02 - 15 - 2006
Code
of the
Borough of
California
COUNTY OF WASHINGTON
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA
SERIAL NO. . . . . . . . . . . .
GENERAL CODE PUBLISHERS CORP.
www.generalcode.com
2006

i 02 - 15 - 2006
PREFACE
The Borough of California has, over the years, passed through a process of legislative change
common to many American communities. While only a few simple laws were necessary at the
time of the establishment of the Borough, subsequent growth of the community, together with the
complexity of modern life, has created the need for new and more detailed legislation for the
proper function and government of the Borough. The recording of local law is an aspect of municipal
history, and as the community develops and changes, review and revision of old laws and
consideration of new laws, in the light of current trends, must keep pace. The orderly collection
of these records is an important step in this ever-continuing process. Legislation must be more
than mere chronological enactments reposing in the pages of old records. It must be available and
logically arranged for convenient use and must be kept up-to-date. It was with thoughts such as
these in mind that the Borough Council ordered the following codification of the Borough's legislation.
Contents of Code
The various chapters of the Code contain all currently effective legislation of a general and
permanent nature enacted by the Borough Council of the Borough of California, including revisions
or amendments to existing legislation deemed necessary by the Borough Council in the
course of the codification.
Division of Code
The Code is divided into parts. Part I, Administrative Legislation, contains all Borough legislation
of an administrative nature, namely, that dealing with the administration of government, that
establishing or regulating municipal departments and that affecting officers and employees of the
municipal government and its departments. Part II, General Legislation, contains all other Borough
legislation of a regulatory nature. Items of legislation in this part generally impose penalties
for violation of their provisions, whereas those in Part I do not.
Histories
At the end of the Scheme (list of section titles) in each chapter is located the legislative history
for that chapter. This History indicates the specific legislative source from which the chapter was
derived, including the enactment number (e.g., ordinance number, local law number, bylaw number,
resolution number, etc.), if pertinent, and the date of adoption. In the case of chapters containing
parts or articles derived from more than one item of legislation, the source of each part or
article is indicated in the text, under its title. Amendments to individual sections or subsections
are indicated by histories where appropriate in the text.
CALIFORNIA CODE
ii 02 - 15 - 2006
General References; Editor's Notes
In each chapter containing material related to other chapters in the Code, a table of General
References is included to direct the reader's attention to such related chapters. Editor's Notes are
used in the text to provide supplementary information and cross-references to related provisions
in other chapters.
Appendix
Certain forms of local legislation are not of a nature suitable for inclusion in the main body of
the Code but are of such significance that their application is community-wide or their provisions
are germane to the conduct of municipal government. The Appendix of this publication is reserved
for such legislation and for any other material that the community may wish to include.
Disposition List
The Disposition List is a chronological listing of legislation, indicating its inclusion in the publication
or the reason for its exclusion. The Disposition List will be updated with each supplement
to the Code to include the legislation reviewed with said supplement.
Index
The Index is a guide to information. Since it is likely that this publication will be used by persons
without formal legal training, the Index has been formulated to enable such persons to locate
a particular section quickly. Each section of each chapter has been indexed. The Index will be
supplemented and revised from time to time as new legislation is added.
Instructions for Amending the Code
All changes to the Code, whether they are amendments, deletions or additions, should be
adopted as amendments to the Code. In doing so, existing material that is not being substantively
altered should not be renumbered.
Adding new sections. Where new sections are to be added to a chapter, they can be added at
the end of the existing material (continuing the numbering sequence) or inserted between existing
sections as decimal numbers (e.g., a new section between §§ 65-5 and 65-6 should be designated
§ 65-5.1).
Adding new chapters. New chapters should be added in the proper alphabetical sequence in
the appropriate division or part (e.g., Part I, Administrative Legislation, or Part II, General Legislation),
utilizing the reserved chapter numbers. New chapter titles should begin with the key word
for the alphabetical listing (e.g., new legislation on abandoned vehicles should be titled "Vehicles,
Abandoned" under "V" in the Table of Contents, and a new enactment on coin-operated amusement
devices should be "Amusement Devices" or "Amusement Devices, Coin-Operated" under
"A" in the Table of Contents). Where a reserved number is not available, an "A" chapter should
PREFACE
iii 02 - 15 - 2006
be used (e.g., a new chapter to be included between Chapters 166 and 167 should be designated
Chapter 166A).
Adding new articles. New articles may be inserted between existing articles in a chapter (e.g.,
adding a new district to the Zoning Regulations) by the use of "A" articles (e.g., a new article to
be included between Articles XVI and XVII should be designated Article XVIA). The section
numbers would be as indicated above (e.g., if the new Article XVIA contains six sections and
existing Article XVI ends with § 166-30 and Article XVII begins with § 166-31, Article XVIA
should contain §§ 166-30.1 through 166-30.6).
Supplementation
Supplementation of the Code will follow the adoption of new legislation. New legislation or
amendments to existing legislation will be included and repeals will be indicated as soon as possible
after passage. Supplemental pages should be inserted as soon as they are received and old
pages removed, in accordance with the Instruction Page which accompanies each supplement.
Acknowledgment
The assistance of the Borough officials is gratefully acknowledged by the editor. The codification
of the legislation of the Borough of California reflects an appreciation of the needs of a progressive
and expanding community. As in many other municipalities, officials are faced with
fundamental changes involving nearly every facet of community life. Problems increase in number
and complexity and range in importance from everyday details to crucial areas of civic planning.
It is the profound conviction of General Code Publishers Corp. that this publication will
contribute significantly to the efficient administration of local government. As Samuel Johnson
observed, "The law is the last result of human wisdom acting upon human experience for the
benefit of the public."

v 02 - 15 - 2006
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Tools for Finding Information - In addition to the municipality’s legislation, this publication
contains tools to help locate information: table of contents, index, chapter outlines (schemes), and
a disposition list.
Chapters - Chapters are generally discrete pieces of legislation, but can also be made up of several
individual pieces on a related topic. In that case, the individual pieces are arranged into articles
or parts within the chapter. The article or part titles can be found in the chapter scheme or by
subject in the index. If you are familiar with a former number or title, look for it chronologically
in the disposition list.
Reserved Chapters - In the numbering of chapters, space has been provided for the convenient
insertion, alphabetically, of later enactments. Help in selecting an appropriate number for a new
chapter is available from the editor. See also the “Instructions for Amending the Code” in the
Preface.
Section Numbering - A chapter-related section-numbering system is employed. Each section of
every item of legislation is assigned a number, which indicates both the number of the chapter in
which the item of legislation is located and the location of the section within that chapter. Thus,
the fourth section of Chapter 6 is § 6-4.
Scheme - The scheme is the list of section titles that precedes the text of each chapter. These titles
are carefully written so that, taken together, they may be considered as a summary of the content
of the chapter. Taken separately, each describes the content of a particular section. For ease
and precision of reference, the scheme titles are repeated as section headings in the text.
Page Numbers - A unique page-numbering system has been used in which each chapter forms
an autonomous unit. The first page of each chapter is the number of that chapter followed by a
colon and the numeral “1.” Thus, Chapter 6 begins on page 6:1. By the use of this system, it is
possible to add or to change pages in any chapter, or add new chapters, without affecting the sequence
of subsequent pages.
CALIFORNIA CODE
vi 02 - 15 - 2006
PART I: ADMINISTRATIVE LEGISLATION
General Provisions ................................................................................ 1:1
Auditor .................................................................................................. 5:1
Authorities, Municipal........................................................................... 8:1
Pensions and Retirement ..................................................................... 36:1
Personnel Policies................................................................................ 39:1
Police Department ............................................................................... 43:1
Risk Management................................................................................ 48:1
Salaries and Compensation ................................................................. 52:1
Secretary and Treasurer....................................................................... 55:1
PART II: GENERAL LEGISLATION
Amusements ........................................................................................ 67:1
Animals ............................................................................................... 70:1
Bicycles and Pedalcycles..................................................................... 76:1
Cable Television.................................................................................. 83:1
Construction Codes, Uniform.............................................................. 89:1
Fees, Special...................................................................................... 105:1
Fireworks........................................................................................... 110:1
Insurance ........................................................................................... 122:1
Junkyards and Junk Dealers .............................................................. 128:1
Peace and Good Order....................................................................... 147:1
Peddling and Soliciting ..................................................................... 151:1
Property Maintenance........................................................................ 156:1
Rental Housing.................................................................................. 160:1
Sewers and Sewage Disposal ............................................................ 168:1
Solid Waste and Recycling................................................................ 175:1
Stormwater Management .................................................................. 181:1
Streets and Sidewalks........................................................................ 184:1
TABLE OF CONTENTS
vii 02 - 15 - 2006
Subdivision and Land Development ................................................. 187:1
Taxation............................................................................................. 192:1
Vehicles and Traffic .......................................................................... 199:1
Zoning ............................................................................................... 205:1
APPENDIX
Fire Department, Recognition of ....................................................A208:1
Police Department Policies and Procedures ....................................A209:1
Records, Access to ..........................................................................A210:1
DISPOSITION LIST
INDEX

PA RT I
ADMINISTRAT IVE
LEGISLAT ION

1:1 02 - 15 - 2006
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[An ordinance adopting the Code of the Borough of California and making certain
substantive changes to existing ordinances of the Borough is presently proposed before
the Borough Council. Upon final adoption, it will be included here as Article I of this
chapter.]

5:1 02 - 15 - 2006
Chapter 5
AUDITOR
§ 5-1. Definitions.
§ 5-2. Appointment of independent
auditor.
§ 5-3. Office of elected auditor abolished.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of California 1-14-1980 by
Ord. No. 352. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 5-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
INDEPENDENT AUDITOR— A certified public accountant registered in Pennsylvania, a
firm of certified public accountants so registered, or a competent public accountant or a
competent firm of public accountants.
§ 5-2. Appointment of independent auditor.
The Council of the Borough of California does hereby elect to appoint an independent auditor
who shall be appointed annually by resolution before the close of the fiscal year. Said
independent auditor shall make an independent examination of the accounting records of the
Borough for such fiscal year. Such independent auditor shall also perform the other duties and
exercise the powers as conferred upon him by Section 1196 of the Borough Code (53 P.S.
§ 46196).
§ 5-3. Office of elected auditor abolished.
From and after the date of enactment of this chapter, the office of elected Borough Auditor is
hereby abolished although any Borough Auditor then in office shall continue to hold his office
during the term for which elected but the Borough Auditors shall not audit, settle, or adjust
the accounts audited by the independent auditor but shall perform the other duties of their
office.

8:1 02 - 15 - 2006
Chapter 8
AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL
ARTICLE I
Recreation Authority
§ 8-1. Intent and authority.
§ 8-2. Articles of Incorporation.
§ 8-3. Implementation and filing.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of California as indicated
in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
1. Editor’s Note: The Municipality Authorities Act of 1945 was repealed 6-19-2001 by P.L. 287, No. 22. See now 53
Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
2. Editor's Note: The original Articles of Incorporation that followed here, along with any amendments thereto, are on
file in the Borough offices.
ARTICLE I
Recreation Authority
[Adopted 6-12-2003 by Ord. No. 481]
§ 8-1. Intent and authority.
The Borough Council of the Borough of California, Washington County, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, hereby declares its intention to organize a municipality authority in said county
and commonwealth under the Municipality Authorities Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as
amended, 53 P.S. § 303.1
§ 8-2. Articles of Incorporation.
In pursuance of said desire and intention, and in conformity with the terms and conditions of
the Municipality Authorities Act and its subsequent amendments, the proposed Articles of
Incorporation for the proposed Authority are hereby set forth in full as follows.2
§ 8-3. Implementation and filing.
The proposed Articles of Incorporation of the said Authority shall be executed by and on
behalf of the Council of the Borough of California by the President of such Council, the Seal
of the Borough shall be thereto affixed and attested by the Secretary/Treasurer. The Solicitor
is authorized and directed to cause to be published the notice of intention to file the Articles
of Incorporation as required under the Municipality Authorities Act, and when said Articles of
Incorporation are properly executed by the incorporation municipality the same shall be filed
with the Secretary of the Commonwealth.

36:1 02 - 15 - 2006
Chapter 36
PENSIONS AND RETIREMENT
ARTICLE I
Police Pension Benefits
§ 36-1. Election to change benefits.
§ 36-2. Membership requirements.
§ 36-3. Credit for prior service.
§ 36-4. Payment for obligations.
§ 36-5. Provision of benefits; liability for
unfundedness.
§ 36-6. Affirmative vote of plan
members.
§ 36-7. Plan authorization; repealer.
§ 36-8. Filing; effective date.
ARTICLE II
Municipal Employees Pension Benefits
§ 36-9. Election to change benefits.
§ 36-10. Membership requirements.
§ 36-11. Credit for prior service.
§ 36-12. Payment for obligations.
§ 36-13. Provision of benefits; liability for
unfundedness.
§ 36-14. Plan authorization; repealer.
§ 36-15. Filing; effective date.
ARTICLE III
457 Deferred Compensation Plan
§ 36-16. Establishment of plan;
contributions.
§ 36-17. Payments to plan by Borough.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of California as indicated
in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel policies— See Ch. 39.
Police Department— See Ch. 43.
Salaries and compensation— See Ch. 52.
1. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 881.101 et seq.
ARTICLE I
Police Pension Benefits
[Adopted 12-13-2001 by Ord. No. 472]
§ 36-1. Election to change benefits.
California Borough, being a member municipality of the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement
System, hereby elects to change its police pension benefits in that System as authorized by the
Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Law, Act 15 of 1974,1 as amended, and does hereby agree
to be bound by all the requirements and provisions of said law, and to assume all obligations,
§ 36-1 CALIFORNIA CODE § 36-6
36:2 02 - 15 - 2006
2. Editor’s Note: Said agreement is on file in the Borough offices.
3. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.101 et seq.
financial and otherwise, placed upon member municipalities. All references hereafter shall be
based on benefits negotiated between the Board and the municipality under the provisions of
Article IV of the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Law.
§ 36-2. Membership requirements.
Membership in the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System shall be mandatory for all
full-time police officers of the Borough. Membership for elected officials and employees hired
on a temporary or seasonal basis is prohibited, as is membership for individuals paid only on
a fee basis.
§ 36-3. Credit for prior service.
Credit for prior service for original members is granted for each year or partial year thereof
that the member was employed by the Borough from original date of hire or the expiration of
the member’s probationary period if one so existed. Benefits provided to members in the
agreement dated December 13, 2001,2 shall accrue based on all credited service granted and
earned in accordance with this section.
§ 36-4. Payment for obligations.
Payment for any obligation established by the adoption of this article and the agreement
between the System and California Borough shall be made by the Borough in accordance with
the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Law and Act 205 of 1984, the Municipal Pension Plan
Funding Standard and Recovery Act.3
§ 36-5. Provision of benefits; liability for unfundedness.
As part of this article, the Borough agrees that the System shall provide the benefits set forth
in the agreement between the Board and California Borough, dated December 13, 2001. The
passage and adoption of this article by California Borough is an official acceptance of said
agreement and the financial obligations resulting from the administration of said benefit
package. California Borough hereby assumes all liability for any unfundedness created or
which may be created due to the acceptance of the benefit structure outlined in the
above-referenced agreement.
§ 36-6. Affirmative vote of plan members.
The Borough hereby acknowledges that an affirmative vote representing at least 75% of the
plan members indicated the members were in agreement with the benefit change in the plan
being administered by the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System.
§ 36-7 PENSIONS AND RETIREMENT § 36-11
36:3 02 - 15 - 2006
§ 36-7. Plan authorization; repealer.
California Borough intends this article to be the complete authorization of the Borough’s
police pension plan and it shall become effective and specifically repeals the previous
agreement and ordinance under Ord. No. 419.
§ 36-8. Filing; effective date.
A duly certified copy of this article and the referenced agreement shall be filed with the
Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Membership for the police pension plan of California Borough in the Pennsylvania Municipal
Retirement System shall be effective the first day of July 1994 with the revised plan structure
reflected in the agreement dated December 13, 2001, effective the first day of January 2002.
4. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 881.101 et seq.
5. Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Borough offices.
ARTICLE II
Municipal Employees Pension Benefits
[Adopted 2-13-2003 by Ord. No. 479]
§ 36-9. Election to change benefits.
California Borough, being a member municipality of the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement
System, hereby elects to change its member benefits in that System as authorized by the
Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Law, Act 15 of 1974,4 as amended, and does hereby agree
to be bound by all the requirements and provisions of said law, and to assume all obligations,
financial and otherwise, placed upon member municipalities. All references hereafter shall be
based on benefits negotiated between the Board and the municipality under the provisions of
Article IV of the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Law.
§ 36-10. Membership requirements.
Membership in the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System shall be mandatory for all
permanent, municipal employees of the Borough of California. Membership for elected
officials and employees hired on a temporary or seasonal basis is prohibited, as is membership
for individuals paid only on a fee basis.
§ 36-11. Credit for prior service.
Credit for prior service for original members is granted for each year or partial year thereof
that the member was employed by the Borough from original date of hire or the expiration of
the member’s probationary period if one so existed. Benefits provided to members in the
agreement dated February 13, 2003,5 shall accrue based on all credited service granted and
earned in accordance with this section.
§ 36-12 CALIFORNIA CODE § 36-16
36:4 02 - 15 - 2006
6. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.101 et seq.
§ 36-12. Payment for obligations.
Payment for any obligation established by the adoption of this article and the agreement
between the System and the Borough of California shall be made by the Borough of
California in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Law and Act 205 of
1984, the Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act.6
§ 36-13. Provision of benefits; liability for unfundedness.
As part of this article, the Borough of California agrees that the System shall provide the
benefits set forth in the agreement between the Board and the Borough of California, dated
February 13, 2003. The passage and adoption of this article by the Borough of California is an
official acceptance of said agreement and the financial obligations resulting from the
administration of said benefit package. The Borough of California hereby assumes all liability
for any unfundedness created or which may be created due to the acceptance of the benefit
structure outlined in the above-referenced agreement.
§ 36-14. Plan authorization; repealer.
The Borough of California intends this article to be the complete authorization of the Borough
of California plan and it shall become effective and specifically repeal Ord. No. 384 either
immediately or on August 1, 2002, which is the effective date of the amended agreement
dated February 13, 2003, between the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System and the
Borough of California, whichever is later.
§ 36-15. Filing; effective date.
A duly certified copy of this article and the referenced agreement shall be filed with the
Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Membership for the municipal employees of the Borough of California in the Pennsylvania
Municipal Retirement System shall be effective the first day of January 1964, with the revised
plan structure reflected in the agreement dated February 13, 2003, effective the first day of
August 2002.
ARTICLE III
457 Deferred Compensation Plan
[Adopted 8-14-2003 by Res. No. 03-113]
§ 36-16. Establishment of plan; contributions.
A. The Borough Council of the Borough of California hereby authorizes the establishment
of a 457 Deferred Compensation Pension Plan for all Borough employees desiring to
participate therein. Participation in the plan is noncompulsory, but is open to all full-time
Borough employees.
§ 36-16 PENSIONS AND RETIREMENT § 36-17
36:5 02 - 15 - 2006
B. The Borough shall make no contribution to the 457 Deferred Compensation Pension Plan
as to any employee enrolled hereunder, except as provided under this article. Any
full-time employee may, however, participate and make such individual contributions as
appropriate under the terms of the plan.
C. The Borough Secretary/Treasurer and any other officer or official of the Borough
Council of the Borough of California are hereby authorized to execute any and all
documents as necessary to establish a 457 Deferred Compensation Pension Plan through
Keystone Insurers Group, as provided hereunder.
§ 36-17. Payments to plan by Borough.
A. The Borough of California recognizes that certain employees do not participate in any
Borough-provided health insurance plan, by virtue of coverage available to said
employees from other sources.
B. In recognition of the value to the Borough of the nonparticipation of certain employees,
the Borough of California shall pay a sum equal to 2/3 the amount of premium per
month which would otherwise be paid to enroll any such full-time employee in the
Borough health insurance plan, to the 457 Deferred Compensation Pension Plan
established hereunder, in the name of each such employee. Payments under this section
may be made by the Borough only upon written request of the full-time employee and
upon waiver by the employee of participation in the health insurance plan.
C. The Borough of California shall continue to pay 2/3 of the monthly health insurance
premium amount into the 457 Deferred Compensation Pension Plan for each full-time
employee who elects not to participate in Borough-provided health insurance coverage,
for so long as such employee is not enrolled in any Borough-provided health insurance
plan.
D. The enrollment or reenrollment in a Borough health insurance plan by any full-time
employee who was receiving payments to 457 Deferred Compensation Pension Plan
hereunder shall terminate any further payment by the Borough of any amounts provided
hereunder, during such time as the employee is enrolled in a Borough-provided health
insurance plan.

39:1 02 - 15 - 2006
Chapter 39
PERSONNEL POLICIES
ARTICLE I
Drug and Alcohol Testing
§ 39-1. Definitions.
§ 39-2. Establishment of policy.
§ 39-3. Scheduling of intoxicant testing.
§ 39-4. Testing procedures; notification
of results; record keeping.
§ 39-5. Procedures following reasonable
cause.
§ 39-6. Penalties for positive result.
§ 39-7. Refusal to cooperate.
§ 39-8. Effect on other provisions.
ARTICLE II
Sexual Harassment
§ 39-9. Findings; statement of policy.
§ 39-10. Statement of prohibited conduct.
§ 39-11. Penalties for misconduct.
§ 39-12. Procedure for reporting,
investigating and resolving
sexual harassment and
retaliation complaints.
§ 39-13. False allegations.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of California as indicated
in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pensions and retirement—See Ch. 36. Police Department policies and procedures — See Ch.
A209.
ARTICLE I
Drug and Alcohol Testing
[Adopted 10-14-1999 by Ord. No. 461]
§ 39-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
INTOXICANTS— Substances, including, but not limited to, alcoholic beverages, marijuana,
narcotics, barbiturates, amphetamines, drugs, and any other controlled substance other than
those taken under the direction and prescription of a duly licensed health care professional.
Intoxicants also include legal drugs, whether or not taken under the direction and prescription
of a duly licensed health care professional to the extent that their ingestion is inconsistent with
their prescription or that their ingestion adversely affects, or may adversely affect, the safety
of fellow employees or members of the public, the employee's job performance, or the safe or
efficient operation of the Borough's business.
RANDOM SELECTION PROCESS— Intoxicant tests that are unannounced and that every
employee of the Borough of California has an equal chance of being selected for testing
within a given testing cycle.
§ 39-1 CALIFORNIA CODE § 39-3
39:2 02 - 15 - 2006
REASONABLE CAUSE— A belief by the Borough that the action or appearance or conduct
of the employee is indicative or consistent with the use of any of the aforedefined intoxicants.
§ 39-2. Establishment of policy.
In keeping with the goal of the Borough of California, Washington County, in obtaining and
maintaining a drug- and alcohol-free workplace, the Borough hereby issues and adopts the
following as guidelines for employee behavior concerning the use of drugs, alcohol or
intoxicants:
A. Involvement with intoxicants; penalties.
(1) The use, possession, purchase, sale, distribution, taking, carrying, transfer, handling
or other involvement with intoxicants is prohibited in the following circumstances:
(a) Anywhere on or about the premises of the Borough of California. This
includes areas within the immediate vicinity of the administrative offices of
the Borough of California, such as the buildings and parking areas
maintained as property of the Borough of California.
(b) Anywhere else where an employee is performing services as a representative
of the Borough of California.
(2) Any employee found to be in violation of the above rules, except under procedures
already provided herein, or subsequently adopted by resolution of the Council of
the Borough of California, may be subject to disciplinary action up to and
including dismissal.
B. The presence of any Borough employee at any Borough workplace, or at any other place
where an employee is performing services as a representative of the Borough of
California, while under the influence of any intoxicant as defined in this article is
expressly prohibited and constitutes a violation of the drug and alcohol policy of the
Borough of California.
§ 39-3. Scheduling of intoxicant testing.
A. The Borough of California shall be permitted to randomly schedule one intoxicant test
per year for each employee of the Borough of California without cause.
B. The Borough of California shall be permitted to schedule an employee for intoxicant
testing at any time upon reasonable cause as defined in this article.
C. All testing samples shall consist of a urine or blood specimen or combination of both
whenever the employee is requested to provide the same at the direction of the testing
facility, as such facility is designated by resolution of the Borough of California. The
employee shall not be permitted to choose which specimen shall be submitted.
§ 39-4 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 39-4
39:3 02 - 15 - 2006
§ 39-4. Testing procedures; notification of results; record keeping.
A. Any employee required to report for intoxicant testing by notice duly served by the
Borough of California shall do so at the time and location specified by the Borough, the
same to be performed in an approved testing center as designated by resolution of the
Council of the Borough of California.
B. The employee shall provide two samples of blood and/or urine extracted, one of which
shall be tested at the Borough’s direction and the other of which shall be maintained for a
minimum of five days to permit the employee to have testing conducted on the second
sample should the employee choose to do so. Upon written request to the Borough
Secretary/Treasurer or President of Council, the Borough shall deliver the second sample
to a testing facility designated by the employee and approved by the Borough for
administration of appropriate testing.
C. The laboratory, as designated by resolution of the Council of the Borough of California,
shall be instructed to check the seals on the shipping container and the specimen bottle
and the chain of custody immediately upon receipt of said sample. When the urine test
kit is received by a laboratory, one sealed specimen bottle shall be removed immediately
for testing. The shipping container with the remaining sealed bottle shall be immediately
placed in secure refrigerated storage.
D. The Borough shall notify the employee of the results of the test within 24 hours of
receipt of same by the Secretary/Treasurer of the Borough of California or President of
Council.
E. The Borough Secretary/Treasurer shall maintain the results of all intoxicant testing as
provided under this article for a period of not less than two years.
F. Any employee who receives a test with positive results shall be entitled to request an
independent test performed by an independent testing center, if the same is done within
24 hours of receipt of the test results by the employee from the Borough of California.
Any independent testing as contemplated under this article shall be performed at the
employee’s expense.
G. Should the employee’s test results contradict the results obtained by the Borough, the
employee shall be required to provide an additional testing sample within 24 hours of
notification of the results of the employee’s independent test to the Borough of
California.
H. The Council of the Borough of California shall hold a hearing to determine the validity
of the Borough’s original test when, as provided under this article, an employee’s
independent test has obtained a contradictory result from that obtained by the Borough,
and where the second sample, as provided by the employee under this article, has been
tested and reaches a similar contradictory result to that obtained through the original test.
Upon determination by the Council of the Borough of California that the original test
result as obtained by the Borough under the provisions of this article is invalid, no
disciplinary action or other remedial measures may be taken against said employee by
the Borough of California.
§ 39-5 CALIFORNIA CODE § 39-7
39:4 02 - 15 - 2006
§ 39-5. Procedures following reasonable cause.
A. Upon determination by the Borough of California that reasonable cause exists, as defined
under this article, against an employee of the Borough of California, the Council of the
Borough of California shall provide written notice to said employee of the Borough’s
finding of the existence of reasonable cause. Upon receipt of written notice of the
Borough’s determination of the existence of reasonable cause, the employee may be
requested at any time by the Borough of California to undergo intoxicant testing at a
time and place as designated by the Borough of California. In addition, upon receipt of
notice from the Borough of California that reasonable cause exists, any employee
requested to be tested as a result of reasonable cause may be subject to indefinite leave
without pay beginning with the date upon which written notice was served to the
employee by the Borough of California of the existence of reasonable cause. The
decision to place an employee on indefinite leave due to a finding of reasonable cause
shall be solely at the discretion of the Borough of California.
B. Any employee placed on indefinite leave as a result of reasonable cause, as contemplated
under this article, may be recalled to work at any time pending the receipt of test results,
within the discretion of the Borough of California.
C. Subsequent to the testing of any employee for whom a finding of reasonable cause has
been made by the Borough of California and who has been placed on indefinite leave,
should the results of said test prove negative, the employee shall be immediately
reinstated and be reimbursed for any lost time, including any missed overtime and other
benefits to which said employee would be entitled had they not been placed on indefinite
leave.
§ 39-6. Penalties for positive result.
A. Any employee who receives a positive test result as a result of a random or scheduled
test as contemplated under this article shall be subject to a maximum of five days’
suspension without pay for said employee’s first positive test result.
B. Subject to the discretion of the Borough of California, subsequent positive test results of
any employee after a first positive test result shall provide standing for the Borough of
California to dismiss the offending employee.
C. Any employee who receives a positive test result shall be permitted to attend an alcohol
and/or drug rehabilitation program not to exceed 30 days, at the expense of the
employee. The Borough of California shall provide a period of unpaid leave and maintain
all seniority rights of an employee exercising the within contemplated right to seek a
period of rehabilitation at an approved alcohol and/or drug rehabilitation facility.
§ 39-7. Refusal to cooperate.
Any employee refusing to undergo testing or otherwise refusing to cooperate with any of the
terms and conditions of the drug and alcohol policy, as set forth in this article, or any other
action in connection with the testing as provided in this article, and as deemed appropriate by
§ 39-7 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 39-9
39:5 02 - 15 - 2006
the Borough of California, may subject the employee, at the discretion of the Council of the
Borough of California, to immediate dismissal.
§ 39-8. Effect on other provisions.
The provisions of this article, so far as they are the same as those ordinances or regulations in
force prior to the enactment of this article or deal with the same subject matter, are intended
as a continuation of ordinances or regulations and not as new enactments. The provisions of
this article shall not affect any act done or liability incurred, nor shall they affect any suit or
prosecution pending or to be instituted to enforce any repealed ordinances, regulations or parts
thereof.
ARTICLE II
Sexual Harassment
[Adopted 8-12-2004 by Res. No. 04-101]
§ 39-9. Findings; statement of policy.
A. Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 prohibits employment discrimination on the
basis of race, color, sex, age or national origin. The Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC) issued guidelines affirming its position that sex-related harassment
in the workplace is sex discrimination and, as such, is prohibited by Title VII of the 1964
Civil Rights Act.
B. Sexual harassment, according to EEOC, consists of unwelcome sexual advances, requests
for sexual favors or other verbal or physical acts of a sexual or sex-based nature where:
(1) Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or
condition of an individual’s employment;
(2) An employment decision is based on an individual’s acceptance or rejection of
such conduct; or
(3) Such conduct interferes with an individual’s work performance or creates an
intimidating, hostile or offensive work environment.
C. It is also unlawful to retaliate or take reprisal in any way against anyone who has
articulated any concern about sexual harassment or discrimination, whether that concern
relates to harassment of or discrimination against the individual raising the concern or
against another individual. Examples of conduct that would be considered sexual
harassment or related retaliation are set forth in statement of prohibited conduct which
follows. These examples are provided to illustrate the kind of conduct proscribed by this
policy; the list is not exhaustive.
D. For the purposes of this policy, "employees" shall mean any employees, elected and
appointed officials and volunteers of the Borough.
E. Sexual harassment is unlawful, and such prohibited conduct exposes not only the
Borough as an employer, but also individuals involved in such conduct, to significant
§ 39-9 CALIFORNIA CODE § 39-10
39:6 02 - 15 - 2006
liability under the law. Employees shall at all times treat other employees respectfully
and with dignity in a manner so as not to offend the sensibilities of a coworker.
Accordingly, the Borough is committed to enforcing its sexual harassment policy at all
levels within all Borough departments.
§ 39-10. Statement of prohibited conduct.
The Borough considers the following conduct to represent some of the types of acts which
violate the sexual harassment policy:
A. Physical assaults of a sexual nature, such as:
(1) Rape, sexual battery, molestation or attempts to commit these assaults; and
(2) Intentional physical conduct which is sexual in nature, such as touching, pinching,
patting, grabbing, brushing against another employee’s body or poling along
another employee’s body.
B. Unwanted sexual advances, propositions or other sexual comments, such as:
(1) A pattern of sexually oriented gestures, noises, remarks, jokes or comments about
a person’s sexuality or sexual experience directed at or made in the presence of any
employee who indicates or has indicated in any way that such conduct in his/her
presence is unwelcome.
(2) Preferential treatment or promise of preferential treatment to an employee for
submitting to sexual conduct, including soliciting or attempting to solicit any
employee to engage in sexual activity for compensation or reward.
(3) Subjecting or threats of subjecting an employee to unwelcome sexual attention or
conduct or intentionally making performance of the employee’s job more difficult
because of that employee’s sex.
C. Sexual or discriminatory displays or publications in the workplace, such as:
(1) Displaying pictures, posters, calendars, graffiti, objects, promotional materials,
reading materials or other materials that are sexually suggestive, sexually
demeaning or pornographic;
(2) Displaying signs or other materials purporting to segregate an employee by sex in
any area of the workplace other than rest rooms and similar semiprivate
locker/changing rooms.
D. Retaliation for sexual harassment complaints, such as:
(1) Disciplining, changing work assignments of, providing inaccurate work
information to, or refusing to cooperate or discuss work-related matters with any
employee because that employee has complained about or resisted harassment,
discrimination or retaliation; and
§ 39-10 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 39-12
39:7 02 - 15 - 2006
(2) Intentionally pressuring, falsely denying, lying about or otherwise covering up or
attempting to cover up conduct such as described in Subsection D(1) above.
E. Other acts.
(1) The foregoing is not to be construed as an all-inclusive list of prohibited acts under
this policy.
(2) Sexual harassment is unlawful and hurts other employees. Any of the prohibited
conduct described here is sexual harassment of anyone at whom it is directed or
who is otherwise subjected to it. Each incident of harassment, moreover,
contributes to a general atmosphere in which all persons who share the victim's sex
suffer the consequences. Sexually oriented acts or sex-based conduct have no
legitimate business purpose; accordingly, the employee who engages in such
conduct should be and will be made to bear the full responsibility for such
unlawful conduct.
§ 39-11. Penalties for misconduct.
A. Any employees’ commission of acts of sexual harassment or retaliation against a sexual
harassment complaint will result in appropriate sanctions, up to and including dismissal,
against the offending employee, depending upon the nature and severity of the
misconduct.
B. A written record of each action taken pursuant to this policy will be placed in the
offending employee’s personnel file. The record will reflect the conduct, or alleged
conduct, and the warning given, or other discipline imposed.
§ 39-12. Procedure for reporting, investigating and resolving sexual harassment and
retaliation complaints.
A. Reporting claims.
(1) An employee who perceives the comments, gestures or actions of another
employee to be sexually harassing should communicate to that person that such
behavior is unwelcome, offensive and highly inappropriate. Failure to express
unwelcomeness, however, does not prevent the employee from filing a complaint
nor does it in any way exonerate the harasser.
(2) All complaints will be in writing using a form provided by the Borough. All
information pertinent to the charges should be included. Complaints of acts of
sexual harassment and retaliation that are in violation of the sexual harassment
policy will be taken seriously and investigated. A complaint need not be limited to
someone who was the target of harassment or retaliation. Anyone who has
observed sexual harassment or retaliation should report it to their immediate
supervisor. In the event that it would be inappropriate to report such concerns to
the supervisor, the report should be made to a member of Borough Council. In the
event that a female employee would prefer to report a concern about sexual
harassment or discrimination to another female, the report may be made to a
§ 39-12 CALIFORNIA CODE § 39-13
39:8 02 - 15 - 2006
1. Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
2. Editor’s Note: Refers to the Local Agency Law.
female member of the Borough Council, if one exists. In the event there are no
female members on the Borough Council, another female employee of the Borough
may be designated as the proper person to receive such communications.
(3) Only those who have an immediate need to know, including the person to whom a
report was made, the alleged target of harassment or retaliation, the alleged
harasser or retaliator, and any witnesses will or may find out the identity of the
complainant. All parties contacted in the course of an investigation will be advised
that all parties involved in a charge are entitled to respect and that any retaliation
or harassment against any individual who has made a complaint or who has
provided evidence in connection with a complaint is a separate actionable offense
and subject to discipline under this policy.1
B. Cooperation. An effective sexual harassment policy requires the support and example of
personnel in positions of authority. The Borough agents or employees who engage in
sexual harassment or retaliation or who fail to cooperate with Borough-sponsored
investigations of sexual harassment or retaliation may be severely sanctioned by
suspension or dismissal. By the same token, officials who refuse to implement remedial
measures, obstruct the remedial efforts of other Borough employees and/or retaliate
against sexual harassment complainants or witnesses may be immediately censured.
C. Process.
(1) A special committee of three members of Borough Council appointed by the
Council President will take testimony of the accuser and any witnesses offered in
support of the charge; the accuser and the accused will be provided an opportunity
to review and respond to the charges for accuracy and/or clarification. The
committee will then proceed to validate or dismiss the allegations. The committee's
determination shall be transmitted in writing to both the accuser and the accused.
Both accuser and accused will have the right of appeal to Borough Council, if
requested in writing within 20 days of the committee's determination. Any hearing
conducted by Borough Council shall be de novo and shall comply with the
requirements of due process and the Administrative Code.2
(2) If no appeal is filed from the committee's determination, the Borough shall
consider the matter closed.
§ 39-13. False allegations.
Any Borough employee who makes an allegation of sexual harassment, knowing the
allegation to be false, shall be subject to appropriate sanctions up to and including dismissal.
43:1 02 - 15 - 2006
Chapter 43
POLICE DEPARTMENT
ARTICLE I
Establishment
§ 43-1. Police force established.
ARTICLE II
Superintendent of Police
§ 43-2. Position created.
§ 43-3. Powers and duties.
§ 43-4. Terms of employment.
§ 43-5. Vacancies.
§ 43-6. Modification of article.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of California as indicated
in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police pension benefits —See Ch. 36, Art. I. Police Department policies and procedures — See Ch.
A209.
ARTICLE I
Establishment
[Adopted 1-6-1937 by Ord. No. 121; amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 43-1. Police force established.
From and after January 6, 1937, the Borough of California shall maintain a regular full-time
police force. The composition, salaries, regulations and procedures of the police force shall be
as set from time to time by Borough Council.
ARTICLE II
Superintendent of Police
[Adopted 8-28-1997 by Ord. No. 446]
§ 43-2. Position created.
There is hereby created within the police force of the Borough of California the position of
Superintendent of Police. The position of Superintendent of Police shall be and is hereby
designated as an executive/managerial position.
§ 43-3 CALIFORNIA CODE § 43-6
43:2 02 - 15 - 2006
§ 43-3. Powers and duties.
The Superintendent of Police shall have full power and authority to act as a police officer of
the Borough of California to the extent authorized by law, except as may heretofore or
hereafter be limited by ordinances or other actions by the Council of the Borough of
California, and shall have supervision over and provide instruction to the other officers within
the Borough of California police force.
§ 43-4. Terms of employment.
The compensation, benefits and other terms and conditions of employment of the
Superintendent of Police shall be such as is agreed upon by the Superintendent of Police and
the Council of the Borough of California as is approved by motion of Council.
§ 43-5. Vacancies.
Should Borough Council desire to fill a vacancy in the office of Superintendent of Police, the
Borough Council may nominate a person to the Borough of California Civil Service
Commission for appointment to the position of Superintendent of Police. The Borough of
California Civil Service Commission shall then subject said person to a noncompetitive
examination. If such person is certified by the Borough of California Civil Service
Commission as qualified, he may then be formally appointed to such position by the Borough
Council.
§ 43-6. Modification of article.
The Council of the Borough of California is hereby and shall be authorized to provide any
further provisions or parts to this article pertaining to the subject matter hereof and/or may
supplement, amend or modify any provision herein as pertains to the subject matter hereof, by
resolution of Borough Council.
48:1 02 - 15 - 2006
Chapter 48
RISK MANAGEMENT
§ 48-1. Intent.
§ 48-2. Participation authorized.
§ 48-3. Custody of funds.
§ 48-4. Legislative findings.
1. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 481 et seq.
2. Editor's Note: Refers to the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Risk Management Association.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of California 8-8-2002 by
Ord. No. 476. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 48-1. Intent.
The Borough of California shall join with other municipalities in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act1 by becoming a member of the
Association2 and entering into the intergovernmental contract which was adopted by reference
with the same effect as if it had been set out verbatim in this section and a copy of which
shall be filed with the minutes of the meeting at which this chapter was adopted
§ 48-2. Participation authorized.
The Borough of California is authorized to enter into the intergovernmental contract for the
purposes contained therein, as well as any amendments or modifications thereto as the same
may be required from time to time. These actions are to be taken by the member(s) or
employee(s) of the municipality designated for this purpose, pursuant to general or specific
instructions by the governing body adopting this chapter.
§ 48-3. Custody of funds.
The Association is designated as having official custody of this municipality’s funds which are
invested by Association pursuant to the terms of the intergovernmental contract.
§ 48-4. Legislative findings.
As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, the following matters are specifically
found and determined:
A. The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the intergovernmental contract referred
to in § 48-1.
B. This municipality's participation in the Association shall be terminable at any time by
ordinance subject to the terms and conditions set forth in the contract.
§ 48-4 CALIFORNIA CODE § 48-4
48:2 02 - 15 - 2006
C. The purposes and objectives of the agreement are set forth hereinabove and the
intergovernmental contract and actions contemplated thereby and purposes and objectives
contained therein are otherwise legal as part of a pooled arrangement with other
governmental units, thereby achieving economic and other advantages of
intergovernmental cooperation.
D. It is not necessary to finance the agreement authorized herein from municipal funds
except through the contribution of this municipality's basis rate (as such term is defined
in the intergovernmental contract) to the Association.
E. The Association shall be managed by a Board of Commissioners or Executive Committee
as set forth in the bylaws of said Association, a copy of which has been provided for
review in connection with the adoption of this chapter.
F. All property, real or personal, shall be acquired, managed, or disposed of by the
Association in accordance with the terms of the intergovernmental contract.
52:1 02 - 15 - 2006
Chapter 52
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
ARTICLE I
Mayor and Council
§ 52-1. Compensation established.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of California as indicated
in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pensions and retirement—See Ch. 36. Personnel policies— See Ch. 39.
ARTICLE I
Mayor and Council
[Adopted 11-15-1976 by Ord. No. 325; amended in its entirety at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 52-1. Compensation established.
A. The Mayor shall be compensated to the extent permitted under Section 1025 of the
Borough Code (53 P.S. § 46025).
B. Members of Borough Council shall be compensated to the extent permitted under Section
1001 of the Borough Code (53 P.S. § 46001).

55:1 02 - 15 - 2006
Chapter 55
SECRETARY AND TREASURER
§ 55-1. Appointment to both offices;
compensation.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of California 12-1-1966 by
Ord. No. 254. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 55-1. Appointment to both offices; compensation.
Effective January 1, 1967, and thereafter, Council may appoint the same person to serve as
Borough Secretary and Borough Treasurer, but shall not allow any compensation to be paid
for any services performed in the capacity of Borough Treasurer.

PA RT II
GENERAL
LEGISLAT ION

67:1 02 - 15 - 2006
Chapter 67
AMUSEMENTS
ARTICLE I
Mechanical and Electronic Devices
§ 67-1. License required.
§ 67-2. License application and issuance.
§ 67-3. License renewal or transfer.
§ 67-4. License fees.
§ 67-5. Display of certificate or tag.
§ 67-6. Gambling devices prohibited.
§ 67-7. Inspection of premises.
§ 67-8. License revocation.
§ 67-9. Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of California as indicated
in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning—See Ch. 205.
ARTICLE I
Mechanical and Electronic Devices
[Adopted 2-2-1988 by Ord. No. 381]
§ 67-1. License required.
No person or persons, firm, corporation or association shall at any time have in their or its
possession within the Borough of California any mechanical and/or electronic device, machine
or apparatus whatsoever for the playing of games, for profit, amusement, or entertainment,
whether operated by pins, pegs, or balls, or otherwise howsoever, by electric batteries, electric
current, central lighting system or by any other device, or music boxes, phonographs or other
similar music devices operated through or by the insertion therein of a coin or any metal disc
or otherwise, without first having procured a license therefor as hereinafter provided.
§ 67-2. License application and issuance.
Any person or persons, firm, corporation or association using or operating or causing to be
used or operated any such machine or musical device shall first make application for a license
or licenses to the Borough Secretary/Treasurer, on forms provided by the Borough, which
application shall set forth the name, residence, present and previous occupation of the
applicant, place where such machine or machines are to be used or placed, number and kind
of machines to be used or operated, and any other information which may be required in said
application, and said application shall be referred to the Police Department of the Borough for
investigation and approval, and after approval thereof, and if the same be approved, a license
shall be issued the Borough Secretary/Treasurer for each such separate machine or mechanical
and/or electronic device for the current license period.
§ 67-3 CALIFORNIA CODE § 67-8
67:2 02 - 15 - 2006
§ 67-3. License renewal or transfer.
A similar application and a similar license shall be required for each license year or fraction
thereof. In the event a machine has to be replaced for a portion of a license year for which the
license has been paid or in the event there is a substitution of a similar machine for a period
of time during which the license has been paid, there shall be no additional license imposed in
accordance with the schedule of licensing hereafter set forth, but there shall be a permit or
renewal or transfer fee to be paid in the amount of $1 and said transfer or substitution shall be
made pursuant to application of forms to be provided by the Borough.
§ 67-4. License fees.
The license year shall be from January to January and the license fee for each and every
mechanical and/or electronic device hereinabove set forth shall be the sum of $150, and for
each music box or musical device as hereinabove set forth shall be the sum of $37.50 per
year. However, should any such mechanical and/or electronic device or music box be installed
and licensed after July 1 of any year, then, in such event, the license fee shall be $75 for each
mechanical and/or electronic device as above set forth and $18.75 for each music box or other
similar musical device.
§ 67-5. Display of certificate or tag.
Upon payment of the license fee herein provided, there shall be issued to the licensee a
license certificate or tag, setting forth the number of the license for each machine or device so
licensed, which certificate shall be attached to the respective machine or device or be
displayed in some conspicuous place on the premises.
§ 67-6. Gambling devices prohibited.
Nothing in this article shall be in any way construed to authorize, license, or permit any
gambling device whatsoever or any mechanism that has been judicially determined to be a
gambling device or in any way contrary to law, nor shall any such device be used or
permitted to be used for gambling purposes.
§ 67-7. Inspection of premises.
It shall be the duty of the Police Department to regulate and supervise the operation of all said
devices and to regularly inspect the premises where the same are being used and to require
full compliance with the law and this chapter, so that the same shall not amount to a nuisance
or be used in violation of any law.
§ 67-8. License revocation.
In the event that any such machines or devices are so operated as to constitute a nuisance or
in violation of the laws of the commonwealth or ordinances of the Borough, then the license
as to all machines and devices operated on the premises shall be revoked and there shall be no
§ 67-8 AMUSEMENTS § 67-9
67:3 02 - 15 - 2006
rebate or return of any part of the license fee and at least two months shall elapse before
another license may be granted to said person or persons, firm, corporation or association.
§ 67-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, firm, corporation or association violating any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof before a Magisterial District Judge, be fined a sum of
not less than $100 nor more than $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
of such fine and costs, be subject to imprisonment of not more than 30 days. Each and every
day that any machine or device, under the terms of this article, shall be operated and used in
violation thereof shall constitute a separate and distinct offense under this article and shall be
subject to a separate and distinct penalty thereunder.

70:1 02 - 15 - 2006
Chapter 70
ANIMALS
ARTICLE I
Control of Animals
§ 70-1. Designation of authorized officer.
§ 70-2. Definitions.
§ 70-3. Nuisances prohibited;
responsibilities of owners.
§ 70-4. Authority to remedy
noncompliance; costs and penalty.
§ 70-5. Complaint of nuisance; seizure,
redemption and disposal; fees.
§ 70-6. Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of California as indicated
in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning—See Ch. 205.
ARTICLE I
Control of Animals
[Adopted 3-30-1998 by Ord. No. 449]
§ 70-1. Designation of authorized officer.
The Animal Control Officer of the Borough of California or such other person or entity
hereafter designated by motion of Council is hereby appointed as the designated officer who
is authorized to carry out all responsibilities and duties stated herein.
§ 70-2. Definitions.
The following words and phrases used throughout this article shall have the following
meanings:
(ANIMAL) OWNER— Any person owning, keeping, feeding, harboring or having custody
and/or control of animals, or who allows animals to reside or remain about his or her
premises, shall be considered an animal owner.
ANIMALS— Considered to be dogs, cats, and other domesticated and nondomesticated
animals kept as pets and/or for rodent control and/or protection.
VACCINATION— The practice of inoculations with a vaccine to afford protection from
rabies, as required by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection or other
agency, subdivision or department of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
VICIOUS PROPENSITY— A propensity or tendency of animals to show any act which
might endanger the safety of persons and/or property of others.
§ 70-3 CALIFORNIA CODE § 70-4
70:2 02 - 15 - 2006
1. Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 70-3. Nuisances prohibited; responsibilities of owners.
A. It shall be unlawful for any animal owner or real estate owner to permit an animal to
become a nuisance or present a health or safety hazard in the Borough. Acts of nuisance
or a health or safety hazard shall include, but are expressly not restricted to, the
following:
(1) Allowing any animal to run at large in this Borough, either upon the public streets
or highways or upon property other than that of the owner of such dog, cat or other
animal. If permitted to run free about the animal owner’s property, such animal
shall be restrained by a fence or other enclosure which shall be adequate to prevent
the animal’s access to public property and others. Any animal on the public streets
or highways of the Borough shall be restrained on either a leash or another
restraining device.
(2) Allowing any animal confined, kept, residing or remaining on that person’s
premises to make any loud or harsh noise or disturbance which interferes with or
deprives the peace, quiet, rest or sleep of any person within the Borough.
(3) Allowing an animal to defile, corrupt, deposit feces or urine upon, or otherwise
desecrate any sidewalk, walkway or the property of another or to destroy or
damage the property of another.
(4) Failing to remove all refuse, food and excrement as often as necessary to prevent
unpleasant and/or offensive odors and/or conditions contributing to the breeding or
collection of flies or vermin.
(5) Keeping any animal with a known vicious propensity and/or keeping in excess of
four animals without compliance with any/all zoning regulations regarding
licensing/maintaining a kennel.1
(6) Allowing an animal to dig into flower beds, lawns, children’s sandboxes, gardens
or other property, or to damage shrubbery, trees, lawns or personal property not
belonging to the owner of the animal.
(7) Permitting an animal to enter upon any publicly owned park or playground.
B. All owners of animals shall comply with all rabies vaccination requirements of the laws
and/or regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection or other agency, subdivision or department of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania with regard to animals.
§ 70-4. Authority to remedy noncompliance; costs and penalty.
A. If the owner of animals in violation of this article or the owner of real property upon
which a nuisance or health hazard is permitted to exist does not comply with a notice to
abate the violations which constitute a nuisance or health hazard within the time period
§ 70-4 ANIMALS § 70-5
70:3 02 - 15 - 2006
2. Editor’s Note: Section II of this ordinance also provided as follows: "Ordinance No. 449 is further amended to the
extent necessary so as to render the same compatible with the law of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, including
but not limited to the Dog Law, as amended, and the Borough Code, as amended. The remainder of Ordinance No.
449 shall remain fully binding and enforceable to the extent not amended by this amendatory ordinance."
prescribed in such notice, the Borough shall have the authority to take measures to
correct such conditions and violations.
B. If the Borough takes measures to correct such conditions and/or violations, it shall collect
the cost of such correction plus 10% of all costs, plus reasonable attorney's fees incurred
in such collection, in the manner provided by law for municipal claims against the owner
of such real property, including but not limited to the filing and collection of such claim
as a lien on such real property. Alternatively and/or additionally, the Borough shall have
the right to collect such costs and expenses, including but not limited to attorney's fees,
against the animal's owner and/or the owner of such real property as part of enforcement
proceedings, together with a fine and/or by an action of assumpsit through the
Magisterial District Judge and/or Court of Common Pleas of Washington County.
C. The Borough, in the event it takes corrective action, and pursuant to its statutory or
otherwise authorized police powers, shall have the right and power to enter upon the
offending person's premises to accomplish the powers recited in this article or otherwise
available at law. The enforcement authority of this provision shall contain the right to use
reasonable force and to use all other enforcement provisions of this article or as
otherwise available at law to accomplish enforcement of the provisions of this article.
The provisions of this article shall, however, be restricted to the extent that the Borough
comply with the requirements of obtaining a search warrant to the extent prescribed by
law.
§ 70-5. Complaint of nuisance; seizure, redemption and disposal; fees. [Amended
10-11-1998 by Ord. No. 4522 ]
A. Upon receipt of a written complaint that an animal is a public nuisance, the Borough’s
authorized officer will investigate said complaint. If it is found that this article has been
violated, the Borough’s authorized officer shall issue a notice to abate such violation to
the animal’s owner and the owner of such real property upon which a violation is found
to exist. The notice shall direct compliance as the exigencies of the situation require as
shall be set forth in the notice. If no owner can be located, and the animal cannot
otherwise be captured, the authorized Borough officer may authorize the seizure of the
animal by the issuance of a humane type of animal trap to trap said animal. Traps will
only be set during daylight hours. Trapping at night is prohibited.
B. Traps/detention of animals.
(1) Any person who is issued a trap must notify the Borough’s authorized officer as
soon as possible after an animal is apprehended. The authorized officer and/or the
person or agency designated by the governing body of the Borough will transport
and deliver the animal to a licensed kennel approved for such purposes by the
Secretary of the Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture for holding.
§ 70-5 CALIFORNIA CODE § 70-5
70:4 02 - 15 - 2006
(2) If the kennel refuses or is unavailable to take the animal, the animal will be
delivered to a veterinarian contracted with the Borough to be held in accordance
with this article.
(3) Notwithstanding the foregoing or any other provisions of this article, any animal,
other than a dog, may be held by any person or entity authorized by the Animal
Control Officer or Council's designee during the detention period provided for by
this article.
C. Disposal of animals when the owner is known.
(1) If such animal bears a proper license tag or permit identification, or if the owner is
otherwise known, the authorized Borough officer shall cause immediate notice, by
registered or certified mail, with return receipt requested, to the person in whose
name the license was procured, or the animal's owner, or their agent, notifying
such person that the animal has been seized and that they may claim such animal
within five days after receipt thereof.
(2) If, five days after obtaining the postal return receipt, such animal has not been
claimed, the Borough's officer shall dispense such animal by sale or by giving it to
a Humane Society or association for the prevention of cruelty to animals.
(3) No dog bearing a proper license tag or permit identification is to be killed, unless
otherwise authorized by law.
D. Disposal of animals when the owner is unknown.
(1) If an unlicensed animal is seized, and/or its owner is otherwise unknown, the
authorized Borough officer shall cause the same to be detained, kept and fed for a
period of 72 hours at any licensed kennel approved by the Secretary of the
Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture for such purposes, except any animal
seriously ill or injured or forfeited with the owner's permission. If the kennel
refuses or is unavailable to take the animal, the animal is to be delivered to a
veterinarian contracted with the Borough to be so held. Any person may view such
detained animals during normal business hours.
(2) Any unlicensed animal remaining unclaimed after 72 hours may be humanely
killed as authorized by law or given to a Humane Society or association for the
prevention of cruelty to animals. If the Humane Society refuses or is unavailable to
take the animal, the animal is to be delivered to a veterinarian contracted with the
Borough and held for such 72 hours prior to being disposed of in a humane
manner as may be authorized by law.
E. Calculation of detention period. If any part of the custodial period for unlicensed animals
provided for in this article falls on a weekend or holiday observed by the Borough then
the animal shall be held until at least 24 hours has elapsed during a work week,
excluding Saturday, Sunday and such holiday, but in no event shall the custodial period
be less than 72 hours, except for animals seriously ill or injured or forfeited with the
owner's permission.
§ 70-5 ANIMALS § 70-6
70:5 02 - 15 - 2006
F. Transfer preferred to destruction; limitation on transfer of dogs. The sale or other transfer
of an animal shall be preferred to its destruction; provided that no dog caught and
detained pursuant to this article shall be sold or otherwise conveyed for the purpose of
vivisection or research.
G. Disposition of money from sale of dogs. All monies derived from the sale of dogs
pursuant to this article, after deducting the expenses of its detention, shall be paid
through the Department of Agriculture to the State Treasurer for credit to the Dog Law
Restricted Account.
H. Costs to be paid by owner. Any animal may be claimed by its owner at the kennel, the
Humane Society or veterinarian during the custodial period. The owner shall pay all costs
for the transportation, care, feeding, reasonable treatment, maintenance and disposal of
said animal at the kennel, Humane Society or association or veterinarian's prevailing rate.
I. Disposition after custodial period. Any animal which has been seized pursuant to this
article and which has not been reclaimed during the custodial period may be disposed of
in a humane manner as authorized by law or in accordance with standards generally
followed by the Humane Society or other association or as provided by the contracted
veterinarian service; provided, however, that no dog bearing a proper license tag or
permit identification is to be killed unless otherwise authorized by law.
J. Fines for owners of dogs. The owner or claimant of a dog detained pursuant to the
provisions of this article shall be liable for and pay to the Borough of California a
penalty of $15, in addition to all reasonable expenses incurred by reason of its detention
before the dog is returned, in addition to all other costs and expenses provided for this
article.
§ 70-6. Violations and penalties.
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, feed or harbor any animal in violation of, or
to otherwise violate the provisions of, this article. Any person found to violate the provisions
of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100
nor more than $600, plus costs of prosecution, including but not limited to reasonable
attorney’s fees incurred in the prosecution of such offense, and, in default of payment of such
fine and costs, by imprisonment for not more than 30 days. Each day that a violation
continues after notice is given to an owner shall constitute a separate offense for which a per
diem fine shall be assessed.

76:1 02 - 15 - 2006
Chapter 76
BICYCLES AND PEDALCYCLES
§ 76-1. Short title; applicability of Vehicle
Code.
§ 76-2. Definitions.
§ 76-3. Registration and licensing
requirements.
§ 76-4. Violations and penalties.
§ 76-5. Rental agencies and dealers.
§ 76-6. Nonapplicability to other vehicles.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of California 6-30-1978 by
Ord. No. 338. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 199.
1. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
2. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). Original Section 3,
Operation of bicycles and play vehicles, and Section 4, Bicycle and pedalcycle regulations, which immediately
followed this section, were also deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). See 75
Pa.C.S.A. § 3501 et seq. for operational requirements.
§ 76-1. Short title; applicability of Vehicle Code.
A. This chapter shall be known as the "Bicycle and Pedalcycle Ordinance."
B. All provisions of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code1 with respect to bicycles and
pedalcycles are hereby incorporated herein by reference thereto, and in the event that any
provision hereof in any way conflicts with any provision of the Motor Vehicle Code, the
provisions of the Motor Vehicle Code shall control.
§ 76-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BICYCLE or PEDALCYCLE— A vehicle propelled solely by human-powered pedals. The
term does not mean a three-wheeled human-powered pedal-driven vehicle with a main driving
wheel 20 inches in diameter or under and primarily designed for children six years of age or
younger. 2
§ 76-3. Registration and licensing requirements.
A. Every pedalcycle or bicycle shall be registered with the Police Department, which
registration shall consist of a record of:
§ 76-3 CALIFORNIA CODE § 76-3
76:2 02 - 15 - 2006
(1) A description of the pedalcycle or bicycle.
(2) The name, address, and age of the owner.
(3) The names and address of the parents or person or persons in loco parentis to the
owner, if the owner be less than 16 years of age.
B. No person shall ride or propel a pedalcycle or bicycle on any street or upon any public
path set aside for the exclusive use of pedalcycles or bicycles unless such pedalcycles or
bicycles have been licensed and a license tag is attached thereto as provided herein.
C. Application for a license and a license tag shall be made upon a form provided by the
Borough and shall be made to the Police Department. An annual fee of $1 shall be paid
to the Borough for each license or renewal thereof granted. Applications and all renewals
made for pedalcycle or bicycle licenses shall be made on the first day of September of
each year, or at such times set by the Police Department.
D. The Police Department, upon receiving proper application therefor, is authorized to issue
a pedalcycle or bicycle license which shall be effective until one year from the date the
license is issued.
E. The Police Department shall not issue a license for any pedalcycle or bicycle when it
knows or has reasonable grounds to believe that the applicant is not the owner or entitled
to the possession of such pedalcycle or bicycle, or the pedalcycle or bicycle is not
equipped with light, reflectors, adequate brakes and safe tires, or of any pedalcycle or
bicycle that is mechanically defective or unsafe.
F. The Police Department shall keep a record of the number of each license, the date issued,
the name and address of the person to whom issued, and the number on the frame of the
pedalcycle or bicycle for which issued, and a record of all pedalcycle or bicycle license
fees collected by it. At the time of issuing a license, the Police Department shall instruct
the applicant regarding all rules and regulations applicable to the operation of a
pedalcycle or bicycle, either orally or by furnishing to the applicant a copy of the rules
and regulations.
G. The Police Department upon issuing a pedalcycle or bicycle license shall also issue a
license tag bearing the license number assigned to the pedalcycle or bicycle, the name of
the Borough, and the calendar year for which said license is issued and the expiration
date.
H. The Police Department shall cause such license tag to be firmly attached to the rear
mudguard or frame of the pedalcycle or bicycle for which issued in such position as to
be plainly visible from the rear. In the case of theft or loss, a duplicate tag shall be issued
for a fee of $0.50.
I. No person shall willfully deface or destroy any license tag. No person shall remove a
license tag from a pedalcycle or a bicycle during the period for which issued except upon
a transfer of ownership or in the event the pedalcycle or bicycle is dismantled and no
longer operated upon any street in this Borough. Within 10 days after any pedalcycle or
bicycle registered hereunder shall have changed ownership, or has been dismantled or
taken out of operation, the person in whose name the pedalcycle or bicycle has been
§ 76-3 BICYCLES AND PEDALCYCLES § 76-6
76:3 02 - 15 - 2006
registered shall report such information to the Police Department. In case of change of
ownership, the registration shall thereupon be changed to show the name of the new
owner. In case of dismantling and being taken out of operation, the registration shall be
cancelled and the identification tag will be destroyed.
J. Upon the expiration of any pedalcycle or bicycle license the same may be renewed upon
application and payment of the same fee as upon an original application.
§ 76-4. Violations and penalties.
A. No pedalcycle or bicycle shall be registered which is in an unsafe mechanical condition.
The Police Department shall have the authority to suspend the registration of, and
remove the license tag from, any pedalcycle or bicycle operated contrary to state law or
Borough ordinance, or operated while in an unsafe mechanical condition. Such
suspension and removal is to continue for a period not to exceed 30 days, provided that
such registration shall not be reinstated or such license tag be replaced while such
pedalcycle or bicycle is in an unsafe mechanical condition.
B. Any person operating an unlicensed or unregistered pedalcycle or bicycle in a manner
considered dangerous to self, others, or property, or violating any provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $600, plus costs of
prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, by imprisonment for not
more than 30 days. In addition to the foregoing penalties the Police Department may, in
its discretion, confiscate the pedalcycle or bicycle involved in the violation, either
permanently or for a fixed period of time.
C. Any violation of the rules and regulations set forth in this chapter shall constitute a
violation of this chapter and punishable as above.
§ 76-5. Rental agencies and dealers.
A. Rental agencies. A rental agency shall not rent or offer any pedalcycle or bicycle for rent
unless the bicycle is licensed and a license tag is attached thereto as provided herein and
such pedalcycle or bicycle is equipped with the lamps and other equipment required.
B. Pedalcycle or bicycle dealers. Every person engaged in the business of buying or selling
new or secondhand pedalcycles or bicycles shall make a report to the Police Department
of every pedalcycle or bicycle purchased or sold by such dealer, giving the name and
address of the person from whom purchased or to whom sold, a description of such
pedalcycle or bicycle by name or make, the frame number thereof, and the number of
license tag, if any, found thereon.
§ 76-6. Nonapplicability to other vehicles.
This chapter does not apply to any motorcycle, motorbicycle, motor scooter, or other vehicle
required to be licensed and regulated by the Motor Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.

83:1 02 - 15 - 2006
Chapter 83
CABLE TELEVISION
§ 83-1. Definitions and word usage.
§ 83-2. Authorization to grant
franchises.
§ 83-3. Grant of rights and privileges.
§ 83-4. Nonexclusive grant.
§ 83-5. Franchise fee.
§ 83-6. Easements and other
requirements.
§ 83-7. Indemnification of Borough.
§ 83-8. Length of franchise.
§ 83-9. Incorporation of Cable
Communications Act of 1984.
§ 83-10. Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of California 3-11-1985 by
Ord. No. 369. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 184.
§ 83-1. Definitions and word usage.
When used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms and their
derivatives shall have the meaning herein given (and when not inconsistent with the context,
words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural include the singular,
and words in the singular number include the plural):
ACCESS CHANNELS— Those channels set aside for specific access purposes.
APPLICATION— Includes all written proposals, in whatever form made by grantee to the
Council concerning construction, rendition of services, maintenance, or any other matters
pertaining to the cable television system contemplated herein.
BASIC CATV SERVICE — The distribution of broadcast (off the air) television signals by
the grantee.
BASIC SUBSCRIBER REVENUES— All remuneration received directly by the company
from subscribers in payment for regularly furnished basic CATV service, but shall not include
any taxes imposed on services furnished by the grantee or imposed on any subscriber or user
by any government, governmental unit, political subdivision, agency or instrumentality, and
collected by the grantee.
BOROUGH— The Borough of California.
CABLE CHANNEL— A portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used
in a cable system and which is capable of delivering a television channel (as "television
channel" is defined by the Commission by regulation).
§ 83-1 CALIFORNIA CODE § 83-1
83:2 02 - 15 - 2006
1. Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
CABLE OPERATOR— Any person or group of persons:
A. Who provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or more
affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable system; or
B. Who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management
and operation of such a cable system.
CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE— The delivery by the grantee to television receivers, or
any other suitable type of audio-video communication receivers, to all subscribers of all
signals of over-the-air television broadcasters allowed, all FM radio stations carried on the
system; local origination channels; pay television channels; and other services provided for in
this agreement and grantee's application.
CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM — A system of antennas, cables, wires, lines, towers,
waveguides, or other conductors, converters, equipment or facilities designed and constructed
for the purpose of producing, receiving, transmitting, amplifying and distributing audio, video
and other forms of electronic and similar signals and impulses to or for subscribers and other
users thereof.
CATV — A cable television system.
COUNCIL— The governing body of the municipality in such composition as determined by
the rules governing this particular governmental entity.
FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION or FCC— The administrative agency of
the federal government responsible for cable television regulation on a national level or its
lawful successor.
FRANCHISE— The permission, license, or authorization given hereunder to construct,
operate and maintain a cable television system in the Borough of California.
FRANCHISE AREA— That area within the corporate limits of the municipality as now or
hereafter constituted.
FRANCHISING AUTHORITY— Any governmental entity empowered by federal, state or
local law to grant a franchise.
GRANTEE— The recipient of a franchise granted under the terms of this chapter, its
successors, transferees or assigns.1
GROSS ANNUAL SUBSCRIBER REVENUE— Any and all compensation and other
consideration received directly by the grantee from subscribers in periodic payment for all
furnished CATV services in the municipality, including revenues generated by Home Box
Office (HBO) or a similar substitute service or other premium service. Gross subscriber
revenues shall not include any taxes imposed on services furnished by the company or
imposed directly on any other subscriber or user, by any municipality, state or other
governmental unit and collected by the company for such governmental unit.
§ 83-1 CABLE TELEVISION § 83-3
83:3 02 - 15 - 2006
MUNICIPALITY— The Borough of California in its present incorporated form as it may be
changed by annexation.
NORMAL SERVICE INTERVAL— The period between the time that the grantee is notified
by a subscriber of a service deficiency and the second close of business following the receipt
of such notice, provided that the subscriber or his representative is available, during this
period, at the premises to be serviced.
PERSON— Any individual or association of individuals, or any firm, corporation or other
business entity.
PROPERTY OF GRANTEE— All property owned, installed or used by the grantee in the
conduct of a CATV business in the municipality.
STREET — The surface of any space above and below any public street, way, place,
right-of-way, road, highway, freeway, bridge, tunnel, lane, path, bike path, alley, court,
sidewalk, parkway, drive, communications or utility easement, by whatever name called, now
or hereafter existing as such within the franchise area.
SUBSTANTIAL UNIFORMITY— Having incorporated all terms and provisions of this
chapter which may legally be contracted for between the Borough and grantee into the
acceptance instrument.
§ 83-2. Authorization to grant franchises.
Upon proper motion, Borough Council of the Borough of California, through its President and
Secretary/Treasurer, are hereby authorized to execute an agreement granting and giving to
certain cable franchise operators (hereinafter called "grantee"), a nonexclusive franchise,
consent and license to erect, maintain and operate transmission and distribution facilities for
the purpose of transmission by cable and distributing television impulses and television energy
for sale to the inhabitants of the Borough of California, in, under, over, along, across and
upon the public streets, highways and other public places in said Borough and the consent to
lease part of an existing system of transmission and distribution of electrical energy, whether
for light, power, heat, telephone or telegraph or any other purpose, from any person or
corporation.
§ 83-3. Grant of rights and privileges.
There is hereby granted by the Borough to the grantee the right and privilege to construct,
operate and maintain a cable television system and related business operation in the Borough
and for the purpose to erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain and retain
in, on, over, under, upon, across and along any street or streets laid out or dedicated and all
extensions thereof and additions thereto in the franchise area, such poles, wires, cable,
conductors, ducts, conduit, vaults, manholes, pedestals, amplifiers, appliance, attachments, and
other property as may be necessary and appurtenant to the CATV system; and also for that
purpose to lease or in any other manner obtain the use of towers, poles, lines, underground
conduits and facilities of every kind from other persons, including but not limited to any
public utility or other grantee franchised or permitted to do business in the Borough.
§ 83-4 CALIFORNIA CODE § 83-7
83:4 02 - 15 - 2006
2. Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 83-4. Nonexclusive grant.
The right to use and occupy said streets for the purposes herein set forth shall not be exclusive
in the grantee. The Borough shall, however, require a franchise agreement for any other
individual or company engaging the CATV or similar business within any portion of the
Borough.
§ 83-5. Franchise fee.
The Borough shall have the right and authority pursuant to the Cable Communications Act of
1984 to require the grantee to pay to the Borough a franchise fee not to exceed 5% of the
grantee’s gross revenues per annum.
§ 83-6. Easements and other requirements.
The agreement provided for in § 83-2 of this chapter shall stipulate that the grantee shall
procure any and all easements, rights-of-way, grants, certificates of approval, permits and
agreements which may be required from any persons or corporations from any federal, state,
municipal, or other governmental authority or from any utility companies presently operating
in the Borough of California and with whom the grantee may connect any lines or with whom
licensee may jointly use any poles, lines or other transmission or distribution facilities.
§ 83-7. Indemnification of Borough.
A. The grantee shall at all times protect and hold the municipality harmless from all claims,
actions, suits, liability, loss, expense or damages of every kind and description, including
investigation costs, court costs, and reasonable attorney’s fees, which may accrue to or be
suffered or claimed by any person or persons arising out of the negligence and alleged
contractual dispute of the grantee in the ownership, construction, repair, replacement,
maintenance and operation of said cable television system and by reason of any license,
copyright, property right or patent of any article or system used in the construction or use
of said system, provided the municipality gives the grantee prompt notice of any such
claims, actions, and suits, without limitation, in writing. The grantee shall maintain in full
force and effect during the life of any franchise, public liability and property damage
insurance providing for an endorsement thereof in the name of the municipality in a
minimum amount of at least $1,000,000 single limit liability from the time of
commencement of construction of the CATV system.2
B. All such insurance may contain reasonable deductible provisions not to exceed $1,000
for any type of coverage. The municipality may require that any and all investigation of
claims made by any person against the municipality arising out of any use or misuse of
privileges granted to the grantee hereunder shall be made by, or at the expense of the
grantee or its insurer. The grantee may bring its obligations to carry any insurance
required hereby within the coverage of any so-called blanket policies of insurance now or
hereafter carried by appropriate amendment endorsement or otherwise; provided,
§ 83-7 CABLE TELEVISION § 83-10
83:5 02 - 15 - 2006
however, that the interest of the municipality shall be as fully protected thereby as if the
grantee had obtained individual policies or insurance.
§ 83-8. Length of franchise.
The authority to issue franchises shall commence and take effect immediately on the
enactment of the within chapter. Borough Council shall have the authority to issue franchises
for a period of time not to exceed 15 years. Upon application by the grantee to the
municipality, the franchise may be renewed for a ten-year period, provided that the company
has complied with the terms and conditions hereof.
§ 83-9. Incorporation of Cable Communications Act of 1984.
It is the intent of this chapter to adopt the provisions of the Cable Communications Act of
1984 and any and all regulations and amendments adopted pursuant thereto.
§ 83-10. Violations and penalties.
A. From and after the effective date of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to
construct, install or maintain within any public street within the physical limits of the
Borough, or within any other public property of the municipality or within any privately
owned area within the municipality which has not yet become a public street but is
designated or delineated as a proposed public street on any tentative subdivision that may
be approved by the municipality, any equipment or facilities for distributing any
television signals or radio signals through a CATV or similar system, unless a franchise
authorizing such use of such street or property or area has first been obtained, and unless
such franchise is in full force and effect.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to make any unauthorized connection, whether
physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively, or otherwise, with any part of the
franchised CATV system within the physical limit of this Borough for the purpose of
enabling anyone to receive any television signal, radio signal, picture, or sound, without
payment to the grantee.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the owner, willfully to tamper
with, remove or injure any cables, wires or equipment used for distribution or television
signals, radio signals, pictures, or sound.
D. Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this section shall
be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $600, plus costs of prosecution,
and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30
days. In addition, grantee may pursue all other remedies for the above wrongful action
under the applicable criminal and civil law.

89:1 02 - 15 - 2006
Chapter 89
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
ARTICLE I
UCC Administration and Enforcement
§ 89-1. Election to administer and
enforce.
§ 89-2. Adoption of standards.
§ 89-3. Methods of administration and
enforcement.
§ 89-4. Board of Appeals.
§ 89-5. Effect on prior provisions.
§ 89-6. Fees.
ARTICLE II
UCC Appeals Board
§ 89-7. Establishment; powers and
duties; composition; proceedings;
fees.
§ 89-8. Jurisdiction.
§ 89-9. Effect on prior provisions.
§ 89-10. Establishment of fees.
§ 89-11. Savings clause.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of California as indicated
in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance —See Ch. 156.
Subdivision and land development— See Ch. 187.
Zoning—See Ch. 205.
ARTICLE I
UCC Administration and Enforcement
[Adopted 5-3-2004 by Ord. No. 488]
§ 89-1. Election to administer and enforce.
This municipality hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S. §§ 7210.101 to 7210.1103, as amended from
time to time, and its regulations.
§ 89-2. Adoption of standards.
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401 to 405, as amended
from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference as the municipal
building code of this municipality.
§ 89-3. Methods of administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the code within this municipality shall be undertaken in
any of the following ways as determined by the governing body of this municipality from
time to time by resolution:
§ 89-3 CALIFORNIA CODE § 89-6
89:2 02 - 15 - 2006
1. Editor’s Note: See Art. II of this chapter.
A. By the designation of an employee of the municipality to serve as the municipal code
official to act on behalf of the municipality;
B. By the retention of one or more construction code officials or third-party agencies to act
on behalf of the municipality;
C. By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint administration and
enforcement of this Act through an intermunicipal agreement;
D. By entering into a contract with another municipality for the administration and
enforcement of this Act on behalf of this municipality;
E. By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry
for plan review, inspections and enforcement of structures other than one-family or
two-family dwelling units and utility and miscellaneous use structures.
§ 89-4. Board of Appeals. 1
A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the governing body of this
municipality in conformity with the requirements of the relevant provisions of the code, as
amended from time to time, and for the purposes set forth therein. If at any time enforcement
and administration is undertaken jointly with one or more other municipalities, said Board of
Appeals shall be established by joint action of the participating municipalities.
§ 89-5. Effect on prior provisions.
A. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were adopted by this
municipality on or before July 1, 1999, and which equal or exceed the requirements of
the code shall continue in full force and effect until such time as such provisions fail to
equal or exceed the minimum requirements of the code, as amended from time to time.
B. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in effect as of the
effective date of this article and whose requirements are less than the minimum
requirements of the code are hereby amended to conform with the comparable provisions
of the code.
C. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of this municipality not governed by the
code shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 89-6. Fees.
Fees assessable by the municipality for the administration and enforcement undertaken
pursuant to this article and the code shall be established by the governing body by resolution
from time to time.
§ 89-7 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 89-7
89:3 02 - 15 - 2006
2. Editor’s Note: See Art. I of this chapter.
ARTICLE II
UCC Appeals Board
[Adopted 3-10-2005 by Ord. No. 05-100]
§ 89-7. Establishment; powers and duties; composition; proceedings; fees.
A. The Borough Council of the Borough of California does hereby establish a Uniform
Construction Code Appeals Board, in accordance with the terms and conditions of
Ordinance No. 488 of the Borough of California.2
B. The Borough Council does hereby vest the California Borough Uniform Construction
Code Appeals Board with all of the rights, powers and duties as set forth in the
Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S. §§ 7210.101 to 7210.1103,
as amended, and as more specifically set forth under 34 Pa. Code § 403.121 and 34 Pa.
Code § 403.122.
C. In accordance with 34 Pa. Code § 402.121(c), the composition of the California Borough
Uniform Construction Code Appeals Board shall be governed by all of the following:
(1) The Uniform Construction Code Appeals Board shall be comprised of three
members, whose qualifications shall be as set forth herein, and who shall be
appointed for a term of not to exceed three years. The terms of office of the
members of the Appeals Board shall be structured so that the term of one member
expires each year.
(2) A member of the Appeals Board shall be qualified by training and experience to
pass on matters pertaining to building construction. Training and experience may
consist of licensure as an architect or engineer, experience in the construction
industry, and training or experience as an inspector or plan reviewer.
(3) A member of the Appeals Board shall hold office at the pleasure of the Borough
Council of the Borough of California.
(4) Members of the Borough Council of the Borough of California and the California
Borough Code Enforcement Official may not serve or sit as a member of the UCC
Appeals Board.
(5) The Borough Council may fill a position on the Appeals Board with a qualified
person who resides outside of California Borough when no such person is available
within the municipality who satisfies the requirements of this section.
D. Proceedings before the California Borough Uniform Construction Code Appeals Board
shall be governed by the terms and conditions of 34 Pa. Code § 403.122, and such other
terms and conditions of Pennsylvania law as deemed appropriate and applicable.
E. The Borough Council may, from time to time, establish fees and/or a fee schedule to
govern applications for any matters properly brought before the California Borough
Uniform Construction Code Appeals Board. Nonpayment of any fee as provided by the
§ 89-7 CALIFORNIA CODE § 89-10
89:4 02 - 15 - 2006
3. Editor’s Note: See Ch. 156, Property Maintenance.
Borough Council, and as set forth herein, shall act as a bar to consideration of the matter
to be brought before the Board.
§ 89-8. Jurisdiction.
The California Borough Uniform Construction Code Appeals Board shall have jurisdiction
over all appeals arising from or relating to the Uniform Construction Code, as adopted as the
Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, 35 P.S. §§ 7210.101 to 7210.1103, as amended, as well
as all such appeals arising from or relating to the Property Maintenance Code regulations of
the Borough of California, as duly adopted by the Borough of California.3 In addition, the
Uniform Construction Code Appeals Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction over any and all
appeals arising from or relating to any and all other building code regulations or ordinances of
the Borough of California, which may remain enforceable as such requirements equal or
exceed the requirements of the Uniform Construction Code.
§ 89-9. Effect on prior provisions.
A. Any resolution or part of any resolution conflicting with the terms and conditions of this
article is hereby repealed insofar as it conflicts with the provisions and terms of this
article.
B. By adoption of this article, the Borough Council hereby expresses its intent that any and
all prior existing BOCA Boards or any Appeal Board constituted to hear proceedings
arising from or relating to building code regulations or property maintenance regulations
in the Borough of California be disbanded and that the Uniform Construction Code
Appeals Board established under this article shall constitute the sole Appeals Board for
the Borough of California to hear appeals in matters relating to the jurisdiction of the
Board set forth under this article.
§ 89-10. Establishment of fees.
A. The Borough Council of the Borough of California hereby establishes a fee schedule for
the filing of applications for any matter properly brought before the California Borough
Uniform Construction Code Appeals Board.
B. The fees established hereunder may, from time to time, be adjusted by subsequent
resolution of the Borough Council of the Borough of California.
C. The following fees shall apply for matters before the California Borough Uniform
Construction Code Appeals Board:
(1) Appeals for matters pertaining to the Uniform Construction Code: $650;
(2) Appeals for matters pertaining to the Property Maintenance Code: $650;
§ 89-10 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 89-11
89:5 02 - 15 - 2006
(3) Appeals for any other matter properly within the jurisdiction of the UCC Appeals
Board: $650.
D. In addition to the fees above referred, the Borough Code Enforcement Officer is duly
authorized and empowered to compile an invoice containing any and all additional
charges, as allowed by law, including, but not limited to, court stenographic fees,
engineering fees, and any other extraordinary expenses incurred during the pendency of
an appeal before the California Borough Uniform Construction Code Appeals Board, and
to submit such invoice to the applicant for payment in accordance with the terms of this
article.
E. Failure of an applicant to pay any such additional invoices as submitted by the Code
Enforcement Officer for charges relating to the prosecution of an appeal before the UCC
Appeals Board shall constitute a violation of this article, and shall subject the defaulting
applicant to such collection remedies as available to the Borough of California. The
Solicitor of the Borough of California is duly authorized to commence such civil action
as necessary to collect payment of any invoice submitted by the Code Official under this
paragraph and not paid by an applicant.
§ 89-11. Savings clause.
Should any section, provision or other part of this article be found to be illegal, unenforceable
or void, such shall not affect the remainder hereof, which shall remain fully binding, valid and
enforceable, and such section, provision or other part shall be modified to the extent necessary
to so conform to the law. The Borough Council hereby declares its intention that should any
section, provision or other part of this article be found to be illegal, unenforceable or void, it
would have taken the foregoing action and made the foregoing resolutions without such part
or with such part so modified so as to conform to the law.

105:1 02 - 15 - 2006
Chapter 105
FEES, SPECIAL
ARTICLE I
Attorney Fees for Municipal Claims
§ 105-1. Applicability of article.
§ 105-2. Schedule of attorney fees.
§ 105-3. Notice of fee assessment.
§ 105-4. Addition of interest.
§ 105-5. Assessment of penalty.
ARTICLE II
Reimbursement for Borough Response
Services
§ 105-6. Definitions.
§ 105-7. Imposition of charges.
§ 105-8. Establishment of charges.
§ 105-9. Collection of charges.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of California as indicated
in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
ARTICLE I
Attorney Fees for Municipal Claims
[Adopted 5-8-1997 by Ord. No. 438]
§ 105-1. Applicability of article.
This article shall apply to all municipal claims allowed and authorized by the law of the
commonwealth to be assessed by the Borough of California, including, but not limited to,
liens for taxes and for municipal improvements, for the removal of nuisances, and for water
rents or rates, sewage rates, lighting rates and power rates to the fullest extent authorized by
law (hereinafter "delinquent accounts"), whether heretofore or hereafter assessed or filed.
§ 105-2. Schedule of attorney fees.
The following schedule of attorney fees is to be utilized and followed in the assessment of
attorney fees in the collection of any delinquent account and the corresponding fees shall be
added and included in the collection of the same at the time of the filing of the municipal
claim by or for the Borough of California or as soon thereafter as may be convenient or
proper:
Claim Amount Attorney Fee
Under $1,000 $250
$1,000 to $2,500 $500
$2,501 to $5,000 $1,000
$5,001 to $7,500 $1,500
$7,501 to $10,000 $2,000
$10,001 to $25,000 $2,500
Over $25,000 10% of the claim amount
§ 105-3 CALIFORNIA CODE § 105-6
105:2 02 - 15 - 2006
§ 105-3. Notice of fee assessment.
Prior to assessing or imposing attorney fees in connection with a delinquent account, the
Borough of California shall provide notice of the Borough’s intention to assess or impose
attorney fees in connection with this article as may be required by the Act of May 16, 1923,
P.L. 207, No. 153, as amended or supplemented, 53 P.S. § 7106.
§ 105-4. Addition of interest.
In all proceedings where a municipal claim is filed as a lien against real property for
delinquent accounts which are the subject of this article, interest equal to 10% per annum
shall be assessed and accrue on the claim from the date of the completion of the work after it
is filed as a lien, and on claims for taxes, water rents or rates, lighting rates or sewer rates,
from the date of the filing of the lien therefor; provided, however, that if a municipal claim is
filed arising out of a municipal project which required the Borough to issue bonds to finance
the project, interest shall accrue and be collectible on such claim at the rate of interest of the
bond issue or at the rate of 12% per annum, whichever is less. No notice prior to the
assessment or imposition of interest as set forth herein shall be required. Such interest shall be
added to the municipal claim and collected therewith.
§ 105-5. Assessment of penalty.
In all proceedings where a municipal claim is filed as a lien against real property for
delinquent accounts which are the subject of this article, a penalty equal to 5% of the
delinquent account shall be added to the municipal claim and collected therewith when the
delinquent account remains unpaid for 90 days after the assessment shall have been levied, or
as soon thereafter as may be convenient or proper. No notice prior to the assessment or the
imposition of a penalty as set forth herein shall be required.
ARTICLE II
Reimbursement for Borough Response Services
[Adopted 11-13-2003 by Ord. No. 485]
§ 105-6. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated unless a
different meaning clearly appears from the context:
ACTOR— The person violating any ordinance of the Borough of California and/or any laws
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and/or those laws, rules and regulations designated as
the Pennsylvania Crimes Code, Pa.C.S.A. Title 18, and Title 35, Chapter 6, in their entirety.
REQUEST FOR RESPONSE— Any communication to the Borough of California or County
911 Dispatch Center or to the police, Code Enforcement Officer, Zoning Officer, or other
entity, indicating the possibility of the existence of the occurrence of a crime, the violation of
a Borough ordinance, or other emergency situation warranting immediate action by the police
and/or zoning and code enforcement officials.
§ 105-6 FEES, SPECIAL § 105-9
105:3 02 - 15 - 2006
REQUESTOR— Any person, tenant, resident, business organization, nonprofit organization,
charitable institution, agent, servant or employee who makes a request for response.
RESPONSE— Any event which causes or necessitates the California Borough Police
Department, the Borough of California Zoning Officer, the Borough of California Code
Enforcement Officer, or the California Borough Animal Control Officer to utilize its
communications systems, motor vehicles and/or personnel to arrive at any place designated by
the requestor.
§ 105-7. Imposition of charges.
A. Any requestor who makes a request for response which causes a response to be made by
an agent, employee or servant of the Borough of California, which subsequently results
in the withdrawing of charges initiated as a result of the response, or any requestor who
unreasonably makes multiple requests for response may be charged the cost of the
response as set forth in § 105-8 of this article.
B. Any actor or perpetrator who it has been determined has violated the ordinances of the
Borough of California or the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as set forth in
this article, said determination being made by the Court of Common Pleas of Washington
County, including the minor judiciary of said county, by either judge, district justice, or
jury, after trial or hearing; the agreement by the actor to a guilty plea, ARD agreement,
plea of nolo contendere or no contest, probation or determination without verdict, and/or
any adjudication, determination, or agreement regarding a juvenile under the
Pennsylvania Juvenile Laws, shall be charged the costs of the response as set forth in
§ 105-8 of this article.
§ 105-8. Establishment of charges.
Any responses or determinations as set forth in § 105-7 of this article shall require the
requestor or actor to reimburse to the Borough of California such fees, costs, and expenses as
set forth by resolution of the Council of the Borough of California as well as any incidental
costs, fees or expenses relating to a response.
§ 105-9. Collection of charges.
A. The Borough of California shall provide an invoice to those individuals creating the
requirement of a police, zoning or code enforcement, and/or animal control response as
set forth in § 105-7A of this article pursuant to the schedule of charges set forth by
resolution of the Borough Council of the Borough of California.
B. The invoicing as designated above shall be provided by the Borough within 30 days of
the date of the municipal response as set forth in this article. Thereafter, payment shall be
made to the Borough of California for the aforesaid invoicing within 30 days of the date
of the invoice.
C. Where the costs, expenses and fees claimed under this article for police, zoning, code
enforcement or animal control arise from or relate to the prosecution of an actor, as
§ 105-9 CALIFORNIA CODE § 105-9
105:4 02 - 15 - 2006
1. Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
provided under § 105-7B, or the filing of any action for enforcement of an ordinance of
the Borough, then such costs, expenses, and fees as provided by resolution of the
Borough Council of the Borough of California pursuant to § 105-8 shall be included as
restitution, costs of prosecution, or additional costs in any such prosecution or
enforcement action.
D. The costs, fees, and expenses as provided under Subsection C, above, shall be collected
through the appropriate magisterial district office and/or through the office of the Clerk
of Courts of Washington County. It shall be the duty of the prosecuting officer or
Borough officer bringing the enforcement proceeding to make appropriate claim for any
amounts due under this article.
E. Failure to pay the aforesaid amounts shall cause the Borough of California to file a civil
action, judgment and/or municipal lien against the invoiced party. The foregoing
notwithstanding, the Borough of California, through its Police Department and/or zoning
and code enforcement department, may request any court having competent jurisdiction
over a requestor, actor or perpetrator to make restitution to the Borough of California
consistent with the terms and conditions of this article.
F. Interest on the unpaid balance of any invoices of any fees shall carry an interest rate of
6% per annum of the unpaid balance. In addition, the Borough of California may assess
attorney's fees.1
110:1 02 - 15 - 2006
Chapter 110
FIREWORKS
§ 110-1. Sale of fireworks prohibited.
§ 110-2. Supervised public displays
permitted; permits.
§ 110-3. Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of California at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order— See Ch. 147.
§ 110-1. Sale of fireworks prohibited.
Except as hereinafter provided, or except as set forth in Act 204 of 2004, it shall be unlawful
for any person, copartnership, association or corporation to offer for sale, expose for sale, sell
at retail or use or explode any fireworks.
§ 110-2. Supervised public displays permitted; permits.
The Borough Council shall have power, under reasonable rules and regulations adopted by it,
to grant permits for supervised public displays of fireworks to be held by the Borough, fair
associations, amusement parks and other organizations or groups or individuals. Every such
display shall be handled by a competent operator to be approved by the Borough Council and
shall be of such a character and so located, discharged or fired as, in the opinion of the Chief
of the Fire Department or such other officer as may be designated by the Borough Council,
after proper inspection, shall not be hazardous to property or endanger any person or persons.
Application for permits shall be made in writing at least 15 days in advance of the date of the
display. After such privilege shall have been granted, sales, possession, use and distribution of
fireworks for such display shall be lawful for that purpose only. No permit granted hereunder
shall be transferable.
§ 110-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punishable by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $600, plus costs of prosecution, and,
in default of payment of such fine and costs, by imprisonment for not more than 30 days.

122:1 02 - 15 - 2006
Chapter 122
INSURANCE
ARTICLE I
Fire Insurance Claims
§ 122-1. Definitions.
§ 122-2. Designated official.
§ 122-3. Limitation on payment to
insurer.
§ 122-4. Certificates by Tax Collector;
payment of delinquencies and
costs.
§ 122-5. Security for costs.
§ 122-6. Procedures, regulations and
fees.
§ 122-7. No assumption of liability.
§ 122-8. Filing with Department of
Community and Economic
Development.
§ 122-9. Violations and penalties.
§ 122-10. Joint and several responsibility.
§ 122-11. Liberal construction.
§ 122-12. Effective date; applicability.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of California as indicated
in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
1. Editor’s Note: See Ch. 184, Arts. III and IV.
ARTICLE I
Fire Insurance Claims
[Adopted 2-8-1996 by Ord. No. 429]
§ 122-1. Definitions.
The following terms in this article are defined as follows:
ACT 98 OF 1992— The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Act of July 9, 1992, P.L. 678, No.
98, Section 1, 40 P.S. § 638, as now or hereafter amended, modified and/or supplemented, and
any legislative enactment as now or hereafter enacted which amends, replaces and/or
supplements said Act.
BOROUGH— The Borough of California, Washington County, Pennsylvania.
BUILDING CODES— Any code or ordinance adopted, enacted, and/or in effect in and for
the Borough of California concerning fitness for habitation, the construction, maintenance,
operation, occupancy, use or appearance of any premises, building and/or fire prevention,
housing standards, and municipal waste, including but not limited to all applicable federal and
state codes and regulations. Also included within, but not limited by, this definition are the
following which are in effect as of the date of codification of this article: International
Building Code; International Plumbing Code; International Property Maintenance Code;
International Fire Code; ICC Electrical Code; Sidewalk Maintenance Ordinance;1 Ice Removal
§ 122-1 CALIFORNIA CODE § 122-4
122:2 02 - 15 - 2006
2. Editor’s Note: See Ch. 184, Art. II.
3. Editor’s Note: See Ch. 175.
4. Editor’s Note: See Ch. 205.
5. Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Ordinance;2 Solid Waste and Recycling Ordinance;3 Zoning Ordinance;4 and any duly enacted
amendment or supplement to any of the above and any new enactment falling within this
definition.5
INSURING AGENT — Any insurance company, association or exchange.
§ 122-2. Designated official.
The Secretary/Treasurer of the Borough of California or such official’s designee is hereby
appointed as the designated officer who is authorized to carry out all responsibilities and
duties stated herein.
§ 122-3. Limitation on payment to insurer.
No insuring agent doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a claim of
a named insured for fire damage to a building or structure located within the Borough of
California where the amount recoverable for the fire loss to the structure under all policies
exceeds $7,500, unless the insuring agent is furnished with a municipal certificate by the
Borough’s Tax Collector pursuant to Section 508(b) of Act 98 of 1992, and unless there is
compliance with Section 508(c) and (d) of Act 98 of 1992, and the provisions of this article.
§ 122-4. Certificates by Tax Collector; payment of delinquencies and costs.
A. The Tax Collector shall, upon written request of the named insured specifying the tax
description of the property, name and address of the insuring agent and the date agreed
upon by the insuring agent and the named insured as the date of the receipt of a loss
report of the claim, furnish the insuring agent either of the following within 14 working
days of the request:
(1) A certificate to the effect that, as of the date specified in the request, there are no
delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user charges against the property and
that, as of the date of the Tax Collector’s certificate or verbal notification, no
municipality has certified any amount as total costs insured by the municipality for
the removal, repair or securing of a building or other structure on the property; or
(2) A certificate and bill showing the amount of delinquent taxes, assessments,
penalties and user charges against the property as of the date specified in the
request that have not been paid as of the date of the certificate and also showing,
as of the date of the Treasurer’s certificate, the amount of the total costs, if any,
certified to the Tax Collector that have been incurred by a municipality for the
removal, repair or securing of a building or other structure on the property. For the
purposes of this subclause, the municipality shall certify to the Tax Collector the
§ 122-4 INSURANCE § 122-5
122:3 02 - 15 - 2006
total amount, if any, of such costs. A tax, assessment, penalty or user charge
becomes delinquent at the time and on the date a lien could otherwise have been
filed against the property by the municipality under applicable law.
B. Upon receipt of a certificate pursuant to Subsection A(1) of this section, the insuring
agent shall pay the claim of the named insured in accordance with the policy terms,
unless the loss agreed to between the named insured and the insuring agent equals or
exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of liability on all fire policies covering the building
or other structure. In the case of such a loss, the insuring agent, the insured property
owner and the municipality shall follow the procedures set forth in § 122-5 of this article.
C. Upon receipt of a certificate and bill pursuant to Subsection A(2) of this section, the
insuring agent shall return the bill to the Tax Collector and transfer to the Tax Collector
an amount from the insurance proceeds necessary to pay the taxes, assessments,
penalties, charges and costs as shown on the bill. The municipality shall receive the
amount and apply or credit it to payment of the items shown in the bill.
§ 122-5. Security for costs.
If the loss agreed upon by the named insured and the insuring agent, or otherwise to be paid
to the insured, equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of liability on all fire policies
covering the building or other structure, the following procedures must be followed:
A. The insuring agent shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to the officer of the
Borough designated pursuant to this article, in the aggregate of $2,000 for each $15,000
of a claim, or fraction thereof, such that if the claim is $15,000 or less, the amount
transferred to the Borough shall be $2,000; or if, at the time of a loss report, the named
insured has submitted a contractor’s signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing
and/or securing the building or other structure, in an amount less than the amount
calculated under the foregoing formula, the insuring agent shall transfer to the
municipality from the insurance proceeds the amount specified in the estimate.
B. The transfer of proceeds shall be on a pro-rata basis by all companies, associations or
exchanges insuring the building or other structure.
C. After the transfer, the named insured may submit to the Borough a contractor’s signed
estimate of the costs of removing, repairing and/or securing the building or other
structure, and the Borough’s designated officer shall forward the amount of the funds
transferred to the Borough in excess of the estimate, to the named insured if the Borough
has not commenced to remove, repair and/or secure the building or other structure.
D. Upon receipt of proceeds under this article, the Borough shall do the following:
(1) The designated officer shall place the proceeds in a separate fund to be used solely
as security against the total costs of removing, repairing, and/or securing the
building or structure which are or may be incurred by the Borough of California.
Such costs shall include, but are not limited to, any and all engineering, legal
and/or administrative costs incurred by the Borough of California in connection
§ 122-5 CALIFORNIA CODE § 122-7
122:4 02 - 15 - 2006
with such removal, repair and/or securing of the building or other structure or any
proceedings related thereto.
(2) It is the obligation of the insuring agent when transferring the proceeds, to provide
the Borough of California with the name and address of the named insured. Upon
receipt of the transferred funds and the name and address of the named insured, the
Borough's designated officer shall contact the named insured in writing, certify that
the proceeds have been received by the Borough and notify the named insured that
the procedures under this article shall be followed.
(3) When repairs, removal or securing of the building or other structure damaged by
fire have been completed in accordance with all applicable Borough codes, as
certified by the Borough Code Enforcement Officer after an inspection by the
Code Enforcement Officer, and the required proof of such completion has been
received by the Borough's designated officer, and if the Borough has not incurred
any costs for repairs, removal or securing the building or other structure, the fund
shall be forwarded to the named insured. If the Borough has incurred or incurs
costs for repairs, removal or securing of the building or other structure, the costs
shall be paid from the fund and if excess funds remain, the Borough shall transfer
the remaining funds to the named insured.
(4) To the extent that interest, if any, is earned on proceeds held by the Borough
pursuant to this article, and the proceeds are not returned to the named insured,
such interest shall belong to the Borough, as it was the Borough's funds which
were originally expended for such repairs, removal and/or securing of the building
or other structure. To the extent that proceeds are returned to the named insured,
interest earned on such proceeds shall be distributed to the named insured at the
time that the proceeds are transferred to the insured.
E. The Borough shall be entitled to recover any deficiency in expenditures and/or costs it
incurs whatsoever and nothing in this article shall be interpreted to modify its rights to
do so under law or otherwise. Furthermore, the Borough and the named insured may
enter into an agreement that permits the transfer of funds to the named insured if some
other reasonable disposition of the damaged property has been negotiated and agreed to
by the Borough of California.
§ 122-6. Procedures, regulations and fees.
The Council may, by resolution, adopt procedures and regulations to implement Act 98 of
1992 and this article and may, by resolution, fix reasonable fees to be charged for municipal
activities or services provided pursuant to Act 98 of 1992 and this article, including but not
limited to issuance of certificates and bills, performance of inspections and opening and/or
managing separate fund accounts.
§ 122-7. No assumption of liability.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to make any Borough public official, employee nor
agent an insuring agent, nor to obligate the Borough of California or any public official,
§ 122-7 INSURANCE § 122-12
122:5 02 - 15 - 2006
employee or agent of the Borough to pay any property taxes, liens, costs or expenses, nor to
take any action with regard to any property, except to the extent and only to the extent the
Borough has expended funds from the insurance proceeds therefor.
§ 122-8. Filing with Department of Community and Economic Development.
The Borough’s designated officer shall forthwith file a copy of this article with the
Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic Development, together with the
names, position and phone number of the Borough officer responsible for compliance with
this article and Act 98 of 1992, and such other and further information, if any, as may be
required to comply with Act 98 of 1992.
§ 122-9. Violations and penalties.
Any owner of property, any named insured, any insuring agent or any person acting on behalf
of any of the above, violating any of the provisions of this article, or any person or entity
providing or filing any false information required pursuant to this article, shall, upon
conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before a Magisterial District Judge, be subject to
a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of
payment of such fine and costs, by imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
§ 122-10. Joint and several responsibility.
If any structure is owned by more than one person, in any form of joint tenancy, as a
partnership, or otherwise, or if any named insured or insuring agent consists of a partnership,
corporation or other entity(ies), each person, including, but not limited to, all partners and
officers of a corporate owner, named insured or insuring agent, shall be jointly and severally
responsible for the duties imposed under the terms of this article, and shall be jointly and
severally subject to prosecution and liability for a violation of this article.
§ 122-11. Liberal construction.
This article shall be liberally construed to accomplish its purposes to deter the commission of
arson and related crimes, to discourage the abandonment of property, to prevent urban blight
and deterioration and to protect and promote the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of
the Borough of California.
§ 122-12. Effective date; applicability.
This article shall become effective on February 8, 1996, but only applies to fire losses that
occur after adoption of this article.

128:1 02 - 15 - 2006
Chapter 128
JUNKYARDS AND JUNK DEALERS
§ 128-1. Short title.
§ 128-2. Definitions.
§ 128-3. Establishment of new junkyards
prohibited.
§ 128-4. License required; fee.
§ 128-5. Application for license.
§ 128-6. Issuance of license.
§ 128-7. Limitation on licensees.
§ 128-8. Transfer of licenses.
§ 128-9. Transfer fee.
§ 128-10. Recordkeeping.
§ 128-11. Delay in disposal.
§ 128-12. Regulations for operation.
§ 128-13. Violations and penalties.
§ 128-14. Abatement of nuisances.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of California 5-13-1968 by
Ord. No. 279. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance —See Ch. 156.
Solid waste and recycling — See Ch. 175.
Zoning—See Ch. 205.
§ 128-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "California Borough Junkyard and Salvage
Yard Ordinance."
§ 128-2. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall be construed
throughout this chapter to have the meanings herein indicated:
BOROUGH— California Borough, Washington County, Pennsylvania.
COUNCIL— The Council of the Borough of California.
JUNK— Any discarded material or article and shall include, but not be limited to, scrap
metal, scrapped, abandoned or junked motor vehicles, machinery, equipment, paper, glass,
plastics, containers, and structures. It shall not include, however, refuse or garbage kept in a
proper container for the purpose of prompt disposal.
JUNK DEALER or SALVAGE YARD DEALER or SECONDHAND DEALER— Any
person, persons, partnership, association, firm and corporation who shall engage in the
business of selling, buying, salvaging, and dealing in junk, as hereinabove defined, and who
maintains and operates a junkyard, salvage yard, or secondhand goods and materials yard
within the Borough of California.
§ 128-2 CALIFORNIA CODE § 128-6
128:2 02 - 15 - 2006
JUNKYARD, SALVAGE YARD or OTHER PLACES USED AND MAINTAINED FOR
THE COLLECTION, STORAGE, AND DISPOSAL OF USED OR SECONDHAND
GOODS AND MATERIALS— Any place where any junk, as hereinabove defined, is stored,
disposed of, or accumulated.
LICENSE— The permit granted to a person who accumulates, stores or disposes of junk, as
hereinabove defined.
PERSON— Includes any person, persons, partnerships, associations, firm and corporation.
§ 128-3. Establishment of new junkyards prohibited.
No person shall establish or maintain any junkyard within the territorial limits of the Borough
of California, excepting only those junkyards which were legally established and operating as
going businesses prior to the adoption of the California Borough Zoning Code which was
effective November 1, 1964.
§ 128-4. License required; fee.
No person shall engage in business as a junk dealer or maintain a junkyard without first
obtaining a license from the Council, for which license a fee of $100 per year shall be paid to
the Borough for the use of the Borough. The license shall be issued for the twelve-month
period beginning the first day of January of each year, and ending the 31st day of December,
and each license must be renewed annually on or before the first day of January of each year.
§ 128-5. Application for license.
The license provided for in this chapter shall be issued by the Council after written
application shall have been made therefor by the person desiring to be licensed. Such license
shall state the name of the person to whom such license is issued and the premises on which
such business is to be conducted, or such junkyard is to be maintained. Such license shall be
posted conspicuously upon the premises licensed thereunder. The written application for
license hereinabove mentioned shall be accompanied by a form, every question of which must
be answered, which form will be supplied by the Council. Applicant shall also submit
therewith a plot of the premises used or to be used in connection with such license.
§ 128-6. Issuance of license.
Upon receipt of an application by the Council, the Council shall issue a license or shall refuse
to issue a license to the person applying therefor after an examination of the application and
taking into consideration the suitability of the property proposed to be used for the purposes
of the license, the character of the properties located nearby, and the effect of the proposed
use upon the Borough, both economic and aesthetic. In the event the Council shall issue a
license, it may impose upon the license and the person applying therefor such terms and
conditions in addition to the regulations herein contained and adopted pursuant to this chapter
as may be deemed necessary to carry out the spirit and intent of this chapter.
§ 128-7 JUNKYARDS AND JUNK DEALERS § 128-12
128:3 02 - 15 - 2006
§ 128-7. Limitation on licensees.
No person licensed under this chapter shall, by virtue of one license, keep more than one
place of business within the Borough, or maintain more than one junkyard for the purpose of
buying, selling and dealing in junk. No person shall engage in business as a junk dealer in any
place other than the place designated upon his license, or maintain a junkyard in any place
other than the place designated upon his license.
§ 128-8. Transfer of licenses.
No license issued by the Council shall be transferable by the licenser to any other person
unless such a transfer is authorized by the Council. Any person desiring to transfer his license
shall notify the Council in writing, which notification shall be accompanied by an application
for a license, as described in § 128-5 of this chapter, by the transferee.
§ 128-9. Transfer fee.
In the event the Council shall approve the transfer of a license, the transferred shall
immediately pay to the Borough a transfer fee of $10.
§ 128-10. Recordkeeping.
Every person licensed under this chapter shall provide and shall constantly keep a book, in
which shall be fairly written down in the English language at the time of the purchase of any
junk, a description of every article or material purchased or received by him, the date and
hour of such purchase and the person from whom such article or material was purchased,
received or handled by such person. Such records shall at all times be subject to the inspection
of any official of the Borough.
§ 128-11. Delay in disposal.
Every person licensed under this chapter shall keep and retain upon the licensed premises, for
a period of 48 hours after the purchase or receipt thereof, all junk received or purchased by
him, and he shall not disturb or reduce the same or alter the original form, shape or condition
until such period of 48 hours shall have elapsed.
§ 128-12. Regulations for operation.
Every person licensed under this chapter shall constantly maintain the licensed premises in
accordance with any special provisions imposed by the Council and in the manner prescribed
by this section and any subsequent regulations adopted by the Council:
A. Such premises shall at all times be maintained so as not to constitute a nuisance or a
menace to the health of the community or of residents nearby or a place for the breeding
of rodents or vermin.
B. No garbage or other organic waste shall be stored in such premises.
§ 128-12 CALIFORNIA CODE § 128-14
128:4 02 - 15 - 2006
1. Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
2. Editor’s Note: Original Subsection f, permitting the burning of motor vehicles, which immediately followed this
subsection, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
C. Whenever any motor vehicle shall be received in such premises as junk, all gasoline and
oil shall be drained and removed therefrom. Gasoline in an amount not exceeding 10
gallons may be stored above ground in said junkyards provided the same be placed in
containers approved by the Council. All other gasoline which is kept in the premises
shall be stored in a manner approved by the Council.1
D. The manner of storage and arrangement of junk, and the drainage facilities of the
premises, shall be such as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water upon the
premises, and to facilitate access for fire-fighting purposes.
E. All junk kept, stored or arranged on the licensed premises shall at all times be kept,
stored and arranged within the junkyard as described in the application for license
hereunder, and as limited under Subsection D above.2
F. The premises to be licensed shall be set back a minimum distance of 25 feet from the
right-of-way lines on all streets or roads and a minimum distance of 25 feet from all
other property lines. The area between the setback line and the right-of-way line and all
streets and roads and all other property lines shall be at all times kept clear and vacant.
G. When the Council shall deem it necessary and desirable, the premises to be licensed shall
at the setback lines be enclosed by a fence of type and style to be determined by the
Council or by evergreen screen plantings, or both. The Council may set forth the fence
and planting requirement at the time of the issuance of a license or at the time of renewal
or transfer of a license.
§ 128-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof by a summary proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more
than $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, by
imprisonment for not more than 30 days. Each day upon which a junkyard shall be maintained
in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 128-14. Abatement of nuisances.
In addition to the remedies provided in § 128-13 above, any continued violations of this
chapter which shall constitute a nuisance in fact or which shall in the opinion of the Council
constitute a nuisance may be abated by proceeding against the violator in a court of equity for
relief.
147:1 02 - 15 - 2006
Chapter 147
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
§ 147-1. Offenses against public and
private property.
§ 147-2. Conduct in parks.
§ 147-3. Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of California 2-14-1972 as
Secs. V and VI of Ord. No. 294. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals —See Ch. 70.
Fireworks— See Ch. 110.
Solid waste—See Ch. 175.
§ 147-1. Offenses against public and private property.
A. Against public and private property.
(1) Injury or removal. No person in the Borough shall willfully, maliciously or
wantonly injure, deface, destroy or remove real property or improvements thereto,
or moveable or personal property, belonging to the Borough or to any person in
the Borough.
(2) Scattering rubbish. No person in the Borough shall throw or permit to be deposited
or scattered upon any sidewalk, alley, street, bridge or public passageway, or upon
any private property, any paper, waste, trash, refuse or other material of a like
kind.
(3) Posting notices. No person in the Borough shall fasten in any way any show-card,
poster or advertising device upon public property in the Borough unless authorized
to do so by Borough Council.
B. Against public property.
(1) Tampering. No person in the Borough shall tamper with, injure, deface, destroy or
remove any sign, notice, marker, fire-alarm box, fire-plug, topographical survey
monument or any other personal property erected or placed by the Borough.
(2) Obstructing passageways. No person in the Borough shall place or erect upon a
public way or passageway to any building an obstruction of any type, provided that
this prohibition shall not prevent the duly authorized or required placing of
temporary barriers of warning signs for the purpose of safeguarding the public.
(3) Removal of earth. No person in the Borough shall move, disturb, or take any earth,
stone or other material from any public street, alley, park, or other public ground.
§ 147-2 CALIFORNIA CODE § 147-2
147:2 02 - 15 - 2006
§ 147-2. Conduct in parks.
A. Buildings and other property.
(1) Disfigurement and removal. No person in a park (defined for purposes of this
chapter as a park, playground, beach, recreation center or any other area in the
Borough, owned or used by the Borough, and devoted to active or passive
recreation and including comfort stations) shall willfully mark, deface, disfigure,
injure, tamper with, or displace or remove any building, bridges, tables, benches,
fireplaces, railings, paving or paving materials, waterlines or other public utilities
or parts of appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards, whether temporary or
permanent, monuments, stakes, posts, or other boundary markers, or other
structures or equipment, or facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever,
either real or personal.
(2) Rest rooms and washrooms. No person in a park in the Borough shall fail to
cooperate in maintaining rest rooms and washrooms in a neat and sanitary
condition.
(3) Removal of natural resources. No person in a park in the Borough shall dig, or
remove any beach sand, whether submerged or not, or any soil, rock, stones, trees,
shrubs, or plants, down-timber or other wood or materials, or make any excavation
by tool, equipment, blasting, or other means or agency.
(4) Erection of structures. No person in a park in the Borough shall construct or erect
any building or structure of whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary in
character, or run or string any public service utility into, upon, or across such
lands, except on special written permit.
B. Trees, shrubbery, and lawn.
(1) Injury and removal. No person in a park in the Borough shall damage, cut, carve,
transplant or remove any tree or plant or injure the bark, or pick the flowers or
seeds, of any tree or plant. Nor shall any person attach any rope, wire, or other
contrivance to any tree or plant. A person shall not dig in or otherwise disturb
grass areas, or in any other way injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of
any area.
(2) Climbing trees, etc. No person in a park in the Borough shall climb any tree, or
walk, stand or sit upon monuments, vases, fountains, railing, fences or
gun-carriages or upon any other property not designated or customarily used for
such purposes.
C. Animals, birds, etc.
(1) Hunting. No person in a park in the Borough shall hunt, molest, harm, frighten,
kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot or throw missiles at any time at any animal, reptile or
bird; nor shall he remove or have in his possession the young of any wild animal,
or the eggs or nest, or young of any reptile or bird. Exception to the foregoing is
made in that snakes known to be deadly poisonous, such as rattlesnakes,
moccasins, coral snakes, or other deadly reptiles, may be killed on sight.
§ 147-2 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 147-2
147:3 02 - 15 - 2006
(2) Feeding. No person in a park in the Borough shall give or offer or attempt to give
to any animal or bird any tobacco, alcohol or other known noxious substances.
D. Sanitation.
(1) Pollution of waters. No person in a park in the Borough shall throw, discharge, or
otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, bay
or tributary, stream, storm sewer, or drain flowing into such waters, any substance,
matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said
waters.
(2) Refuse and trash. No person in a park in the Borough shall have brought in or shall
dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt,
rubbish, waste, garbage, or refuse, or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be
placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park, or left anywhere on the grounds
thereof, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided;
where receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried
away from the park by the person responsible for its presence, and properly
disposed of elsewhere.
E. Recreational activities.
(1) Bathing and swimming.
(a) Designated areas. No person in a park in the Borough shall swim, bathe, or
wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to any park, except in such
waters and at such places as are provided therefor, and in compliance with
such regulations as are herein set forth or may be hereafter adopted. Nor shall
any person frequent any waters or places customarily designated for the
purpose of swimming or bathing, or congregate thereat when such activity is
prohibited by the person in charge upon a finding that such use of the water
would be dangerous or otherwise inadvisable.
(b) Certain hours. No person in a park in the Borough shall frequent any waters
or places designated for the purpose of swimming or bathing, or congregate
thereat, except between such hours of the day as shall be designated by the
person in charge for such purposes for each individual area.
F. Behavior.
(1) Intoxicating beverages.
(a) Prohibition. No person in a park in the Borough shall have brought alcoholic
beverages, nor shall any person drink alcoholic beverages at any time in the
park.
(b) Drunkenness. No person in a park in the Borough shall be under the
influence of intoxicating liquor.
(2) Fireworks and explosives. No person in a park in the Borough shall have brought,
or have in his possession, or set off or otherwise cause to explode or discharge or
§ 147-2 CALIFORNIA CODE § 147-3
147:4 02 - 15 - 2006
burn, any firecrackers, torpedo, rocket, or other fireworks or explosives of
inflammable material, or discharge them or throw them into any such area from
land or highway adjacent thereto.
(3) Closed areas. No person in a park in the Borough shall enter an area posted as
"closed to the public," nor shall any person use or abet the use of any area in
violation of posted notices.
(4) Games of chance. No person in a park in the Borough shall gamble, or participate
in or abet any game of chance.
(5) Going onto ice. No person in a park in the Borough shall go onto the ice on any of
the waters except such areas as are designated as skating fields, and provided a
safety signal is displayed.
(6) Loitering and boisterousness. No person in a park in the Borough shall sleep or
protractedly lounge on the seats, or benches, or other areas, or engage in loud,
boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language, or engage in any
disorderly conduct or behavior tending to a breach of the public peace or tending
to disturb others in their peaceful use and enjoyment of the park.
§ 147-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $600, plus costs of
prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, by imprisonment for not more
than 30 days.
151:1 02 - 15 - 2006
Chapter 151
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
[An ordinance establishing regulations for peddling, soliciting and other transient retail
business in the Borough of California is currently under review before the Borough
Council. Upon final adoption, said legislation will be included here.]

156:1 02 - 15 - 2006
Chapter 156
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
§ 156-1. Adoption of standards.
§ 156-2. Amendments, additions and
deletions.
§ 156-3. Establishment of Appeals Board.
§ 156-4. Effect on other provisions.
§ 156-5. When effective.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of California 3-10-2005 by
Ord. No. 492. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
UCC Appeals Board— See Ch. 89, Art. II.
Junkyards and junk dealers —See Ch. 128.
Rental housing —See Ch. 160.
Solid waste—See Ch. 175.
§ 156-1. Adoption of standards.
A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the offices of the Code Enforcement
Department of the Borough of California, being marked and designated as the International
Property Maintenance Code, 2003 edition, as published by the International Code Council, be
and is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the Borough of California and the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance
of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and
other physical things and conditions essential to insure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit
for human occupation and use; and providing for the condemnation of buildings and structures
unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein
provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and
all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance
Code on file in the office of the Code Enforcement Department are hereby referred to,
adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with such amendments,
additions, insertions and deletions, and changes, if any, as prescribed in § 156-2 of this
chapter.
§ 156-2. Amendments, additions and deletions.
The following sections of the 2003 edition of the International Property Maintenance Code are
hereby revised as follows:
A. Section 101.1: insert "Borough of California."
B. Section 103.5: delete.
C. Section 106.4: insert "Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of
this code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be
prosecuted within the limits provided by state or local laws, and, upon conviction thereof,
may be fined not less than $300 nor more than $1,000, or, in default of payment thereof,
§ 156-2 CALIFORNIA CODE § 156-5
156:2 02 - 15 - 2006
1. Editor’s Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
2. Editor’s Note: See Ch. 89, Art. II.
may be confined in the Washington County Correctional Facility for a period not to
exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served in
accordance with this section shall be deemed a separate offense and may be punishable
by per diem penalty as provided hereunder."
D. Section 302.4: insert "six inches."1
E. Section 304.14: insert "May 1" and "October 1."
F. Section 602.3: insert "September 1" and "April 30."
G. Section 602.4: insert "September 1" and "April 30."
§ 156-3. Establishment of Appeals Board.
Any and all appeals arising under the 2003 edition of the International Property Maintenance
Code, and as provided under Section 111 of the Property Maintenance Code regulations, shall
be heard by the Uniform Construction Code Appeals Board of the Borough of California.2 The
UCC Appeals Board shall have complete jurisdiction over all matters arising under the
Property Maintenance Code regulations, and all references under Section 111 of the Property
Maintenance Code to "Appeals Board" shall be construed to refer to the Borough of
California UCC Appeals Board. The UCC Appeals Board shall exercise all such jurisdiction,
authority and responsibility as provided under Section 111 of the Property Maintenance Code
regulations.
§ 156-4. Effect on other provisions.
Nothing in this chapter or in the Property Maintenance Code hereby adopted shall be
construed to affect any suit or proceeding pending in any court, or any rights acquired or
liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing under any act or
ordinance repealed by this chapter; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character
be lost, impaired or affected by the implementation and adoption of this chapter.
§ 156-5. When effective.
This chapter and the rules, regulations, provisions, requirements, orders and matters
established and adopted hereby shall take effect and be in full force and effect immediately
upon adoption of this chapter by the Borough Council of the Borough of California.
160:1 02 - 15 - 2006
Chapter 160
RENTAL HOUSING
§ 160-1. Purpose.
§ 160-2. Definitions.
§ 160-3. Registration statement;
designation of managing agent.
§ 160-4. License required.
§ 160-5. Application for license.
§ 160-6. Issuance of temporary
certificate.
§ 160-7. Issuance or denial of license.
§ 160-8. Expiration and renewal of
license.
§ 160-9. Transfer of license.
§ 160-10. Suspension or revocation of
license.
§ 160-11. License availability.
§ 160-12. Inspection of rental units and
schedule of fees.
§ 160-13. Classification of units;
modification of requirements.
§ 160-14. Duty to file list of tenants.
§ 160-15. Current licenses.
§ 160-16. Liability of owner.
§ 160-17. Violations and penalties.
§ 160-18. Owners severally responsible.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of California 1-26-1996 by
Ord. No. 428. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes— See Ch. 89. Property maintenance —See Ch. 156.
§ 160-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the
residents of the Borough of California, including, but not limited to:
A. The protection of the character and stability of residential areas;
B. The correction and prevention of housing conditions that adversely affect or are likely to
adversely affect the life, safety, general welfare and health, including the physical, mental
and social well-being, of persons occupying dwellings and adjoining or neighboring
properties;
C. The prevention of the overcrowding of dwellings;
D. The prevention of slums and blight;
E. The preservation of the value of land and buildings throughout the Borough.
§ 160-2. Definitions.
The following terms in this chapter are defined as follows:
§ 160-2 CALIFORNIA CODE § 160-2
160:2 02 - 15 - 2006
1. Editor’s Note: See Ch. 184, Arts. III and IV.
2. Editor’s Note: See Ch. 184, Art. II.
3. Editor’s Note: See Ch. 175.
4. Editor’s Note: See Ch. 205.
5. Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
BOROUGH— The Borough of California, Washington County, Pennsylvania.
BUILDING CODES— Any code or ordinance adopted, enacted, and/or in effect in and for
the Borough of California concerning fitness for habitation, the construction, maintenance,
operation, occupancy, use or appearance of any unit, premises or building and/or fire
prevention, housing standards, and municipal waste, including but not limited to all applicable
federal and state codes and regulations. Also included within, but not limited by, this
definition are the following which are in effect as of the date of codification of this chapter:
International Building Code; International Plumbing Code; International Property Maintenance
Code; International Fire Code; ICC Electrical Code; Sidewalk Maintenance Ordinance;1 Ice
Removal Ordinance;2 Solid Waste and Recycling Ordinance;3 Zoning Ordinance;4 and any
duly enacted amendment or supplement to any of the above and any new enactment falling
within this definition. 5
HOTEL— A building or structure operated in compliance with all applicable state and
federal laws and regulations, and the operator of which is licensed by the state or county,
which is held out to the public as a place where all transient persons who will come will be
received as guests for compensation, and which actually operates as such, and which opens its
facilities to the public as a whole rather than limited accessibility to a well-defined or limited
private group. The definition includes a motel.
MOTEL— See "hotel."
OWNER— The owner or owners of the fee simple title of a rental unit, or of a beneficial
and equitable interest therein or a lesser estate thereon. The following person, persons, firms
or corporations are included in the definition of owner of a rental unit: a mortgagee or vendee
in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, administrator, trustee, lessee, agent or any
other person, firm, corporation, partnership or other entity directly or indirectly in control of a
structure, dwelling, building in which a rental unit is located, or of an individual rental unit.
PERSON— A natural person, partnership, corporation, unincorporated association, limited
partnership, trust, or any other entity.
RENTAL UNIT — A room or group of rooms within a building or structure which is either
rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied or is occupied, for a consideration, as the
temporary or permanent residence or house of one or more individuals. An owner-occupied
unit can be a rental unit if any part thereof is rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied or
is occupied, for a consideration, as the temporary or permanent residence or house of one or
more individuals.
TENANT — An individual which rents, leases, hires or occupies a rental unit, whether for a
consideration or not, as a temporary or permanent residence.
§ 160-3 RENTAL HOUSING § 160-3
160:3 02 - 15 - 2006
6. Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 160-3. Registration statement; designation of managing agent.
A. Every owner of a rental unit as above defined shall file with the Borough Code
Enforcement Officer, within 45 days after the adoption of this chapter, or, for new rental
property, within 30 days of commencement of use as rental property, a written
registration statement on forms to be supplied by the Borough Code Enforcement
Officer, containing the following information:6
(1) A description of the rental unit by street number, tax ID parcel number and
apartment number or other indicia sufficient to distinguish the rental unit from all
others.
(2) The name and residence and business address of such owner, together with his
residence and business telephone number or, if such owner is a corporation, the
name, telephone number and address of such corporation and the name, residence
and business address of all officers thereof, together with the residence and
business telephone numbers of the corporation’s officers.
(3) The number of tenants the owner proposes to have occupy the rental unit.
(4) Designation of managing agent:
(a) The name, residence, business address and residence and business telephone
numbers of a natural person, 21 years of age or over, who resides within the
Borough or within 15 driving miles from the Borough and who shall be
designated by such owners as a managing agent who may be accessible
regarding maintenance and operation of such rental unit, and who shall be
designated as the person upon whom process may be served on behalf of the
owner.
[1] The managing agent shall keep a current record of all the tenants and
their names and addresses, who are renting, leasing or living in each
rental unit on the premises. This list shall be available for inspection by
the Code Enforcement Officer at reasonable times at a location within
the Borough.
[2] There shall be endorsed upon the registration statement a written
consent to such designation as managing agent signed by such
managing agent. An owner who is a natural person and who resides
within the Borough or within 15 driving miles from the Borough and
otherwise meets the requirements of this subsection may designate
himself or herself as such managing agent.
(b) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as preventing a
corporation, which is an owner of a rental unit, from designating as its
managing agent with respect thereto any officer of such corporation who
meets the requirements of this subsection as to the location of the residence
of a managing agent.
§ 160-3 CALIFORNIA CODE § 160-3
160:4 02 - 15 - 2006
(c) Any designation as managing agent made pursuant to the provisions of this
section shall remain in full force and effect until changed or terminated as
hereinafter provided.
(5) Where, after the filing of any registration statement in relation to any rental unit
under the applicable provisions of this chapter, the owner of such rental unit shall
have granted or transferred his right, title or interest therein or in any part thereof,
such owner shall file with the Borough Code Enforcement Officer, within 10 days
after such grant or transfer, a written statement which shall contain the name,
residence and business address, and residence and business telephone numbers, of
the grantee, transferee or other successor of such right, title or interest, or, if such
grantee, transferee or successor is a corporation, the name, telephone number and
address of such corporation.
(6) Where, after the filing of any registration statement with the Borough Code
Enforcement Officer pursuant to the applicable provisions of this section, any
change, other than a designation of a different managing agent or a change of
ownership or interest, occurs in any name, residence or business address, list of
officers or telephone number(s) or any other information required to be included in
such statement, the owner, within 10 days after such change, shall file, in
duplicate, on forms to be furnished by the Borough Code Enforcement Officer, a
statement setting forth the particulars of such change so as to supply the
information necessary to make currently correct the last registration statement filed
pursuant to the applicable provisions of this chapter.
(7) Any designation of a managing agent made pursuant to the applicable provisions
of this chapter shall cease to be effective if such agent shall die or be judicially
declared incompetent.
(8) Any owner may terminate the designation of a managing agent by filing with the
Borough Code Enforcement Officer a written designation of a new managing agent
made in conformity with the provisions hereinabove.
(9) If any owner shall fail to file a designation of a new managing agent with the
Borough Code Enforcement Officer in conformity with the provisions herein and
within the following time periods, such owner shall be guilty of a violation of this
chapter: on or before the effective date of a notice of termination or within three
business days after an owner receives a notice of termination from a managing
agent or other termination of a written designation, or 15 days after any such agent
shall die or be judicially declared incompetent.
B. Any registration statement or designation of a managing agent required to be filed with
the Borough Code Enforcement Officer under the provisions of this chapter shall be
signed by an owner or, if such owner is a corporation, by an authorized officer thereof.
C. Any such registration statement or designation of a managing agent shall be deemed
prima facie proof of the statements therein contained in any prosecution or litigation
instituted by the Borough or any department, commission, agency or authority thereof
against the owner or managing agent of a rental unit.
§ 160-4 RENTAL HOUSING § 160-7
160:5 02 - 15 - 2006
§ 160-4. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to conduct or operate, or cause or
permit to be rented or occupied either as owner, lessee, agent or manager within the Borough,
any rental unit without having first obtained a license or temporary certificate to do so as
hereafter provided.
§ 160-5. Application for license.
A. Within 45 days after the effective date of this chapter, the owner of each rental unit
existing on the effective date of this chapter shall make written application on forms
prescribed therefor to the Borough Code Enforcement Officer, containing such
information as necessary to administer and enforce and to insure compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and the building codes, in their entirety. The application shall
specify the rental unit the owner desires permission to operate or rent, as well as the total
number of tenants the owner requests permission to have occupy the rental unit.
B. In addition, the owner of each rental unit constructed or proposed to be rented, occupied
or used after the effective date of this chapter but not yet existing, rented or occupied as
such shall make written application to the Code Enforcement Officer for a license as
herein provided prior to any initial occupancy.
§ 160-6. Issuance of temporary certificate.
A. Upon receipt of a completed application for a license, for an existing and occupied rental
unit with tender of the appropriate license fee as hereinafter provided, the Borough Code
Enforcement Officer shall issue a "temporary certificate" indicating that a license has
been duly applied for, and that such license shall be issued or denied after the building,
including, but not limited to, interior portions thereof intended or used for human
habitation, has been inspected for compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the
building codes. A temporary certificate, as issued, shall authorize continued occupancy of
such rental unit in actual existence and use on the effective date of this chapter, pending
the issuance or denial of the applied-for license.
B. Units proposed to be rented, occupied or used or for which construction is to be
completed, for use as or conversion to a rental unit, after the effective date of this
chapter, but not yet so used or occupied, shall not be occupied for human habitation as a
rental unit prior to issuance of a license.
§ 160-7. Issuance or denial of license.
A. Upon completion of the inspection of the building or buildings, if the Borough Code
Enforcement Officer finds the requirements of this chapter and the building codes have
been met, a license shall be issued. Such license shall identify the unit which is
authorized for operation and occupancy as a rental unit as well as the total number of
tenants which may lawfully occupy the rental unit. It shall be a violation of this chapter
to occupy, use or permit the occupancy or use of a unit not covered by, or contrary to, a
duly issued license.
§ 160-7 CALIFORNIA CODE § 160-10
160:6 02 - 15 - 2006
B. If the Code Enforcement Officer finds that the requirements of this chapter or the
building codes have not been met, a written denial specifying the defects shall be
transmitted to the applicant. When a license has been denied, expired, suspended, or
revoked, no further rental or occupancy of rental units then vacant or which may become
vacant shall be permitted until a license has been issued. It shall be the owner's
responsibility to remove all tenants occupying a rental unit for which a license is denied,
expired, suspended or revoked.
C. The rental units within a structure which are in compliance with this chapter and the
building codes may continue to be occupied if units or other areas in other portions of
the structure which do not comply, do not create any hazard to the health, safety or
welfare of the persons in the occupied units.
§ 160-8. Expiration and renewal of license.
Unless sooner revoked or suspended for cause, each license shall expire on June 30 of each
year and may be renewed for successive one-year periods.
§ 160-9. Transfer of license.
A license issued hereunder is transferable, for a fee of $2, to any owner who has acquired
ownership of a licensed rental unit for the unexpired portion of the one-year term for which it
was issued or reissued, provided that the application to transfer such license is timely filed
with the Borough Code Enforcement Officer for change of ownership and the licensed rental
unit is in compliance with this chapter and Borough building codes. A license shall terminate
upon failure to apply for its transfer within 30 days of the date of sale or transfer of
ownership of the rental unit.
§ 160-10. Suspension or revocation of license.
A. A license shall be suspended upon a finding by the Borough Code Enforcement Officer
that one or more of the requirements of this chapter or the building codes have been
violated. The Code Enforcement Officer shall give written notice to the license holder of
such violations. Service upon a managing agent shall be deemed service upon the license
holder.
B. Said written notice may be served upon the owner, or such owner’s managing agent, by
any of the following methods:
(1) Personal service by hand delivery;
(2) Certified mail, return receipt requested;
(3) By handing a copy at the residence of the owner, or the managing agent, to an
adult member of the family with whom such person resides; but if no adult
member of the family is found, then to an adult person in charge of such residence;
§ 160-10 RENTAL HOUSING § 160-12
160:7 02 - 15 - 2006
7. Editor’s Note: Original Section XII, Schedule of fees, which immediately followed this section, was repealed
12-16-1999 by Ord. No. 462.
(4) By handing a copy at any office or usual place of business of the owner or the
managing agent to their agent or to the person for the time being in charge thereof.
C. Upon failure of the license holder to correct the violations stated in the notice of
violation within 30 days, or such shorter time as designated by the Borough Code
Enforcement Officer, the license may be revoked. A suspended license may be reinstated
upon meeting the requirements of the building codes. Issuance of a new license after
revocation shall be subject to payment of the full amount of the applicable license fee
and the procedures for issuance set forth above.
§ 160-11. License availability.
Licenses issued under this chapter shall be prominently and publicly displayed on the
premises of the structure, or produced on the request of a tenant or prospective tenant and
shall be available at reasonable times for inspection by the Borough Code Enforcement
Officer at a location within the Borough of California.7
§ 160-12. Inspection of rental units and schedule of fees. [Added 12-16-1999 by Ord. No.
462]
A. Inspection required; fees established.
(1) The Borough Code Enforcement Officer shall, on an annual basis, conduct an
inspection of all rental units having obtained a temporary certificate or requested a
renewal license as contemplated under this chapter, to insure compliance with the
terms and conditions of this chapter and with the property maintenance codes of
the Borough of California. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted as limiting
the authority of the Borough to conduct additional inspections, as deemed
appropriate by the Borough, where the Borough has a reasonable basis to believe
that a unit is in violation of this chapter or the property maintenance codes.
(2) The Borough Code Enforcement Officer shall, at the time of the application for
license or request for license renewal, collect an inspection fee from each property
owner in accordance with the following schedule:
Type of Property Fee
Single-family dwelling $40
Multiple-family dwelling:
1 to 600 square feet $40 (base fee)
601 to 900 square feet Base fee plus $20
Each 300 square feet over 901 Additional $20
Rooming houses and special care facilities:
§ 160-12 CALIFORNIA CODE § 160-15
160:8 02 - 15 - 2006
Type of Property Fee
8. Editor’s Note: Original Section XIV, Exemptions/exclusions, which immediately followed this section, was repealed
12-16-1999 by Ord. No. 462.
1 to 600 square feet $40 (base fee)
601 to 900 square feet Base fee plus $20
Each 300 square feet over 901 Additional $20
(3) A 15% variance on square footage calculation shall be allowed, adjusting the fee to
the lower amount as provided above.
(4) No new rental unit license, as contemplated under this chapter, shall be issued until
an initial inspection of the unit has been conducted by the Code Enforcement
Officer and the appropriate fee paid to the Borough, as provided under this section.
B. Additional provisions. [Added 1-29-2001 by Ord. No. 470]
(1) Any singular property covered by Ordinance No. 428 and Ordinance No. 462 shall
not be charged any annual inspection fee for any square footage in excess of
30,000 square feet.
(2) The license fee shall be subject to a 1% penalty per month, or any portion thereof,
beyond the date due and payable. No refund of license shall be made to those
discontinuing operation or who sell, transfer, give away, or otherwise dispose of a
licensed rental unit to another person.
§ 160-13. Classification of units; modification of requirements.
Borough Council may, by resolution, categorize and/or classify and recategorize and/or
reclassify rental units in the Borough and modify application or other deadlines under this
chapter so as to stagger inspections of rental units.8
§ 160-14. Duty to file list of tenants.
At the time of application for the rental unit license and all renewals, it shall be the duty of
every owner of a rental unit within the Borough to certify to and file with the Borough Code
Enforcement Officer a list of the names of all lessees, tenants and occupants, as well as their
permanent addresses and the telephone number for such permanent addresses, for each rental
unit, whether licensed or not. Where any change occurs in any tenant(s) or lessee(s) name or
residence, the owner, within 10 days after such change, shall certify the same to the Borough
Code Enforcement Officer, so as to supply the information necessary to make currently
correct the last tenant list filed by the owner.
§ 160-15. Current licenses.
The obligation to apply for and obtain a license and pay a license fee for a rental unit license
shall not apply to any owner currently holding a valid license under another Borough
§ 160-15 RENTAL HOUSING § 160-18
160:9 02 - 15 - 2006
ordinance which is rescinded by the adoption hereof until the expiration or other termination
of such current license; provided, however, that all other requirements under this chapter shall
apply to and be complied with by all rental unit owners.
§ 160-16. Liability of owner.
A. Every owner of a rental unit in the Borough who willfully or negligently fails to register
a rental unit, pay the license fee, license a rental unit or file a list of tenants and
occupants shall be liable for, in addition to other penalties herein provided, the payment
of all sewer rents and charges as levied by the Borough, together with all penalties, costs,
interest and lien charges. This provision shall in no way modify or nullify any other
persons’ or tenants’ liability for the same.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall not issue a license or temporary certificate as to
such property until all such delinquent charges, penalties, costs, interest and lien charges
have been paid in full.
§ 160-17. Violations and penalties.
Any owner violating any of the provisions of this chapter, or providing or filing any false
information required pursuant to this chapter, shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary
proceeding before a Magisterial District Judge, be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor
more than $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs,
by imprisonment for not more than 30 days. Each day that a tenant resides in an unlicensed
rental unit shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 160-18. Owners severally responsible.
If any rental unit is owned by more than one person, in any form of joint tenancy, as a
partnership, or otherwise, each person, including each corporate officer of a corporate owner,
shall be jointly and severally responsible for the duties imposed under the terms of this
chapter, and shall be jointly and severally subject to prosecution and liability for a violation of
this chapter.

168:1 02 - 15 - 2006
Chapter 168
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
ARTICLE I
Holding Tanks
§ 168-1. Purpose.
§ 168-2. Definitions.
§ 168-3. Rights and privileges granted.
§ 168-4. Authority to adopt rules and
regulations.
§ 168-5. Rules and regulations to
conform to applicable law.
§ 168-6. Rates and charges.
§ 168-7. Exclusiveness of rights and
privileges.
§ 168-8. Duties of improved property
owner.
§ 168-9. Length of time in existence.
§ 168-10. Area of use.
§ 168-11. Violations and penalties.
§ 168-12. Abatement of nuisances.
ARTICLE II
Sewer Use
§ 168-13. Short title.
§ 168-14. Definitions.
§ 168-15. Purpose.
§ 168-16. Scope.
§ 168-17. Fees and charges.
§ 168-18. Direct connection required.
§ 168-19. Requirements for connection to
system.
§ 168-20. Abandonment of private
systems.
§ 168-21. Conditions for use of Borough's
wastewater sewers.
§ 168-22. Industrial discharges.
§ 168-23. Costs of damage.
§ 168-24. Pretreatment standards.
§ 168-25. Grease traps required.
§ 168-26. Construction by property
owner.
§ 168-27. Reimbursement of cost of
construction.
§ 168-28. Borough may do work and
impose appropriate fees.
§ 168-29. Failure to connect.
§ 168-30. Vandalism.
§ 168-31. Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of California as indicated
in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes— See Ch. 89.
Stormwater management— See Ch. 181.
Street openings— See Ch. 184, Art. I.
Subdivision and land development— See Ch. 187.
§ 168-1 CALIFORNIA CODE § 168-2
168:2 02 - 15 - 2006
ARTICLE I
Holding Tanks
[Adopted 8-13-1990 by Ord. No. 395]
§ 168-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish procedures for the use and maintenance of holding
tanks designed to receive and retain sewage whether from residential, commercial or other
uses and it is hereby declared that the enactment of this article is necessary for the protection,
benefit and preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of this
municipality.
§ 168-2. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in
this article shall be as follows:
BOROUGH— The Borough of California, Pennsylvania.
HOLDING TANK — A watertight, receptacle, whether permanent or temporary, which
receives and retains sewage by a water-carrying system and is designed and constructed to
facilitate the ultimate disposal of the sewage at another site. This definition shall include, but
shall not be limited to, the following:
A. CHEMICAL TOILET —A toilet using chemicals that discharge to a holding tank.
B. RETENTION TANK — A holding tank to which sewage is conveyed by a
water-carrying system.
C. VAULT PIT PRIVY— A holding tank designed to receive sewage where water under
pressure is not available.
IMPROVED PROPERTY— Any property within the Borough upon which there is erected a
structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy, or use by human beings
or animals and from which structure sewage shall or may be discharged.
MUNICIPALITY— The Borough of California, Washington County, Pennsylvania.
OWNER— Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or partial, of any
property located in the Borough.
PERSON— Any individual, partnership, company, association, corporation, or other group
or entity.
SEWAGE— Any substance that contains any of the waste products or excrement or other
discharges from the bodies of human beings or animals and any noxious or deleterious
substance being harmful or inimical to the public health, or to animal or aquatic life or to the
use of water for domestic water supply or recreation.
§ 168-3 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 168-8
168:3 02 - 15 - 2006
§ 168-3. Rights and privileges granted.
The Borough is hereby authorized and empowered to oversee that the maintenance of holding
tanks and the disposal, collection and transportation of sewage is performed satisfactorily and
in accordance with all applicable laws, rules and regulations. The Borough will complete and
retain annual inspection reports for each permitted tank.
§ 168-4. Authority to adopt rules and regulations.
The Borough is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt such rules and regulations
concerning holding tanks which it may deem necessary from time to time to effect the
purposes herein.
§ 168-5. Rules and regulations to conform to applicable law.
All such rules and regulations adopted by the Borough shall be in conformity with the
provisions herein, all other ordinances of the Borough, all applicable laws, and all applicable
rules and regulations of administrative agencies of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and
the United States.
§ 168-6. Rates and charges.
The Borough shall have the right and power by resolution to fix, alter, charge and collect
reasonable and uniform rates, assessments, and other charges as authorized by applicable law
for monitoring and inspecting holding tanks and reasonable and uniform rates, assessments,
and other charges as authorized by applicable law for the disposal of sewage from the holding
tanks in the event that the sewage is disposed at the municipality’s sewage treatment facility.
§ 168-7. Exclusiveness of rights and privileges.
The collection and transportation of all sewage from all property utilizing a holding tank shall
be done under the direction of the Borough. All collection and transportation shall be done in
compliance with DEP regulations governing the use of such tanks. Disposal of all sewage
shall be made only at such site or sites as may be approved by the Department of
Environmental Protection of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 168-8. Duties of improved property owner.
The owner of an improved property who desires to utilize a holding tank shall:
A. Obtain a permit from the Borough prior to the installment of any holding tank.
B. Prior to receiving the permit post a minimum performance bond in the amount of
$100,000. Exception: In the case of an application for a permit by the commonwealth, a
state agency or a subsidiary of the commonwealth, the Borough reserves the right to
waive the posting of the performance bond. The bond may be waived for these entities
due to the fact that the commonwealth, a state agency and a subsidiary of the
§ 168-8 CALIFORNIA CODE § 168-13
168:4 02 - 15 - 2006
commonwealth possess taxing resources sufficient so as to enable them to comply in the
event of a violation.
C. Maintain the holding tank in conformance with this and any other ordinance of the
Borough, the provisions of any applicable law, and the rules/regulations of the Borough
and any administrative agency of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, including, but not
limited to, the Department of Environmental Protection.
D. The property owner shall receive and retain pumping receipts from permitted holding
tanks and shall provide the Borough with copies thereof within a reasonable time after
receiving the same.
§ 168-9. Length of time in existence.
All holding tanks permitted under this article shall be in existence for a period not to exceed
six years. At the end of the six-year period, the owner shall be responsible for replacing the
holding tank with a sewage treatment plant or sewage system approved by the Department of
Environmental Protection and the Borough.
§ 168-10. Area of use.
The use of holding tanks shall only be permitted in districts that are zoned Rural Agricultural
(RA) by the Borough.
§ 168-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of § 168-8 shall, upon conviction thereof by civil
proceedings, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $600, plus costs
of prosecution, including attorneys' fees incurred by the municipality as a result thereof, and,
in default of payment of such fine and costs, by imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
Each day that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate offense and
subject the property owner to additional fines and costs as provided herein.
§ 168-12. Abatement of nuisances.
In addition to any other remedies provided in this article, any violation of § 168-8 above shall
constitute a nuisance and shall be abated by the municipality or the Borough by either seeking
mitigation of the nuisance or appropriate equitable or legal relief from a court of competent
jurisdiction.
ARTICLE II
Sewer Use
[Adopted 2-13-2003 by Ord. No. 480]
§ 168-13. Short title.
This article may be referred to as the "California Borough Sewage Ordinance of 2003."
§ 168-14 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 168-14
168:5 02 - 15 - 2006
§ 168-14. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BOROUGH— The Borough of California.
BUILDING SEWER— The service line connected to and running from one of the Borough's
main service lines or any extension thereof, over private property to the structure provided
with public sanitary sewer service.
CAPACITY-RELATED FACILITIES— Components of the sanitary sewer system relating
to treatment, transmission, trunk, interceptors and mains, sludge treatment or disposal,
interconnection or other general system facilities. As used herein, "capacity-related facilities"
may include those such facilities that provide existing service and/or those that will provide
future service.
CAPITAL RESERVE CHARGE— The charge fixed by the Borough for the purpose of
providing funds at least in part, for additional capital expenditures necessary for the
wastewater system, which expenditures shall include sewer line extensions and sewer line
replacement at the end of the useful life, as defined herein. Said charge shall be separately
identified to the user.
COLLECTION FACILITIES — Components of the sanitary sewer system related to the
provision of collection services, including but not limited to mains and pumping stations. As
used herein, "collection facilities" may include those such facilities that provide existing
services and/or those that will provide future service.
COMMERCIAL USER— Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, all retail stores,
restaurants, office buildings, laundries, and other private business and service establishments
of any kind or nature, except those which are industrial users, single-family residential users,
institutional users or government, public schools and university users, as those terms are
defined herein.
CONNECTION FEE—
A. A fee imposed to recover the Borough of California's costs of:
(1) Constructing facilities between a sewer main line and the property line of the
property serviced or to be serviced, which fee shall not exceed an amount based on
the actual cost of the service connection, lateral sewer and related costs, of the
property extending from the sanitary sewer system's main line to the property line
of the property so connected; and
(2) Inspection of the facilities identified in Subsection A(1) above whether built by the
sanitary sewer system or otherwise.
B. The part of this fee set forth in Subsection A(1) above shall be chargeable only in the
event that the Borough itself incurs costs (other than costs of inspection) in the
construction of the lateral.
§ 168-14 CALIFORNIA CODE § 168-14
168:6 02 - 15 - 2006
1. Editor’s Note: Said Schedule of Fees is on file in the Borough offices.
CUSTOMER FACILITIES FEE—
A. A fee imposed to recover the Borough's cost of:
(1) Facilities installed between the property line of a property, and the building to
which service is provided, which fee shall not exceed an amount based on the
actual cost of the facilities servicing the connected property, from the property line
to the dwelling or building to be served; and
(2) Inspection of the facilities identified in Subsection A(1) above whether built by the
Borough or otherwise.
B. The part of this fee set forth in Subsection A(1) above shall be chargeable only in the
event that, as a result of the property owner's failure to promptly and properly connect
the building to the sanitary sewer system, in accordance with this article, the Borough is
required to do so.
DEBT SERVICE CHARGE— The charge fixed by the Borough to pay for debt service on
any and all loans, lines of credit, or other form of indebtedness incurred by the Borough in the
construction of the wastewater system, which charge shall be separately identified to the user.
EPA— The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
EXISTING CUSTOMER— Individuals and/or entities who/which are users of the Borough
of California's public wastewater system as of the effective date of the Schedule of Fees
attached hereto and expressly incorporated herein.1
EXISTING FACILITIES— Those facilities which comprise part of the sanitary sewer
system as of the effective date of this article; provided, however, that for purposes of
calculation of the tapping fee imposed by this article, this term shall not include facilities
contributed to the sanitary sewer system by any person, government or agency.
GARBAGE— The solid animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the domestic or
commercial handling, storage, dispensing, preparation, cooking, and serving of food.
GOVERNMENT, PUBLIC SCHOOLS and UNIVERSITY— Include legislative, judicial,
administrative and regulatory activities of the federal, state and local governments, agencies
and authorities and similar users, and public schools and universities, which are users of the
Borough of California's public wastewater system.
HISTORICAL COST — Except as otherwise provided herein, all costs associated with
acquisition of real and personal property and/or construction rights, construction itself, related
financing, engineering, legal and other professional fees, and other administrative expenses
incurred in the acquisition and/or construction of any part of the existing facilities.
INDUSTRIAL USER— Includes any user of the publicly owned treatment works and/or
sewerage system which is identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972,
Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented, under the following
divisions: Division A, Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing; Division B, Mining; Division D,
§ 168-14 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 168-14
168:7 02 - 15 - 2006
Manufacturing; Division E, Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and Sanitary; and
Division I, Services. As used herein, "industrial user" shall also include any user who/which
discharges wastewater containing toxic or poisonous substances or any substance(s) which
cause(s) interference in wastewater facilities.
INSTITUTIONAL USER— Includes social, charitable and religious activities and
organizations such as churches, hospitals, nursing homes, penal institutions and similar users.
INTERFERENCE— Inhibition or disruption of any sewer system, wastewater treatment
process, sludge disposal system, or their operation, which substantially contributes to a
violation of applicable discharge permits.
MAINTENANCE AND OPERATION EXPENSES— Those expenditures made during the
useful life of a sewer system for labor, materials, utilities, equipment, accessories and/or
appurtenances and such other items as are necessary to manage and maintain the system
capacity and performance and to provide the service for which the system was designed and
constructed.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING/MULTIUNIT DWELLING— Includes any apartment,
apartment houses, doublehouses, townhouses, garden apartments, condominiums, hotels,
motels, rooming houses, boardinghouses, high-rise dwellings, and similar buildings that are
rented out to the public and/or provide lodging for the public.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or any other body
of surface or ground water.
NONRESIDENTIAL USE— Any use other than a single-family residential use or
government, public schools and university user.
NORMAL DOMESTIC WASTEWATER — Wastewater that has a BOD concentration of
not more than 208 mg/l and a suspended solids concentration of not more than 220 mg/l, a pH
of 7.0; an NH N of 15 mg/l and a phosphate concentration of 20 mg/l.
NPDES— National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit program, whether
administered by the EPA or by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
OWNER— The person or persons who legally own, lease, or occupy property with building
sewers which discharge, or will discharge, into the Borough's wastewater system.
PERSON— Any individual, firm, company, association, society, partnership, corporation,
municipality, or other similar organization, agency, or group.
pH— The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration expressed in grams
per liter of solution as determined by Standard Methods.
PRETREATMENT— The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of
pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to
discharge to the wastewater system.
REIMBURSEMENT COMPONENT or REIMBURSEMENT PART — The amount
necessary to recapture the allocable portion of facilities in order to reimburse the property
owner who constructed the facilities, or at whose expense such facilities were constructed.
§ 168-14 CALIFORNIA CODE § 168-14
168:8 02 - 15 - 2006
2. Editor’s Note: Schedules A, B, C and D, which originally accompanied this ordinance, are on file in the Borough
offices.
REPLACEMENT — Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment accessories and
appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the wastewater system to maintain
the capacity and performance for which such system was designed and constructed.
SANITARY WASTEWATER— Includes wastewater discharged from the sanitary
conveniences of dwellings, office buildings, industrial plants, or institutions.
SEWER SERVICE EXTENSION LINE or EXTENSION LINE or LATERAL— A sanitary
sewer designed and constructed as an extension to a main sewer line within the public
right-of-way, to which a building sewer from individual properties of customers or potential
customers are to be connected. As used herein, this term does not include any building sewer.
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL USE— Any buildings or portion thereof, room, group of
rooms or enclosure, occupied or designed and intended exclusively for residence or occupancy
as the separate living quarters of a person living alone or a family consisting of a father and/or
mother and/or children related by blood, marriage, or adoption and living together and
maintaining a common household. A single-family residential use shall not include multiunit
homes, apartment buildings, townhouses, or any other similar structures, hotels or motels, or
any other structure used for transient residence.
STATE— The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
STORM SEWER— A sewer for conveying storm, surface, and other waters, which are not
intended to be transported to a treatment facility.
SURFACE WATER— Water which occurs when the rate of precipitation exceeds the rate at
which water may infiltrate into the soil.
TAP PERMIT — The written approval, if any, received by an applicant for connection to the
public wastewater system, which allows the property to which the approval relates to be
physically connected to the Borough's public wastewater system, and/or reserves capacity in
the public wastewater system. Except as may otherwise be authorized by Borough ordinance,
the tap permit shall automatically expire on the date that occurs two years after the date of
issuance of the tap permit, which issuance date shall be identified on said tap permit, if the
property to which the tap permit relates has not, as of that date, been physically connected to
the Borough's wastewater system at that time, and satisfactory inspection of said connection
has not been performed by or on behalf of the Borough, in accordance with ordinances or
regulations.
TAPPING FEE— A fee initially payable to the Borough of California at the time of
application for connection to the sanitary sewer system, which fee is identified on Schedule B
attached to this article.2 The term "connection" includes:
A. The physical connection of the property to the sanitary sewer system; and/or
B. Resulting increases in water consumption in the Sanitary Authority attributable to a
building or structure previously physically connected to which renovation, modifications,
and/or additions are made.
§ 168-14 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 168-16
168:9 02 - 15 - 2006
USER CHARGE— That portion of the total wastewater service charge which is levied in a
proportional and adequate manner for the cost of operation, maintenance and replacement of
the wastewater system, which charge shall be separately identified to the user.
WASTEWATER— A combination of liquid and water-carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industries, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface
water, or stormwater that may be present.
WASTEWATER FACILITY— The combination of the wastewater sewers and treatment
facilities.
WASTEWATER (SANITARY SEWERAGE) SYSTEM— Any devices and systems for the
collection, transmission, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage,
domestic sewage or liquid industrial wastes. These include intercepting sewers, outfall sewers,
sewage collection systems, pumping, power and other equipment, treatment works and their
appurtenances; extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions and alterations thereof;
elements essential to provide a reliable recycled supply such as standby treatment units and
clear well facilities; and any works including site acquisition of the land that will be an
integral part of any treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting
from such treatment (including land for composting sludge, temporary storage of such
compost and land used for the storage of treated wastewater in land treatment systems before
land application); or any other method or system for preventing, abating, reducing, storing,
treating, separating or disposing of municipal waste or industrial waste, including waste in
combined stormwater and sanitary sewer systems.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEM — The structures, processes, equipment and
arrangements necessary to treat and discharge wastewater.
§ 168-15. Purpose.
The purposes of this article are to provide for the maximum possible beneficial use of the
sanitary sewer system through regulation of sewer construction, sewer use, and wastewater
discharge; to provide for equitable and legally authorized distribution of the costs of the
sanitary sewer system; to provide procedures for complying with requirements contained
herein and to promote the general health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Borough.
§ 168-16. Scope.
The provisions of this article shall apply to the discharge of all wastewater to the sanitary
sewer system. This article provides for the uses of the sanitary sewer system’s wastewater
system; regulation of construction of sewers and/or treatment facilities; control of the quantity
and quality of wastewater discharged to the sanitary sewer system; equitably and legally
authorized distribution of costs among existing customers of the existing system, among
existing customers with respect to future expansions or enhancements of the system, and
among future customers; assurance that existing capacity needs of existing customers will not
be preempted; approval of sewer, pump station and/or treatment facilities, construction plans;
issuance of wastewater discharge permits, establishment of sewer connection standards,
conditions and costs, and imposition of penalties and procedures applicable as a result of
violation of this article.
§ 168-17 CALIFORNIA CODE § 168-18
168:10 02 - 15 - 2006
3. Editor’s Note: Schedules A, B, C and D, which originally accompanied this ordinance, are on file in the Borough
offices.
4. Editor’s Note: See also Res. No. 03-114, regarding sewage charges for condemned properties, which is on file in the
Borough offices.
§ 168-17. Fees and charges.
A. Except as otherwise provided herein, all fees and charges payable under the provisions of
this article shall be paid to the Borough of California, such fees and charges as set forth
in Schedule A and Schedule B, which are attached hereto and incorporated herein.3 The
Borough of California shall have the right to periodically amend the fees and charges
enumerated in Schedule A and Schedule B by resolution.4
B. With the exception of tapping fees imposed pursuant to this article, all fees and charges
collected under this article shall be used for the sole purpose of constructing, operating or
maintaining the sanitary sewer system or the retirement of debt incurred for the same.
C. Except as otherwise provided, all fees and charges payable under the provisions of this
article are due and payable upon receipt of notice of the fees and charges. Sewer rates
and charges shall become payable, and shall become delinquent and/or subject to penalty
and interest charges, in accordance with this article.
D. Any person who continues to violate the provisions of this article beyond the time limit
provided herein may be charged with such violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $600, plus costs of
prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, by imprisonment for not
more than 30 days, for each day the violation continues, and shall be subject to
disconnection from the Borough’s water service facilities.
§ 168-18. Direct connection required.
Every owner of property in the Borough whose property either abuts with or is adjacent to
any public wastewater sewer or whose property abuts with or is adjacent to a public street or
right-of-way through which a public wastewater sewer has been, or will be, constructed shall,
within 90 calendar days after notice to connect from the Borough, connect the house, building
or other structure, and/or any subsequent additions thereto, located on said property with the
aforementioned public wastewater sewers for the purpose of disposing of all acceptable
sanitary wastewater emanating from said property.
A. In such event, a property owner shall be required to construct and to dedicate to the
Borough that part of the sewer line between the property line and the sanitary sewer
system’s main line, or any extension or lateral thereto, which is necessary to provide
sanitary sewer service; the Borough and property owner shall both be responsible for
50% of the actual cost of the same, regardless of whether the work has been performed
by the Borough or by a private contractor mutually agreed upon by the owner and the
Borough. Any such construction performed by the property owner or a contractor
retained by the property owner shall be in accordance with this article and Schedule C,
§ 168-18 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 168-19
168:11 02 - 15 - 2006
5. Editor’s Note: Schedules A, B, C and D, which originally accompanied this ordinance, are on file in the Borough
offices.
which is attached hereto and made a part hereof,5 the terms and conditions of any
agreement between the Borough of California and the property owners resulting
therefrom, and/or other reasonable rules and regulations of the Borough of California.
The property owner shall pay to the Borough of California the inspection component of
the connection fee identified on Schedule B attached hereto. The failure of a property
owner to comply with the terms of this section shall result in imposition of a connection
fee calculated as set forth in this article.
B. In such event, a property owner shall also be required, at his/its sole cost and expense, to
construct the building sewer necessary to provide sanitary sewer service from the
dwelling or other building proposed to be served to the lateral. The property owner shall
pay to the Borough of California the inspection component of the customer facilities fee
identified in Schedule B attached hereto. The failure of the property owner to comply
with this obligation shall result in imposition of a customer facilities fee calculated as set
forth in this article.
C. Separate physical connections to the sanitary sewer system, and corresponding separate
tapping fees, shall be required for each building or structure for which public sanitary
sewer service is required pursuant to this article. A separate tapping fee shall also be
required for each renovation or modification (including the construction of additions) to
any such building or structure, regardless of the date of the renovation or modification,
where such modification or addition results in a designed increase in water consumption
attributable to the building or structure. Where modifications or additions result in
increased water consumption, the Borough reserves the right, in appropriate
circumstances, to require separate physical connections as well. Under no circumstances,
however, shall the Borough assume, or be construed as assuming, any obligation or
responsibility for damages caused by or resulting from the imposition of such
requirement. In any event, the property owner shall nonetheless remain obligated to pay
tapping fees in the same amount and calculated in the same manner as otherwise would
have been payable.
§ 168-19. Requirements for connection to system.
In addition to any of the requirements set forth in any other section of this article, no person,
firm, or corporation shall uncover, use, alter or make or cause to be made any connection with
any of the aforementioned public wastewater sewers until all of the following conditions have
been fulfilled:
A. Application must be made to the Borough upon a permit form to be formulated and
supplied by the Borough for permission to uncover, use, alter or connect to the
aforementioned public wastewater sewers. Said permit form shall include, but not be
limited to, a requirement that the applicant state the character and use of each structure
and/or addition thereto located or to be located upon the property and the sewage rate
classification attributable to the structure and/or addition thereto, as estimated at the time
an application is submitted.
§ 168-19 CALIFORNIA CODE § 168-19
168:12 02 - 15 - 2006
6. Editor’s Note: Schedules A, B, C and D, which originally accompanied this ordinance, are on file in the Borough
offices.
B. There shall be three classes of permits for connections to the public wastewater sewer:
Class I, Single-Family Residential; Class II, Multifamily Dwelling/Multiuser
Dwelling/Nonresidential; and Class III, Government, Public Schools, and University.
Each nonresidential use application shall be supplemented by any information required to
administer this article. The Borough expressly reserves the right to change and/or amend
the aforementioned classifications, along with rate changes to said classifications, by
resolution.
C. At the time of application for permission to make a connection, the property owner shall
pay a tapping fee for the structure, and/or addition thereto, located or to be located upon
the property, as estimated at the time the application is submitted.
D. The amount of the tapping fee payable shall be as set forth in Schedule B attached
hereto,6 and expressly incorporated herein, which Schedule is hereby adopted by the
Borough. The tapping fees hereby imposed shall be in addition to any charges which
might otherwise be assessed against the property as a result of the construction of the
sewer main by the Borough, any sewer user rates and charges payable in accordance with
this article and/or any customer facilities fees or connection fees imposed under this
article.
E. No capacity in the sanitary sewer system shall be guaranteed for a property owner or
owners until such time as tapping fees imposed hereunder have been paid or secured by
other financial security acceptable to the Borough. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no
work related to the physical connection of the structure, and/or addition thereto, to the
aforementioned wastewater sewers shall commence before the payment of the tapping
fees imposed hereunder have been received and the aforementioned connection permit
has been issued.
F. Each property owner shall give the Borough at least 72 hours' notice of the time when
the physical connection is to be made to the public wastewater sewers of the sanitary
sewer system, pursuant to the aforementioned connection permit, to permit an individual
duly authorized by the Borough to be present to inspect and approve the work of
connection. The inspector shall signify his approval in writing on the aforementioned
connection permit in the possession of the permittees.
G. At the time of inspection of the connection, the property owner shall permit an individual
duly authorized by the Borough full and complete access to all sanitary and drainage
arrangements and facilities in each building and in and about all parts of the property. No
building sewer shall be covered or in any manner concealed until after it has been
inspected and approved by said inspector.
H. The costs and expenses incidental to the building sewer installation and connection to the
sanitary sewer system shall be borne by the owner of the building sewer. The owner shall
indemnify the Borough from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
§ 168-19 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 168-21
168:13 02 - 15 - 2006
7. Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
I. The construction of all sewer lines shall be done in accordance with the current standards
of the construction industry. All costs and expenses incurred in the making of the
physical connection to the sanitary sewer system shall be borne by the property owner.
§ 168-20. Abandonment of private systems. 7
No privy vault, cesspool, septic tank, mine hole or similar receptacle for human excrement
shall hereafter be maintained upon any premises from which connection with any public
sewer shall have been made. The Borough may, at its discretion, require every such privy
vault, cesspool, septic tank, mine hole or other receptacle within 30 days after final enactment
of this section, in the case of premises now connected with a sewer, and within 30 days after
connection with a sewer, in the case of premises hereafter so connected, to be abandoned,
cleansed and filled under the direction and supervision of the Borough. Any such privy vault,
cesspool, septic tank, mine hole or other receptacle not abandoned, cleansed and filled as
required by this section shall constitute a nuisance and such nuisance may be abated on order
of the Borough as provided by law, at the expense of the owner of such property.
§ 168-21. Conditions for use of Borough's wastewater sewers.
A. All discharge of stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage, or other waters not intended to be treated in the treatment facility shall be made
to storm sewers or natural outlets designed for such discharge. Any connection, drain or
arrangements which would permit any such waters to enter the Borough’s public
wastewater system shall be deemed to be in violation of this article.
B. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any part of the Borough’s
wastewater system any substances, materials, waters, or wastes in such quantities or
concentrations which will:
(1) Create a fire or explosion hazard, including, but not limited to, gasoline, benzene,
naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
(2) Corrosion.
(a) Cause corrosive damage or hazard to structures, equipment, or personnel of
the wastewater system, but in no case discharges with the following
properties:
[1] Having a pH lower than 5.0 or greater than 10.0 for more than 10% of
the time in a twenty-four-hour period;
[2] Having a pH lower than 3.5 or greater than 12.0 for any period
exceeding 15 minutes.
(b) These requirements may be modified for facilities designed to accommodate
greater ranges.
§ 168-21 CALIFORNIA CODE § 168-21
168:14 02 - 15 - 2006
(3) Cause obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the operation of
the sanitary sewer system due to accumulation of solid or viscous materials.
(4) Constitute a rate of discharge or substantial deviation from normal rates of
discharge ("sludge discharge") sufficient to cause interference in the operation and
performance of the sanitary sewer system.
(5) Contain heat in amounts which will accelerate the biodegradation of wastes,
causing the formation of excessive amounts of hydrogen sulfide in the wastewater
sewer or inhibit biological activity in the wastewater treatment facilities, but in no
case shall the discharge of heat cause the temperature of the wastewater sewer to
exceed 58° C. (150° F.) or the temperature of the influent to the treatment facilities
to exceed 40° C. (104° F.) unless the facilities can accommodate such heat.
(6) Contain more than 100 milligrams per liter of nonbiodegradable oils of mineral or
petroleum origin.
(7) Contain floatable oils, fat, or grease, except for domestic kitchen use.
(8) Contain noxious, malodorous gas or substance which is present in quantities that
create a public nuisance or a hazard to life.
(9) Contain radioactive or other toxic wastes in harmful quantities as defined by
applicable state and federal regulations.
(10) Contain any garbage that has not been properly shredded.
(11) Contain any odor or color producing substances exceeding concentration limits
which may be established by the Borough for purposes of meeting the applicable
NPDES.
C. If, in establishing discharge restrictions, discharge limits, or pretreatment standards
pursuant to this article, the Borough establishes concentration limits to be met by an
industrial user, the Borough, in lieu of concentration limits, shall establish mass limits of
comparable stringency for an individual industrial user at the request of such user.
D. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to the sanitary sewer system
wastewaters containing substances subject to an applicable Federal Categorical
Pretreatment Standard promulgated by EPA in excess of the quantity prescribed in such
applicable pretreatment standards except as otherwise provided in this section.
Compliance with such applicable pretreatment standards shall be within three years of the
date the standard is promulgated; provided, however, that compliance with a categorical
pretreatment standard for new sources shall be required upon promulgation.
E. Upon application by a multifamily dwelling/multiuser dwelling/nonresidential industrial
user (as that term is defined herein), the Borough shall revise any limitations on
substances specified in the applicable pretreatment standards to reflect removal of the
substances by the wastewater treatment facility. The revised discharge limit for specified
substances shall be derived in accordance with federal law.
§ 168-21 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 168-22
168:15 02 - 15 - 2006
F. Upon application by a multifamily dwelling/multiunit dwelling/nonresidential industrial
user (as that term is defined herein), the Borough shall adjust any limitation on
substances specified in the applicable pretreatment standards to consider factors relating
to such user which are fundamentally different from the factors considered by the
Borough in the development of the pretreatment standard. Requests for and
determinations of a fundamentally different adjustment shall be in accordance with
federal law.
G. The Borough shall notify any multifamily dwelling/multiunit dwelling/nonresidential
industrial user (as that term is defined herein) affected by the provisions of this article
and establish an enforceable compliance schedule for each.
§ 168-22. Industrial discharges.
A. All multifamily dwelling/multiunit dwelling/nonresidential industrial users (as defined
herein) shall file with the Borough wastewater information deemed necessary by said
Borough for determination of compliance with this article, applicable NPDES permit
conditions, and state and federal law. Such information shall be provided by completion
of a questionnaire designed and supplied by the Borough and by supplements thereto as
may be necessary.
B. Where a multifamily dwelling/multiunit dwelling/nonresidential industrial user (as
defined herein) owns, operates, or occupies properties which results in discharges at more
than one location, separate information submittals shall be made for each location as may
be required by the Borough.
C. When required by the Borough, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer
carrying industrial wastewater discharges shall provide suitable access and such
necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation,
sampling, and measurement of the wastewater. Such access shall be in a readily and
safely accessible location and shall be provided in accordance with the plans approved by
the Borough. The access shall be provided and maintained at the owner’s expense so as
to be safe and accessible at reasonable times.
D. The Borough shall consider such factors as the volume and strength of discharge, rate of
discharge, quantities of toxic materials in the discharge, wastewater treatment facility
removal capabilities, and cost effectiveness in determining whether or not access and
equipment for monitoring such wastewater discharges shall be required.
E. Where the Borough determines access and equipment for monitoring or measuring such
industrial wastewater discharges is not practicable, reliable, or cost effective, the Borough
may specify alternative methods of determining the characteristics of the wastewater
discharge which will, in the Borough’s judgment, provide an equitable measurement of
such characteristics.
F. Measurements, tests, and analyses of wastewater to which reference is made in this
article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for
the Examination of Water and Wastewater" published by the American Public Health
Association or such alternate methods approved by the Borough and which comply with
§ 168-22 CALIFORNIA CODE § 168-23
168:16 02 - 15 - 2006
state and federal law. Sampling methods, locations, times, durations, and frequencies are
to be determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the Borough. The user
shall have the option to use, at his own expense, more complete sampling methods,
locations, times, durations, and frequencies than specified by the Borough.
G. Measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of wastewater required by this
article shall be performed by a qualified laboratory. When such analyses are required of a
user, the user may, in lieu of using the Borough's laboratory, make arrangements with
any qualified laboratory, including that of the user, to perform such analyses.
H. Monitoring of wastewater characteristics necessary for determination of compliance with
applicable pretreatment standards shall be conducted on the basis of the following
schedule, unless more frequent monitoring is required by authority other than this article,
or if the Borough, in its judgment, determines that the characteristics of the specific
discharge warrant a different frequency monitoring:
Average Actual Daily User Discharge Monitoring Frequency
Less than 100,000 gpd Semiannually
100,000 to 999,999 gpd Quarterly
More than 999,999 gpd Monthly
I. Monitoring of wastewater characteristics for any purpose other than the determination of
compliance with pretreatment standards shall be conducted on a frequency deemed
necessary by the Borough.
J. Upon demonstration by any person that the characteristics of the wastewater discharged
by that person are consistent, the Borough may reduce the frequency as may be required
by authority other than this article, except in no case shall the frequency of monitoring be
less than semiannual for the determination of compliance with pretreatment standards.
K. In determining the discharge characteristics, factors such as continuous or batch
operation, and seasonal operation and the information requirements of other provisions of
this article shall be considered by the Borough. The Borough may obtain wastewater
samples as required to verify the consistency of discharge characteristics.
L. Fees for any given measurement, test, or analysis of wastewater by this article and
performed by the Borough shall be the same for all classes of users, regardless of the
quantity or quality of the discharge, and shall reflect only direct cost. Costs of analysis
performed by an independent laboratory at the option of user shall be borne directly by
the user.
§ 168-23. Costs of damage.
If the drainage from any establishment causes a deposit, obstruction, or damage to any part of
the sanitary sewer system, the Borough shall cause the deposit or obstruction to be promptly
removed or cause the damage to be promptly repaired. The cost for such work, including
§ 168-23 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 168-24
168:17 02 - 15 - 2006
materials, labor, and supervision, shall be borne by the person causing such deposit,
obstruction, or damage.
§ 168-24. Pretreatment standards.
A. While the Borough should initially rely upon the Federal Categorical Pretreatment
Standards of this article to protect the wastewater systems or receiving waters, if any
wastewater which contains substances or possesses characteristics shown to have
deleterious effect upon the wastewater systems or receiving waters, or constitutes a
public nuisance or hazard, is discharged or is proposed for discharge to the wastewater
sewers, the Borough may:
(1) Require pretreatment to a condition acceptable for discharge to the wastewater
sewers;
(2) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge;
(3) Require payment to cover added cost of handling and treatment the wastewaters
not covered by existing fees or charges;
(4) Require the development of compliance schedules to meet any applicable
pretreatment requirements;
(5) Require the submission of reports necessary to assure compliance with applicable
pretreatment requirements;
(6) Carry out all inspection, surveillance, and monitoring necessary to determine
compliance with applicable pretreatment requirements;
(7) Obtain remedies for noncompliance by any user; such remedies may include
injunctive relief, the civil penalties otherwise specified in this article, or
appropriate criminal penalties; or
(8) Reject the wastewater, if scientific evidence discloses that discharge will create
unreasonable hazards or have unreasonable deleterious effects on the wastewater
facilities.
B. When considering the above alternatives, the Borough shall assure that conditions of the
applicable NPDES permit are met. The Borough shall also take into consideration cost
effectiveness and the economic impact of the alternatives on the user. If the Borough
allows the pretreatment or equalization of wastewater flows, the installation of the
necessary facilities shall be subject to review. The Borough shall review and recommend
any appropriate changes to the program, within 30 days of submittal.
C. Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or required for any
wastewater, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation
at the expense of the owner.
D. Persons required to pretreat wastewater as aforesaid shall provide a statement, reviewed
by an authorized representative of the user and certified to by a qualified person,
indicating whether applicable pretreatment requirements are being met on a consistent
§ 168-24 CALIFORNIA CODE § 168-26
168:18 02 - 15 - 2006
8. Editor’s Note: Exhibit C is on file in the Borough offices.
basis and, if not, describe the additional operation and maintenance or additional
pretreatment required for the user to meet the pretreatment requirements. If additional
pretreatment or operation and maintenance will be required to meet the pretreatment
requirements, the user shall submit a plan (including schedules) to the Borough. The plan
(including schedules) shall be consistent with applicable conditions of the applicable
NPDES permit or other local, state or federal laws.
E. In the event that the federal government promulgates a regulation for a given new or
existing user in a specific industrial subcategory that establishes pretreatment standards,
such federal regulations shall immediately supersede Subsections A through C above.
F. The Borough shall promptly apply for and obtain authorization from the EPA to revise
discharge limitations for those substances listed in the Federal Categorical Pretreatment
Standards for which consistent removal occurs in the wastewater treatment facilities of
the Borough. The Borough shall not adopt or enforce discharge limitations more stringent
than the requested limitations until the state or EPA acts on the application.
§ 168-25. Grease traps required.
A. Every owner of commercial eating establishments, restaurants, and/or food preparation
facilities connected to the sanitary sewer system shall be required to install grease traps
not more than 50 feet from the sink or drain. The traps shall be constructed from a
watertight material and the liquid holding capacity of the tank shall equal 0.5 gallons per
seat, with a minimum size of 10 gallons, and in accordance with Exhibit C attached
hereto and made a part hereof.8
B. Grease traps shall be installed in every eating establishment, restaurant and/or food
preparation facility within 90 days of the effective date of this article.
C. Cleaning and maintenance of the grease traps shall be the responsibility of the owner of
the commercial eating establishment, restaurant and/or food preparation facility; and
cleaning shall be done at least on a quarterly basis.
D. The Borough shall inspect said grease traps annually.
§ 168-26. Construction by property owner.
A. Where an extension of the sanitary sewer system is to be constructed at the expense of
the property owner, the property owner shall have the right to construct the extension
himself or through a contractor; provided, however, that the Borough shall have the right,
at its option, to perform the construction itself if it is able to provide the extension at a
lower cost and within the same timetable specified or proposed by the property owner or
the approved subcontractor.
B. Construction of an extension to the facilities by the property owner or an approved
subcontractor shall be subject to the following further conditions:
§ 168-26 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 168-26
168:19 02 - 15 - 2006
(1) Construction shall be in accordance with an agreement entered into between the
Borough and the property owner prior to the commencement of such construction,
which agreement shall be in writing and shall include, in addition to such
conditions as might otherwise be deemed necessary and prudent by the Borough,
provisions relating to the right of the property owner to be partially reimbursed as
a result of subsequent connections to the sewer line to be constructed, in
accordance with this article.
(2) Plans and specifications shall be approved in writing by the Borough prior to the
commencement of construction.
(3) Construction shall be undertaken pursuant to such other existing regulations,
requirements, rules and/or standards of the Borough of California applicable to
such construction.
(4) Construction shall be subject to an inspection by an individual duly authorized to
approve such construction and employed or retained by the Borough during such
construction.
(5) Prior to such construction, the property owners shall deposit with the Borough of
California an amount equal to the Borough's estimated reasonable and necessary
costs for reviewing plans, construction, inspections, administrative service, and
legal and engineering services. In addition, property owners shall post such other
appropriate financial security as may be required by the Borough.
(6) Property owners shall reimburse the Borough of California for reasonable and
necessary expenses incurred by the Borough as a result of the construction of the
extension.
(7) No roof, foundation, parking lot, roadway, or other surface runoff or groundwater
drains shall be connected in any manner to the sanitary sewer system. Rather, roof,
foundation, parking lot, roadway or other surface runoff or groundwater drains
shall discharge to natural outlets or storm sewers, in accordance with the
requirements of the applicable building code or other applicable requirements of
the Borough.
C. Upon completion of construction, the property owner shall dedicate, and the Borough
shall accept, the extension into the sanitary sewer system; provided, however, that
dedication of the facilities and the Borough's acceptance thereof shall be conditioned
upon full compliance of construction of the facilities with the plans, specifications, and
regulations of the Borough of California, and the agreement with the property owner.
D. Within the agreement with the property owner referenced above, the Borough shall notify
the property owner of his right to partial reimbursement of the cost of construction of the
extension of the system, in accordance with this article. Said agreement shall attach as an
exhibit an itemized listing of all components of the sanitary sewer system for which
reimbursement shall be available.
§ 168-27 CALIFORNIA CODE § 168-28
168:20 02 - 15 - 2006
§ 168-27. Reimbursement of cost of construction.
A. A property owner who constructs or causes to be constructed at his expense any
extension of the sanitary sewer system shall be entitled to apply to the Borough of
California for reimbursement of part of such expense if, within 10 days of the date of
dedication to the sanitary sewer system of the extension constructed by the property
owner, the owner(s) of another property or properties not situated in the development for
which the extension was originally constructed connect(s) a building sewer directly to the
extension. This reimbursement program shall apply only with respect to those lines for
which the Borough has not previously paid.
B. The amount of reimbursement shall be equal to, but not in place of, the collection part of
each tapping fee collected as a result of the subsequent connection(s), less a 5% fee to be
retained by the Borough for administrative expenses and services rendered in calculating,
collecting, monitoring and disbursing the reimbursement payments to the property
owner(s) entitled thereto.
C. The total reimbursement to which a property owner shall be entitled shall not exceed the
cost of all labor, material, engineering design, performance and maintenance bonds,
Borough review and inspection charges, and flushing and televising charges, and any and
all charges involved in the acceptance and dedication of such facilities by the Borough,
less the amount which would be chargeable to such property owner based upon the
collection part of the sanitary sewer system’s tapping fee which would be applicable to
all lands of the property owner served directly or indirectly through such extensions, if
the property owner did not fund the extension.
D. Within 30 calendar days of the Borough’s receipt of a tapping fee resulting from a
subsequent connection to the line constructed by the property owner, and with respect to
which the property owner is eligible to receive a reimbursement in accordance with this
article, the Borough shall notify the property owner, by certified mail addressed to the
property owner’s last known address, of the payment of the tapping fee which entitles the
property owner to such reimbursement. If the property owner does not claim the
reimbursement within 120 calendar days of the date of mailing of the notice, the
reimbursement to which the property owner would otherwise be entitled shall revert to,
and become the sole property of, the Borough of California, and the Borough of
California shall have no further obligation to reimburse the property owner vis-a-vis
payment of that tapping fee. Nothing set forth herein shall obligate the Borough to notify
such property owner of the payment of a tapping fee with respect to a connection to the
line constructed by the property owner, where said connection occurs on a date more
than 10 years after the date of dedication of the line to the sanitary sewer system, or
where the Borough cannot in due diligence locate said property owner to give him the
notice provided for herein within 30 days after the receipt of the tapping fee.
§ 168-28. Borough may do work and impose appropriate fees.
A. If the owner or owners of any occupied houses, buildings or structures in the Borough of
California directly or indirectly connected to the sanitary sewer system shall neglect or
refuse to comply with the provisions of this article, the Borough may perform or cause to
be performed such work and labor, and furnish or cause to be furnished such material, as
§ 168-28 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 168-28
168:21 02 - 15 - 2006
9. Editor’s Note: Schedules A, B, C and D, which originally accompanied this ordinance, are on file in the Borough
offices.
10. Editor’s Note: Schedules A, B, C and D, which originally accompanied this ordinance, are on file in the Borough
offices.
may be necessary to comply with the provisions of this article, as a result of which the
property owner(s) may be charged a connection fee and/or customer facilities fee as
appropriate. As set forth on Schedule B attached hereto and expressly incorporated
herein,9 any such connection fee or customer facilities fee shall be calculated on the basis
of the actual cost of the work and labor incident thereto, together with an identified
charge which shall represent the administrative and inspection costs incurred by the
Borough in performing such work or causing such work to be performed, and such sum
charged pursuant to this section shall be collected from said owner and/or owners for the
use of the sanitary sewer system, in the same manner as other debts are by law
collectable, or the Borough may file a municipal claim or lien therefor against said
premises as otherwise provided by law.
B. Each user shall pay for the use of the sanitary sewer system provided by the Borough, on
a quarterly basis, in accordance with the Sewer Rate Schedule of Charges, as set forth in
Schedule A attached hereto and made a part hereof.10
(1) For those users whose wastewater requires more treatment than normal domestic
wastewater, an extra strength sum in addition to the normal charges will be
collected.
(2) Any user who discharges any toxins which cause an increase in the cost of
managing the effluent or the sludge from the treatment plant(s), or any user who
discharges any substance which singly or by interaction with other substances
causes identifiable increases in the cost of operation, maintenance or replacement
of the wastewater system shall pay for such increased costs. The charge for each
such user shall be as determined by the Borough upon recommendation by its
consulting engineer.
C. Bills or invoices (hereinafter "invoices") for said sewer service shall be submitted in the
form and manner prescribed by the Borough. All bills for sewer service shall be directed
to the owner of the premises to which sewer service is furnished unless the owner, in
writing, otherwise directs. The owner of the property shall, however, in all cases, be
liable for payment of such bills. As used herein, the term "user" includes, but is not
limited to, the owner of the property to which service is provided.
(1) All charges shall be invoiced quarterly. Users are "delinquent" if any invoice is not
paid within 30 days of the invoice date. A late payment charge of $5 per month
shall be imposed if and when the account is delinquent.
(2) Upon the occurrence of delinquency, the following procedure may be utilized:
(a) Not more than five days after the delinquency date, the Borough will mail a
delinquent notice to the delinquent user (and the owner of the property at
issue, if different) requesting that the delinquent account be paid in full, or, in
extenuating circumstances, the Borough, in its discretion, may establish a
§ 168-28 CALIFORNIA CODE § 168-28
168:22 02 - 15 - 2006
payment schedule acceptable to the Borough, taking into consideration the
length of the delinquency, the user's reasons therefor, and their ability to pay.
(b) In the event of the failure of a delinquent user (or owner of the property at
issue, if different) to respond to the Borough's delinquent notice, or set up or
fulfill a payment plan, at least 10 days prior to terminating service, the
Borough shall mail to the delinquent user (and owner of the property at issue,
if different), by first class mail, and also post the main entrance to the
property at issue, with a notice in substantially the following form:
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO TERMINATE SERVICES
PLEASE TAKE NOTICE THAT THE BOROUGH OF CALIFORNIA
WILL CAUSE YOUR WATER SERVICE TO BE TERMINATED
BECAUSE THE BOROUGH ALLEGES THAT YOU HAVE FAILED TO
PAY YOUR SEWER BILLS IN THE AMOUNT OF $__________.
SERVICE WILL BE TERMINATED AFTER 10 DAYS FROM THE
DATE THIS NOTICE WAS POSTED ON YOUR PREMISES AND
WILL REMAIN TERMINATED UNLESS YOU PAY THE AMOUNT
OWED, PLUS SERVICE FEES AND CHARGES OF $__________ OR
UNLESS YOU TAKE SUCH OTHER ACTION AS IS PROVIDED BY
LAW.
(c) The Borough is authorized to charge and collect from delinquent users the
following fees and charges:
[1] Water shut-off fees charged by the water company, plus 10% of these
same fees;
[2] Water turn-on fees charged by the water company, plus 10% of these
same fees;
[3] Return unpaid to the Borough of a user's/owner's check by the
user's/owner's bank for any reason;
[4] Additional postage used to collect delinquent accounts;
[5] Costs of posting the premises pursuant to this section.
(d) When unpaid charges for any user's account exceed $200, the claim shall
immediately be referred to the Solicitor of the Borough of California for the
purpose of filing a municipal claim, or other collection effort. No such
municipal claim filed under this section may be satisfied by the Borough
Solicitor unless and until the user has paid the delinquent amount provided
under the municipal claim, any and all current charges, and such filing fees
and costs as incurred by the Borough in the preparation and filing of the
claim. [Amended 3-11-2004 by Ord. No. 487]
(e) When a user's water service is terminated pursuant to this section, notice of
such termination and a statement of charges, fees, and penalties then
§ 168-28 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 168-31
168:23 02 - 15 - 2006
outstanding shall immediately be referred to the Solicitor of the Borough of
California for the purpose of filing a municipal claim or other collection
efforts.
§ 168-29. Failure to connect.
In addition to the penalties otherwise identified in this article imposed as a result of the failure
to connect within the time frame established herein, any property owner required to connect to
the public wastewater system who fails to do so in the established time frame shall
nonetheless be billed and be obligated to pay the same user charge, debt service charge, and
capital reserve charge, and shall be subject to the same fines and penalties, as apply to owners
whose properties have been so connected, as set forth herein.
§ 168-30. Vandalism.
No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface,
or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the Borough’s
wastewater facilities. Any person who violates this section shall, upon conviction, be required
to make restitution for the same, to pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $600, plus
costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, be subject to
imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
§ 168-31. Violations and penalties.
In addition, any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof before a Magisterial District Judge, be guilty of a summary
offense and be fined not less than $100 nor more than $600, plus costs of prosecution, with
each day of noncompliance constituting a separate offense, and, in default of payment of such
fine and costs, be subject to imprisonment for not more than 30 days.

175:1 02 - 15 - 2006
Chapter 175
SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING
ARTICLE I
Recycling
§ 175-1. Short title.
§ 175-2. Purpose.
§ 175-3. Definitions.
§ 175-4. Establishment of program;
grant of power.
§ 175-5. Separation and collection.
§ 175-6. Ownership of recyclable
materials.
§ 175-7. Collection by unauthorized
persons.
§ 175-8. Existing recycling operations.
§ 175-9. Recycling of materials.
§ 175-10. Enforcement and
administration; violations and
penalties.
§ 175-11. Franchise or license to collect.
§ 175-12. Modifications.
ARTICLE II
Waste Hauler Licensing
§ 175-13. Short title.
§ 175-14. Purpose.
§ 175-15. Definitions and word usage.
§ 175-16. Prohibited activities.
§ 175-17. Standards for collection and
transportation.
§ 175-18. Licensing requirements.
§ 175-19. Reporting requirements.
§ 175-20. Violations and penalties.
§ 175-21. Injunctive powers.
ARTICLE III
Waste Collection and Disposal
§ 175-22. Short title.
§ 175-23. Purpose.
§ 175-24. Definitions and word usage.
§ 175-25. Prohibited activities.
§ 175-26. Standards for storage of solid
waste.
§ 175-27. Standards and regulations for
collection.
§ 175-28. Licensing requirements.
§ 175-29. Injunction powers.
§ 175-30. Violations and penalties.
ARTICLE IV
Arbitration Panel
§ 175-31. Establishment.
§ 175-32. Request for arbitration.
§ 175-33. Notice requirements.
§ 175-34. Decision of arbitrators.
§ 175-35. Appeal period.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of California as indicated
in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 175-1 CALIFORNIA CODE § 175-3
175:2 02 - 15 - 2006
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junkyards and junk dealers —See Ch. 128. Property maintenance —See Ch. 156.
1. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
ARTICLE I
Recycling
[Adopted 8-20-1991 by Ord. No. 398]
§ 175-1. Short title.
The short title of this article shall be "Recycling Ordinance."
§ 175-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to avoid public health hazards, environmental pollution,
economic loss and irreparable harm to the public health, safety and welfare as a result of
improper municipal waste practices.
§ 175-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ALUMINUM — All empty aluminum beverage or food cans.
BIMETAL CONTAINERS— Empty food or beverage containers consisting of steel and
aluminum.
CLEAN RECYCLABLES— Those recyclables not exposed to foreign substance or
conditions rendering them unusable for recycling.
COLLECTOR— The entity or entities authorized by the Borough to collect recyclable
materials from residences, or authorized by commercial, municipal and institutional
establishments that do not receive collection services from the Borough to collect recyclable
material from those properties.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Those properties used primarily for commercial or
industrial purposes, and those multiple-dwelling residential buildings containing three or more
dwelling units. 1
CORRUGATED PAPER— Structural paper material with an inner core shaped in rigid
parallel furrows and ridges.
FERROUS CONTAINERS — Empty steel or tin coated food or beverage containers.
GLASS CONTAINERS— Bottles and jars made of clear, green or brown glass. Expressly
excluded are noncontainer glass, plate glass, automobile glass, light bulbs, blue glass and
porcelain and ceramic products.
§ 175-3 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 175-3
175:3 02 - 15 - 2006
2. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
3. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER— All white paper, bond paper and computer paper used in
commercial institutional and municipal establishments and in residences.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Those facilities that house or serve groups of
people, including, but not limited to, hospitals, nursing homes, orphanages, day-care centers,
schools, universities and rooming houses.
LEAF WASTE— Leaves from trees, bushes and other plants, garden residues, chipped
shrubbery and tree trimmings, but not including grass clippings.
MAGAZINES and PERIODICALS— Printed matter containing miscellaneous written pieces
published at fixed or varying intervals. Expressly excluded are all other paper products of any
nature whatsoever.
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING PROPERTIES— Any properties having three or more dwelling
units per structure.
MUNICIPAL ESTABLISHMENT — Public facilities operated by the Borough and other
governmental and quasi-governmental authorities.
MUNICIPAL WASTE— Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or other material,
including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material, resulting from operation of
residential, municipal, commercial or institutional establishments and from community
activities and any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste in the Solid
Waste Management Act2 from a municipal, commercial or institutional water supply treatment
plant, wastewater treatment plant or air pollution control facility. The term does not include
source-separated recyclable materials.
NEWSPAPERS — Paper of the type commonly referred to as "newsprint" and distributed at
fixed intervals, having printed thereon news and opinions, containing advertisements and other
matters of public interest. Expressly excluded are newspapers which have been soiled, color
comics, glossy advertising inserts and advertising inserts printed in colors other than black and
white often included with newspapers.
PERSON(S) — Owners, lessees, and occupants of residences and commercial, municipal and
institutional establishments.
PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Recyclable empty plastic food and beverage containers.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS— Materials generated by residences and commercial,
municipal and institutional establishments which are specified by the Borough and can be
separated from municipal waste and returned to commerce to be reused as a resource in the
development of useful products. Recyclable materials may include, but are not necessarily
limited to, clear glass, colored glass, aluminum, steel and bimetallic cans, high-grade office
paper, newsprint, corrugated paper, leaf waste, plastics, and any other items selected by the
Borough or specified in future revisions of Act 101.3 The recyclable material selected by the
Borough may be revised from time to time as deemed necessary by the Borough.
§ 175-3 CALIFORNIA CODE § 175-5
175:4 02 - 15 - 2006
4. Editor’s Note: Said regulations are on file in the Borough offices.
RECYCLING— The collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse of metals, glass,
paper, leaf waste, plastics and other materials which would otherwise be disposed or
processed as municipal waste or the mechanized separation and treatment of municipal waste
(other than through combustion) and creation and recovery of reusable materials.
RESIDENCES— Any occupied single-family or multifamily dwellings having up to three
dwelling units per structure for which the Borough provides municipal waste collection
service.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS— Those materials separated at the
point of origin for the purpose of being recycled.
WASTE— A material whose original purpose has been completed and which is directed to a
disposal or processing facility or is otherwise disposed. The term does not include
source-separated recyclable materials or material approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection for beneficial use.
§ 175-4. Establishment of program; grant of power.
A. The Borough of California hereby establishes a recycling program for the mandatory
separation and collection of recyclable materials and the separation, collection and
composting of leaf waste from all residences and all commercial, municipal and
institutional establishments located in the Borough for which waste collection is provided
by the Borough or any other collector. Collection of the recyclable materials shall be
made at least once per month by the Borough, its designated agent, or any other solid
waste collectors operating in the Borough and authorized to collect recyclable materials
from residences or from commercial, municipal and institutional establishments. The
recycling program shall also contain a sustained public information and education
system.
B. Specific program regulations are provided as an attachment to this article.4 The Borough
Council is empowered to make changes to program regulations as necessary, as described
in § 175-10. Subsequent changes in the program regulations may be made through
approval of the Borough Council and public notice and notification of all affected parties.
C. This article is ordained pursuant to 53 P.S. § 46202.
§ 175-5. Separation and collection.
A. All persons residing in the Borough of California shall separate all of those recyclable
materials designated by the Borough from all other municipal waste produced at their
homes, apartments, rooming houses and other residential establishments, store such
materials for collection, and shall place the same for collection in accordance with the
guidelines established hereunder.
(1) Persons in residences must separate recyclable materials from other refuse.
Recyclable materials shall be placed at the curbside in containers provided by the
§ 175-5 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 175-6
175:5 02 - 15 - 2006
Borough for collection. Any containers provided to residences for collection of
recyclable materials shall be the property of the Borough and shall be used only
for the collection of recyclable materials. Any resident who moves within or from
the Borough shall be responsible for returning the allocated container(s) to the
Borough or shall pay the replacement cost of said container(s). Use of recycling
containers for any purpose other than the designated recycling program or use of
the recycling containers by any person other than the person allocated such
container(s) shall be a violation of this article.
(2) An owner, landlord or agent of an owner or landlord of a multifamily rental
housing property with three or more units may comply with its recycling
responsibilities by establishing a collection system at each property. The collection
system must include suitable containers for collecting and sorting the recyclable
materials, easily accessible locations for the containers, and written instructions to
the occupants concerning the use and availability of the collection system. If
recyclable materials are collected by a collector other than the Borough or its
authorized agents, owners, landlords and agents of owners or landlords shall
submit an annual report to the Borough reporting the tonnage of materials recycled
during the previous year.
B. All persons must separate leaf waste from other municipal waste generated at their
homes, apartments and other residential establishments for collection unless those
persons have otherwise provided for composting of leaf waste.
C. Persons must separate high-grade office paper, aluminum, corrugated paper, leaf waste
and such other materials as may be designated by the Borough generated at commercial,
municipal and institutional establishments and from community activities and store the
recyclable materials until collection. An individual may be exempted from this
subsection based on a preapproved alternate recycling procedure. Such a procedure must
be approved by the Borough before an individual is exempted from this subsection. An
individual shall submit written documentation to the Borough indicating a procedure is
being followed which ensures that recyclable materials are being recycled in an
appropriate manner. After approval by the Borough and an individual is exempted from
this subsection, said individual must annually submit documentation that the alternate
procedure is being followed and recyclable materials are being recycled in an appropriate
manner. If recyclable materials are collected by a collector other than the Borough or its
authorized agent, occupants of said establishments shall submit an annual report to the
Borough reporting the tonnage of materials recycled during the previous year.
§ 175-6. Ownership of recyclable materials.
All recyclable materials placed by persons for collection by the Borough or authorized
collector pursuant to this article shall, from time of placement at the curb, become the
property of the Borough or the authorized collector, except as otherwise provided by § 175-8
of this article. Nothing in this article shall be deemed to impair the ownership of separated
recyclable materials by the generator unless and until such materials are placed at the curbside
for collection.
§ 175-7 CALIFORNIA CODE § 175-10
175:6 02 - 15 - 2006
§ 175-7. Collection by unauthorized persons.
It shall be a violation of this article for any person, firm or corporation, other than the
Borough or one authorized by the Borough Council or other entity responsible for providing
for collection of recyclable materials, to collect recyclable materials placed by residences or
commercial, municipal and institutional establishments for collection by the Borough or an
authorized collector, unless such person, firm or corporation has prior written permission from
the generator to make such collection. In violation hereof, unauthorized collection from one or
more residences or commercial, municipal and institutional establishments on one calendar
day shall constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter provided.
§ 175-8. Existing recycling operations.
Any residence or commercial, municipal or institutional establishment may donate or sell
recyclable materials to any person, firm or corporation, whether operating for profit or not,
provided that the receiving person, firm or corporation shall not collect such donated
recyclable materials from the collection point of a residence or commercial, municipal or
institutional establishment without prior written permission from the Borough Council or other
entity responsible for authorizing collection of recyclable materials to make such a collection.
§ 175-9. Recycling of materials.
Disposal by persons of recyclable materials with wastes is prohibited and shall be a violation
of this article. The collected recyclable materials shall be taken to a recycling facility.
Disposal by collectors or operators of recycling facilities of source-separated recyclable
materials in landfills or to be burned in incinerators is prohibited unless markets do not exist
and the collectors or operators have notified the Borough Council in writing.
§ 175-10. Enforcement and administration; violations and penalties.
A. The Borough Council is hereby authorized and directed to make reasonable rules and
regulations for the operation and enforcement of this article as deemed necessary,
including, but not limited to:
(1) Establishing recyclable material to be separated for collection and recycling by
residences, and additional recyclable materials to be separated by commercial,
municipal and institutional establishments.
(2) Establishing collection procedures for recyclable materials.
(3) Establishing reporting procedures for amounts of material recycled.
(4) Establishing procedures for the distribution, monitoring and collection of
recyclable containers.
(5) Establishing procedures and rules for the collection of leaf waste.
§ 175-10 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 175-15
175:7 02 - 15 - 2006
B. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate the provisions of this article shall
receive an official written warning of noncompliance for the first and second offense.
Thereafter all such violations shall be subject to the penalties hereinafter provided.
C. Except as hereinafter provided, any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of
the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of
such fine and costs, by imprisonment for not more than 30 days, for each and every
offense.
D. The Borough reserves the right not to collect municipal waste containing recyclable
materials in combination with nonrecyclable materials.
§ 175-11. Franchise or license to collect.
The Borough may enter into (an) agreement(s) with public or private agencies or firms to
authorize them to collect all or part of the recyclable materials from the curbside.
§ 175-12. Modifications.
The Borough may, from time to time, modify, add to or remove from the standards and
regulations herein and as authorized in § 175-10.
5. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
ARTICLE II
Waste Hauler Licensing
[Adopted 8-20-1991 by Ord. No. 399]
§ 175-13. Short title.
This article shall be known and referred to as the "Municipal Waste Hauler Licensing
Ordinance."
§ 175-14. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to avoid public health hazards, environmental pollution,
economic loss, and irreparable harm to the public health, safety, and welfare as a result of
improper municipal waste practices.
§ 175-15. Definitions and word usage.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACT 97— The Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act of 1980 (P.L. 380, 97, July
7, 1980).5
§ 175-15 CALIFORNIA CODE § 175-15
175:8 02 - 15 - 2006
6. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
ACT 101 — The Pennsylvania Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste
Reduction Act of 1988 (SB 528, Act 1988-101, July 28, 1988).6
COLLECTOR or WASTE HAULER— Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or
public agency who is engaged in the collection and/or transportation of municipal waste.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
nonmanufacturing or nonprocessing business, including shopping centers and theaters.
DEPARTMENT or DEP— The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in manufacturing or
production of activities, including but not limited to factories, foundries, mills, processing
plants, refineries, mines and slaughterhouses.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment or facility engaged in
services, including but not limited to hospitals, nursing homes, schools, universities and
rooming houses.
LEAF WASTE— Leaves, garden residues, shrubbery and tree trimmings, and similar
material, but not including grass clippings.
LICENSED COLLECTOR or LICENSED WASTER HAULER— Any municipal waste
collector or hauler possessing a current license issued by California Borough pursuant to
this article.
MUNICIPAL WASTE— Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office waste and
other material including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material resulting
from operation of residential, municipal, commercial or institutional establishments and
from community activities; and any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or
hazardous waste under Act 97 from any municipal, commercial or institutional water
supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant, or air pollution control facility. The
term does not include any source-separated recyclable materials.
MUNICIPAL WASTE LANDFILL— Any facility that is designed, operated and
maintained for the disposal of municipal waste and permitted by the Pennsylvania DEP
for such purposes.
PERSON— Any individual, partnership, corporation, association, institution,
cooperative enterprise, municipal authority, municipality, state institution and agency, or
any other legal entity recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. In any
provisions of this article prescribing a fine, penalty or imprisonment, or any combination
of the foregoing, the term "person" shall include the officers and directors of any
corporation or other legal entity having officers and directors.
PROCESSING— Any technology used for the purpose of reducing the volume or bulk
of municipal or residual waste or any technology used to convert part or all of such
materials for off-site reuse. Processing facilities include, but are not limited to, transfer
stations, composting facilities and resources recovery facilities.
§ 175-15 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 175-17
175:9 02 - 15 - 2006
RECYCLING— The collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse of metals, glass,
paper, leaf waste, plastics and other materials which would otherwise be disposed or
processed as Borough waste, or the mechanical separation and treatment of municipal
waste (other than combustion) and creation and recovery of reusable materials other than
fuel for the operation of energy.
SCAVENGING— The unauthorized and controlled removal of any material stored or
placed at a point for subsequent collection or from a solid waste processing or disposal
facility.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS— Materials that are separated
from municipal waste at the point of origin or generation for the purpose of recycling.
TRANSPORTATION— The off-site removal of any municipal waste at any time after
generation.
B. For the purposes of this article, the singular shall include the plural.
§ 175-16. Prohibited activities.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to collect and/or transport municipal waste from any
residential, public, commercial, industrial or institutional establishment within California
Borough without first securing a license to do so in accordance with the provisions of
this article.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to collect and/or transport municipal solid waste from
any sources within California Borough in a manner not in accordance with the provisions
of this article and the minimum standards and requirements established in Chapter 285 of
the DEP’s Municipal Waste Management Regulations.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to transport any municipal waste collected from
within California Borough to any processing and/or disposal facility other than those
facilities which are properly permitted by the Pennsylvania DEP or other applicable
regulatory agency.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge any material from any municipal waste or
source-separated recyclable materials that are stored or placed for subsequent collection
within California Borough without prior approval from the Borough.
§ 175-17. Standards for collection and transportation.
A. All collectors or waste haulers operating within the Borough must comply with the
following minimum standards and regulations:
(1) All trucks or other vehicles used for collection and transportation of municipal
waste must comply with the requirements of Act 97 and Act 101 and Department
regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97 and Act 101, including the Title 25,
Chapter 285, Subchapter B Regulations for the Collection and Transportation of
Municipal Waste.
§ 175-17 CALIFORNIA CODE § 175-18
175:10 02 - 15 - 2006
(2) All collection vehicles conveying municipal waste shall be operated and
maintained in a manner that will prevent creation of a nuisance or a hazard to
public health, safety and welfare.
(3) All collection vehicles conveying putrescible municipal waste shall be watertight
and suitably enclosed to prevent leakage, roadside littering, attraction of vectors
and the creation of odors and other nuisances.
(4) All collection vehicles conveying nonputrescible municipal waste shall be capable
of being enclosed or covered to prevent litter and other nuisances.
(5) All collection vehicles conveying municipal waste shall bear signs identifying the
name and business address of the person or Borough which owns the vehicle and
the specific type of municipal waste transported by the vehicle. All such signs shall
have lettering which is at least six inches in height as required by Act 101.
B. All collection vehicles and equipment used by licensed collectors or haulers shall be
subject to inspection by the Borough or its authorized agents at any reasonable hour
without prior notification.
§ 175-18. Licensing requirements.
A. No person shall collect, remove, haul or transport any municipal waste through or upon
the streets of the Borough without first obtaining a license in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
B. All collections and waste haulers shall be licensed by the Borough of California and
designated as a "licensed waste hauler" or a "licensed collector."
C. The Borough of California shall reserve the right to designate specific municipal waste
processing and/or disposal facilities where all licensed collectors must transport and
dispose all municipal waste collected within the Borough of California.
D. Any person who desires to collect, haul or transport municipal waste within California
Borough shall submit a license application and any application fee to the Borough or its
designated licensing representative. The Borough shall have a minimum period of 30
calendar days to review any application and approve or deny.
E. The license fee shall be set by the Borough Council on an annual basis. All licenses are
nontransferable and shall be issued for a period of one calendar year. There shall be no
reduction or prorated fee for any license issued during the middle of any calendar year.
F. The license application form, which will be supplied by the Borough, shall set forth
minimum information required to establish the applicant’s qualifications for a license to
collect and transport municipal waste, including, but not limited to:
(1) Name and mailing address of the applicant.
(2) Name and telephone number of contact person.
§ 175-18 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 175-20
175:11 02 - 15 - 2006
(3) List of all collection vehicles to be covered under the license, including
identification information for each vehicle, such as vehicle license number and
company identification number.
(4) Type of municipal waste collected and transported.
(5) Certificate(s) of insurance to present evidence that the applicant has valid liability,
automobile and workmen's compensation insurance in the minimum amounts
established and required by the Borough.
G. Any collector or hauler with an existing license shall submit a new license application
and license fee to the Borough of California, at least 60 days prior to the expiration date
of the existing license, if renewal of the license is desired. New license applicants must
submit a license application and license fee at least 30 days before beginning collecting
and transporting municipal waste in the Borough.
H. No new license or license renewal shall be approved and issued to any person who fails
to satisfy the minimum standards and requirements of this article or is in violation of the
provisions of this article.
§ 175-19. Reporting requirements.
A. All licensed collectors shall promptly report any significant changes in the collection
vehicles or equipment covered under the license and insurance coverage to the Borough.
B. All licensed collectors shall maintain current, up-to-date records of the customers
serviced within California Borough. Such records and customer lists shall be subject to
inspection and made available to the Borough or its authorized agents upon request.
C. Each licensed collector shall prepare and submit a semiannual report to the Borough. The
report for the first half of the year (January through June) shall be submitted on or before
July 31 and the report for the second half of each year (July through December) shall be
submitted on or before January 31 of the following year. At a minimum, the following
information shall be included in each report:
(1) Total weight of each type of municipal waste collected from all sources within the
Borough during each month of reporting period.
(2) Name of each processing/disposal facility used during the reporting period and
total weight of each type of municipal waste delivered to each site during each
month of the reporting period.
§ 175-20. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be
punishable by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $600, plus costs of prosecution,
and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, by imprisonment for not more than 30
days. Each day of violation shall be considered as a separate and distinct offense.
§ 175-20 CALIFORNIA CODE § 175-24
175:12 02 - 15 - 2006
B. The Borough of California shall have the right at any time, and without refund of any
license fee, to suspend or revoke the license of any licensed collector or hauler for any of
the following causes:
(1) Falsification or misrepresentation of any statements in any license application.
(2) Lapse or cancellation of any required insurance coverage.
(3) Collection and/or transportation of any municipal waste in a careless or negligent
manner or in any other manner that is not in compliance with the requirements of
this article.
(4) Transportation and disposal of any municipal waste collected within the Borough
at any site that is not properly permitted by the Pennsylvania DEP or other
applicable regulatory agency.
(5) Violation of any part of this article, any other applicable municipal ordinances or
any applicable Pennsylvania laws or regulations.
§ 175-21. Injunctive powers.
The Borough of California may petition the Court of Common Pleas of Washington County
for an injunction, either mandatory or prohibitive, in order to enforce any of the provisions of
this article.
7. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
ARTICLE III
Waste Collection and Disposal
[Adopted 8-20-1991 by Ord. No. 400]
§ 175-22. Short title.
This article shall be known and referred to as the "Municipal Solid Waste Ordinance."
§ 175-23. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to avoid public health hazards, environmental pollution,
economic loss and irreparable harm to the public health, safety and welfare as a result of
improper municipal waste practices.
§ 175-24. Definitions and word usage.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACT 97— The Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act of 1980 (P.L. 380, No. 97,
July 7, 1980). 7
§ 175-24 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 175-24
175:13 02 - 15 - 2006
8. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
ACT 101 — The Pennsylvania Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste
Reduction Act of 1988 (Act 101). 8
BULKY WASTE— Large items of solid waste including, but not limited to, appliances,
furniture, large auto parts, trees, branches, stumps or other objects which may require
special handling due to size, shape or weight.
COLLECTOR or WASTE HAULER— Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or
public agency who is engaged in the collection and/or transportation of municipal waste.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
nonmanufacturing or nonprocessing business, including, but not limited to, stores,
markets, office buildings, restaurants, shopping centers and theaters.
CONTAINER— A portable device in which waste is held temporarily for storage or
transportation.
COUNTY— The County of Washington or the Washington County Board of County
Commissioners.
DEPARTMENT or DEP— The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
(DEP).
DISPOSAL— The deposition, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of solid
waste into or on the land or water in a manner that the solid waste enters the
environment, is emitted into the air or is discharged to the waters of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
DOMESTIC WASTE or HOUSEHOLD WASTE— Solid waste, comprised of garbage
and rubbish, which normally originates in the residential private household or apartment
house.
GARBAGE— Any solid waste derived from animal, grain, fruit, or vegetable matter
that is capable of being decomposed by microorganisms with sufficient rapidity to cause
such nuisances as odors, gases, or vectors.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in manufacturing or
processing, including, but not limited to, factories, foundries, mills, processing plants,
refineries, mines and slaughterhouses.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in service,
including, but not limited to, hospitals, nursing homes, orphanages, schools, universities
and rooming houses.
LICENSED COLLECTOR or LICENSED WASTE HAULER— Any municipal waste
collector or hauler possessing a current, valid municipal license issued by the Borough of
California pursuant to Article II of this chapter.
§ 175-24 CALIFORNIA CODE § 175-25
175:14 02 - 15 - 2006
MUNICIPAL WASTE— Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office waste and
other material including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material resulting
from operation of residential, municipal, commercial or institutional establishments and
from community activities; and any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or
hazardous waste under Act 97 from a municipal, commercial or institutional waste
supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant, or air pollution control facility. The
term does not include source-separated recyclable materials.
PERSON— Any individual, partnership, corporation, association, institution,
cooperative enterprise, municipal authority, federal government or agency, state
institution and agency, or any other legal entity which is recognized by law as the subject
of rights and duties. In any provisions of this article prescribing a fine, imprisonment or
penalty, or any combination of the foregoing, the term "person" shall include the officers
and directors of any corporation or any other legal entity having officers and directors.
RUBBISH— All nonputrescible municipal waste except garbage and other
decomposable matter. This category includes but is not limited to ashes, bedding,
cardboard, cans, crockery, glass, paper, wood and yard cleanings.
SALVAGING— The unauthorized and uncontrolled removal of material placed for
collection or from a solid waste processing or disposal facility.
SCAVENGING— The unauthorized and uncontrolled removal of material placed for
collection or from a solid waste processing or disposal facility.
SOLID WASTE— Any waste, including, but not limited to, municipal, residual or
hazardous wastes, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material.
STORAGE— The containment of any waste on a temporary basis in such a manner as
not to constitute disposal of such waste. It shall be presumed that the containment of any
waste in excess of one year shall constitute disposal. This presumption can be overcome
by clear and convincing evidence to the contrary.
TRANSPORTATION— The off-site removal of any solid waste at any time after
generation.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural.
§ 175-25. Prohibited activities.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate or permit to accumulate on any public
or private property within the Borough any garbage, rubbish, bulky waste, or any other
municipal or residual waste except in accordance with all applicable Department Rules
and Regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97 and Act 101.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any solid waste within the Borough except in
accordance with all applicable Department Rules and Regulations adopted pursuant to
Act 97 and Act 101.
§ 175-25 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 175-27
175:15 02 - 15 - 2006
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to process and/or dispose any solid waste in the
Borough except in accordance with all applicable Department Rules and Regulations
adopted pursuant to Act 97 and Act 101.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to collect, haul, transport or remove any solid waste
from public or private property within the Borough without a current, valid license to do
so issued by the Borough of California.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to salvage any materials from any solid waste that is
stored or deposited for collection within the Borough without prior written approval from
the Borough.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person to salvage or reclaim any solid wastes within the
Borough except at an approved and permitted resource recovery facility under any
applicable Department Rules and Regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97 and Act 101.
§ 175-26. Standards for storage of solid waste.
A. The storage of all solid waste shall be practiced so as to prevent the attraction, harborage
or breeding of insects or rodents, and to eliminate conditions harmful to public health or
which create safety hazards, odors, unsightliness or public nuisances.
B. Any person producing municipal waste shall provide a sufficient number of approved
containers to store all waste materials generated during periods between regularly
scheduled collections, and shall place and store all waste materials therein.
C. Any person storing municipal waste for collection shall comply with the minimum
standards for the storage of municipal waste set forth in the Department’s Title 25,
Chapter 285, Subchapter A Regulations for the Storage of Municipal Waste.
§ 175-27. Standards and regulations for collection.
A. All households, homeowners, commercial, industrial and institutional establishments
within the Borough shall utilize the services of a licensed collector for disposal of their
domestic waste or household waste.
B. All licensed collectors and waste haulers shall comply with the minimum standards for
collection and transportation of municipal waste set forth in the Department’s Title 25,
Chapter 285, Subchapter B Regulations for Collection and Transportation of Municipal
Waste.
C. All municipal waste collected within the Borough shall only be conveyed or transported
to a transfer station, processing facility, and/or disposal site permitted by the Department
of Environmental Protection and/or other regulatory agencies pursuant to the approved
Municipal Waste Management Plan for Washington County.
§ 175-28 CALIFORNIA CODE § 175-33
175:16 02 - 15 - 2006
§ 175-28. Licensing requirements.
No person shall collect, remove, haul, or transport any solid waste upon or through any streets
or alleys of the Borough without first obtaining a license from the Borough of California
pursuant to the requirements of Article II of this chapter.
§ 175-29. Injunction powers.
The Borough may petition the Court of Common Pleas, Washington County, for an
injunction, either mandatory or prohibitive, to enforce any of the provisions of this article.
§ 175-30. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be punishable by
a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of
payment of such fine and costs, by imprisonment for not more than 30 days. Each day of
violation shall be considered a separate and distinct offense.
ARTICLE IV
Arbitration Panel
[Adopted 4-13-1992 by Ord. No. 405]
§ 175-31. Establishment.
A. Borough Council hereby creates an Arbitration Panel to be used to decide any
controversies, including but not limited to rates, collection scheduling, etc., occurring
between the collector of refuse, solid waste and recyclables and any commercial
subscriber.
B. Upon request, the Borough of California Council President will appoint three Council
members to serve as an Arbitration Panel. These three members will be chosen randomly
and will be chosen each time a request is made by either the collector or subscriber.
§ 175-32. Request for arbitration.
A request for arbitration can be made by either the collector or commercial subscriber in the
form of a written request to the Borough Council.
§ 175-33. Notice requirements.
Within 10 days of receipt of the written request, the Council President shall appoint three
Council members to sit on the Arbitration Panel. Notice of the request for arbitration, the
arbitrators selected and hearing date shall be sent to each party. The arbitrators shall hold a
hearing on the request within 10 days of their appointment and render a written decision
within 10 days of the hearing; said written decision shall be mailed to all parties.
§ 175-34 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 175-35
175:17 02 - 15 - 2006
§ 175-34. Decision of arbitrators.
A. Both collector and subscriber have the option to elect that the arbitrators’ decision be
binding on both parties. Any election for binding arbitration must be in writing and
signed by both parties prior to the commencement of the arbitration hearing. When this
election is made, the decision of the arbitrators is final and binding upon both parties.
B. In the event either party does not elect binding arbitration, then either party has the right
to appeal the decision of the Arbitration Panel to the Court of Common Pleas of
Washington County, Pennsylvania, as set forth below.
§ 175-35. Appeal period.
In the event the parties have not elected binding arbitration, then any appeal must be taken to
the Court of Common Pleas of Washington County, Pennsylvania, within 30 days of the
written decision of the Arbitration Panel.

181:1 02 - 15 - 2006
Chapter 181
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 181-1. Statement of findings.
§ 181-2. Purpose.
§ 181-3. Statutory authority.
§ 181-4. Applicability.
§ 181-5. Compatibility with other permit
and ordinance requirements.
§ 181-6. Performance standards and
design criteria.
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 181-7. Definitions.
ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management Requirements
§ 181-8. General requirements.
ARTICLE IV
Plan Requirements
§ 181-9. General requirements.
§ 181-10. Exemptions.
§ 181-11. Plan contents.
§ 181-12. Plan submission.
§ 181-13. Plan approval.
§ 181-14. Modification of plans.
ARTICLE V
Permit Requirements and Procedures
§ 181-15. Permit requirements.
§ 181-16. Exemptions.
§ 181-17. Land disturbance activities as
part of subdivision or land
development.
§ 181-18. Other land disturbance
activities.
§ 181-19. Modification of plans.
§ 181-20. Application for permit.
§ 181-21. Expiration and renewal.
§ 181-22. Suspension and revocation.
ARTICLE VI
Inspections
§ 181-23. Schedule of inspections.
ARTICLE VII
Fees and Expenses
§ 181-24. Establishment; payment
prerequisite to permit issuance.
§ 181-25. Modification of plans.
§ 181-26. Expenses covered by fees.
ARTICLE VIII
Financial Guarantees and Maintenance
§ 181-27. Performance guarantees.
§ 181-28. Maintenance guarantees.
§ 181-29. Maintenance by private entity.
§ 181-30. Maintenance by individual lot
owners.
§ 181-31. Borough action.
ARTICLE IX
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 181-32. Right of entry.
§ 181-1 CALIFORNIA CODE § 181-2
181:2 02 - 15 - 2006
§ 181-33. Notice of violation.
§ 181-34. Violations and penalties.
ARTICLE X
Appeals
§ 181-35. Appeal to Borough Council.
§ 181-36. Appeal to court.
Exhibit A
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of California 5-9-1996 by
Ord. No. 435. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 168. Subdivision and land development— See Ch. 187.
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 181-1. Statement of findings.
The Council of the Borough of California finds that:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated runoff of stormwater resulting from development
throughout a watershed may increase flood flows and velocities, contribute to erosion
and sedimentation, overtax the carrying capacity of streams and storm sewers, increase
the cost of public facilities to carry and control stormwater, undermine floodplain
management and flood control efforts in downstream communities, reduce groundwater
recharge, and threaten public health, safety and welfare.
B. A stormwater management program, including regulation of development and activities
causing accelerated erosion, is important to the public health, safety and welfare and the
protection of the people of the Borough of California and all the people of the
commonwealth, their resources and the environment.
§ 181-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and welfare by minimizing
the damages described in § 181-1A of this chapter by provisions designed to:
A. Control accelerated runoff and erosion and sedimentation problems at their source by
regulating activities which cause such problems.
B. Utilize and preserve the desirable existing natural drainage systems.
C. Encourage recharge of groundwaters.
D. Maintain the existing flows and quality of streams and watercourses in the municipality
and the commonwealth.
§ 181-2 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 181-5
181:3 02 - 15 - 2006
1. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
2. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 45101 et seq.
E. Preserve and restore the flood-carrying capacity of streams.
F. Provide for proper maintenance of all permanent stormwater management structures and
devices which are constructed in the municipality.
§ 181-3. Statutory authority. [Amended 5-27-1997 by Ord. No. 440]
The Borough of California is empowered to regulate these activities by the authority of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as
reenacted December 21, 1988, P.L. 1329, No. 170, § 2,1 and the Pennsylvania Borough
Code.2
§ 181-4. Applicability.
The following activities are included within the scope of this chapter:
A. All earthmoving/disturbance. [Amended 5-27-1997 by Ord. No. 440]
B. Land development.
C. Subdivision.
D. Agricultural operations.
E. Construction of new or additional impervious or semipervious surfaces, including, but
not limited to, driveways and parking lots.
F. Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings.
G. Forest management operations.
H. Nursery operations.
I. Diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream channel.
J. Installation of stormwater systems or appurtenances thereto.
K. Mining operations.
§ 181-5. Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
Permits and approvals issued pursuant to this chapter do not relieve the applicant of the
responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any other
applicable law, code, rule, act, ordinance or orders. If more stringent requirements concerning
regulation of stormwater or erosion and sedimentation control are contained in the other law,
code, rule, act, ordinance or orders, the more stringent regulation shall apply.
§ 181-6 CALIFORNIA CODE § 181-7
181:4 02 - 15 - 2006
3. Editor’s Note: Exhibit A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 181-6. Performance standards and design criteria. [Added 5-27-1997 by Ord. No. 440]
The performance standards and design criteria attached hereto and made a part hereof as
Exhibit A are hereby adopted and incorporated herein as if fully set forth at length.3 To the
extent of any conflict between the provisions of Exhibit A and Ordinance Number 435, the
provisions of Exhibit A shall take precedence.
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 181-7. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACCELERATED EROSION— The removal of the surface of the land through the combined
action of man's activities and natural processes at a rate greater than would occur because of
the natural processes alone.
CISTERN— An underground reservoir or tank for storing rainwater.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Conservation District serving Washington County.
CULVERT — A pipe, conduit or similar structure including appurtenant works which carries
surface water.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude of precipitation from a storm event measured in
probability of occurrence (e.g., fifty-year storm) and duration (e.g., twenty-four-hour), and
used in computing stormwater management control systems.
DETENTION BASIN— A basin designed to retard stormwater runoff by temporarily storing
the runoff and releasing it at a predetermined rate. A detention basin can be designed to drain
completely after a storm event, or it can be designed to contain a permanent pool of water.
DEVELOPER— A person or persons (as defined herein), or any responsible person (as
defined herein) therein or agent thereof, that undertakes the activities covered by this chapter.
DIVERSION TERRACE— A channel and a ridge constructed to a predetermined grade
across a slope, and designed to collect and divert runoff from slopes which are subject to
erosion.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee, allowing the use
of private land for stormwater management purposes.
EROSION— The removal of soil particles by the action of water, wind, ice, or other
geological agents.
FOREST MANAGEMENT OPERATIONS— All activities connected with growing and
harvesting of forest products including the site preparation, cultivation and logging of trees,
and the construction and maintenance of roads.
§ 181-7 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 181-7
181:5 02 - 15 - 2006
4. Editor’s Note: Now known as the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS).
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE— Replenishment of existing natural underground water
supplies.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface which prevents the percolation of water into the
ground.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURES— A structure designed to direct runoff into the ground,
including, but not limited to, french drains, seepage pits and seepage trenches.
LAND DEVELOPMENT —
A. The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of land for
any purpose involving (1) a group of two or more buildings, or (2) the division or
allocation of land or space between or among two or more existing or prospective
occupants by means of, or for the purpose of, streets, common areas, leasehold,
condominiums, building groups or other features; or
B. A subdivision of land.
LAND DISTURBANCE— Any activity involving grading, tilling, digging or filling of
ground, or stripping of vegetation, or any other activity which causes land to be exposed to
the danger of erosion.
MUNICIPALITY— The Borough of California, Washington County, Pennsylvania.
NURSERY— A tract of land on which trees and plants are raised or stored for transplanting
and sale.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of flow of water at a given point and time
resulting from a specified storm event.
PERSON— An individual, partnership, public or private association or corporation, firm,
trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public utility or any other entity whatsoever.
Whenever used in any section prescribing or imposing a penalty, the term "person" shall
include members of a partnership, the officers, members, servants and agents of an association
and the officers, agents and servants of a corporation.
RUNOFF— That part of precipitation which flows over the land.
SCS— Soil Conservation Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture.4
SEDIMENT — Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being
transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by water.
SEDIMENT BASIN— A barrier, dam, retention or detention basin designed to retain
sediment.
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH— An area of excavated earth filled with loose stone or
similar material and into which surface water is directed for infiltration into the ground.
§ 181-7 CALIFORNIA CODE § 181-8
181:6 02 - 15 - 2006
SEMIPERVIOUS SURFACE— A surface, such as stone, rock, concrete or other materials,
which permits some vertical transmission of water.
SOIL COVER COMPLEX METHOD— A method of runoff computation developed by
SCS, and found in its publication "Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds," Technical
Release No. 55, SCS, January 1975.
STORM SEWER— A system of pipes or other conduits which carries intercepted surface
runoff, street water and other wash waters, or drainage, but excludes domestic sewage and
industrial wastes.
SUBDIVISION— The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by any means
into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land including changes in existing
lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, transfer of ownership or
building or lot development; provided, however, that the division of land for agricultural
purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access, shall be exempt.
SWALE— A low-lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface water runoff.
ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management Requirements
§ 181-8. General requirements.
A. Method of computation. Peak discharge and runoff shall be computed using:
(1) For drainage areas zero to five acres, the recommended method of peak discharge
runoff computation is the Rational Method computing storm events for ten-year
storm at ten-minute duration as per Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
Design Manual 2, as now or hereafter amended.
(2) For drainage areas five acres to 0.5 square mile, the recommended method of peak
discharge and runoff computation is the Soil Cover Complex Method, Urban
Hydrology for Small Watersheds, Technical Release No. 55, as published by Soil
Conservation Service, as now or hereafter amended. Compute storm events for
twenty-five-year storm and twenty-four-hour duration.
(3) For drainage areas larger than 0.5 square mile, the recommended method of runoff
computation is Procedure PSU-IV for Estimating Design Flood Peaks on
Ungauged Pennsylvania Watersheds, as developed by Pennsylvania State
University. Compute storm event for twenty-five-year flood.
B. Rainfall frequency data. Refer to the current data from U.S. Department of Commerce,
National Weather Service, and Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources,
now known as the Department of Environmental Protection, Research Publication
Number 70, as now or hereafter amended.
C. Maintenance of natural drainageways. All natural streams, channels, swales, drainage
systems and/or areas of surface water concentration shall be maintained in their existing
§ 181-8 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 181-9
181:7 02 - 15 - 2006
condition unless an alteration is approved by the Borough of California and its engineers
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. All encroachment activities shall
comply with the requirements of Chapter 105 (Water Obstructions and Encroachments)
of Title 25, Rules and Regulations, of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources, now known as the Department of Environmental Protection, as now or
hereafter amended.
D. Method of stormwater runoff detention and control.
(1) The following is a listing of detention and control methods which may be utilized
in stormwater management systems, if appropriate. The choice of control
techniques is not limited to the ones appearing on this list.
(a) Detention basins.
(b) Rooftop storage.
(c) Parking lot and street ponding.
(d) Seepage pits, seepage trenches or other infiltration structures.
(e) Porous pavement and concrete lattice block surfaces.
(f) Grassed channels and vegetated strips.
(g) Cisterns and underground reservoirs.
(h) Routed flow over grass.
(i) Decreased impervious area coverage.
(2) The use of other control methods which meet the criteria in this section will be
permitted when approved by the Municipal Engineer. Various combinations of
methods should be tailored to suit the particular requirements of the type of
development and the topographic features of the project area.
E. Design. The design is to be submitted to the Borough Engineer for review to determine
compliance with this chapter.
ARTICLE IV
Plan Requirements
§ 181-9. General requirements.
Prior to the final approval of subdivision and/or land development plans, or the issuance of
any permit, or the commencement of any land disturbance activity, the owner, subdivider,
developer or any agent shall submit a stormwater management plan to the Borough and the
Borough Engineer for approval thereof.
§ 181-10 CALIFORNIA CODE § 181-11
181:8 02 - 15 - 2006
§ 181-10. Exemptions.
The following activities are specifically exempt from the plan preparation provisions of this
chapter; however, stormwater management must be provided as otherwise specified in this
chapter:
A. Land disturbances affecting less than 5,000 square feet of ground surface; however, an
erosion and sediment control plan is still required. [Amended 5-27-1997 by Ord. No.
440]
B. Land disturbances associated with existing one- and two-family dwellings.
C. Land disturbances associated with a new one-family dwelling if the land
development/disturbance creates less than 5,000 square feet of impervious surface.
[Amended 5-27-1997 by Ord. No. 440]
D. Use of land for gardening for home consumption.
E. Agriculture when operated in accordance with a conservation plan or erosion and
sedimentation control plan prepared by the Conservation District.
F. Forest management operations which are following the Department of Environmental
Resources’ (now known as the Department of Environmental Protection) management
practices contained in its publication "Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Guidelines
for Forestry" and are operating under an erosion and sedimentation control plan.
§ 181-11. Plan contents.
The following items, where appropriate, shall be included in the plan:
A. General.
(1) General description of project.
(2) General description of erosion and sedimentation controls.
(3) General description of stormwater controls both during and after development.
(4) Expected project time schedule, including anticipated start and completion dates.
(5) Training and experience of person(s) preparing the plan.
B. Map(s) of the project area showing:
(1) The location of the project relative to highways, municipalities or other identifiable
landmarks.
(2) Existing contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slopes (greater than
15%), five-foot contour intervals may be used.
(3) Streams, lakes, ponds or other bodies of water within the project area, or which
will be affected by runoff from the project.
§ 181-11 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 181-12
181:9 02 - 15 - 2006
(4) Other physical features including existing drainage swales and areas of natural
vegetation to be preserved.
(5) Locations of proposed underground utilities, sewers and water lines.
(6) An overlay showing soil types and boundaries.
(7) Proposed changes to land surfaces and vegetation cover.
(8) Areas to be cut or filled.
(9) Proposed structures, roads, paved areas and buildings.
(10) Final contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slopes (greater than 15%),
five-foot contour intervals may be used.
C. Erosion and sedimentation controls.
(1) The staging of all earthmoving activities must be described, including but not
limited to cuts and fills, streets, underground utilities, sewer and water lines,
buildings, driveways, parking areas, recreational areas, and other structures.
(2) The type, location and extent of all erosion and sedimentation control measures
must be shown on a map and described, including all calculations, assumptions and
criteria used in designing the controls, and a schedule for their implementation.
D. Stormwater management controls.
(1) All stormwater management controls must be shown on a map and described,
including:
(a) Groundwater recharge methods such as seepage pits, beds or trenches. When
these structures are used, the locations of septic tank infiltration areas and
wells must be shown.
(b) Other control devices or methods such as rooftop storage, semipervious
paving materials, grass swales, parking lot ponding, vegetated strips,
detention or retention ponds, storm sewers, etc.
(c) A schedule for installation of the control measures and devices.
(2) All calculations, assumptions and criteria used in the design of the control device
or method must be shown.
E. Maintenance program. A maintenance program for all stormwater management control
facilities must be included. This program must include the proposed ownership of the
control facilities and detail the financial responsibility for any required maintenance.
§ 181-12. Plan submission.
A. The plan shall be accompanied by the requisite fee, as set forth in Article VII of this
chapter.
§ 181-12 CALIFORNIA CODE § 181-16
181:10 02 - 15 - 2006
B. Five copies of the completed plan must be submitted to the Borough.
§ 181-13. Plan approval.
A. The municipality shall notify the applicant within 30 days from receipt of a complete
plan submission of its decision, unless a longer period of time is agreed to.
B. A disapproval shall contain the reasons for disapproval and a listing of the plan
deficiencies.
C. Failure of the municipality to render a decision within the thirty-day time limit shall be
deemed an approval, unless a longer period of time is agreed to.
§ 181-14. Modification of plans.
A modification to an approved stormwater management plan which involves a change in
control methods or techniques, or which involves the relocation or redesign of control
measures, or which is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated on the
approved application (as determined by the Municipal Engineer), shall be approved under the
procedures contained in § 181-13 of this chapter. The Municipal Engineer shall notify the
applicant when such plan modification is required.
ARTICLE V
Permit Requirements and Procedures
§ 181-15. Permit requirements.
All land disturbance activities as specified in § 181-4, except those specifically exempt from
permit requirements by § 181-16, shall be conducted only after the issuance of a land
disturbance permit.
§ 181-16. Exemptions.
The following activities are specifically exempt from the permit provisions of this chapter;
however, they must otherwise manage stormwater in the manner specified in this chapter:
A. Land disturbances affecting less than 5,000 square feet of ground surface.
B. Land disturbance associated with existing one- and two-family dwellings.
C. Land disturbances associated with a new one-family dwelling if the land
development/disturbance creates less than 5,000 square feet of impervious surface.
[Amended 5-27-1997 by Ord. No. 440]
D. Use of land for gardening for home consumption.
E. Agriculture when operated in accordance with a conservation plan or erosion and
sedimentation control plan approved by the Conservation District.
§ 181-16 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 181-21
181:11 02 - 15 - 2006
F. Forest management operations which are following the Department of Environmental
Resources' (now known as the Department of Environmental Protection) management
practices contained in its publication "Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Guidelines
for Forestry" and are operating under an erosion and sedimentation control plan.
§ 181-17. Land disturbance activities as part of subdivision or land development.
The applicant shall obtain the required land disturbance permit after obtaining the required
plan approval as specified in Article IV of this chapter. This land disturbance permit will be
issued by the municipality concurrently with final subdivision and land development approval.
§ 181-18. Other land disturbance activities.
A. The applicant shall obtain the required land disturbance permit after obtaining the
required plan approval as specified in Article IV of this chapter. This land disturbance
permit will be issued by the municipality after the plan is approved.
B. The applicant must also comply with 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 102, Erosion and Sediment
Control, and applicable federal NPDES nonpoint source regulations, and no land
disturbance permit will be issued by the Borough of California until compliance is
attained. [Added 5-27-1997 by Ord. No. 440]
§ 181-19. Modification of plans.
A modification to an approved stormwater management plan, when required under § 181-14
of this chapter, shall require a new land disturbance permit. The permit shall be issued
following approval of the revised plan.
§ 181-20. Application for permit.
All applications for permits required by this chapter shall be made on forms supplied by the
municipality. Such application shall provide a brief description of the stormwater management
controls and the land disturbance activity. This application shall become part of the plan
submission required by Article IV of this chapter.
§ 181-21. Expiration and renewal.
A. All land disturbance permits shall expire 24 months from the date of issuance unless
construction is commenced prior to this date and is not abandoned within such time
period. Otherwise, the permit shall expire 180 days from the date of the expected project
completion date set forth in the stormwater management plan submitted to the Borough
pursuant to Article IV of this chapter.
B. A renewal of an expired land disturbance permit may be issued by the municipality
following a resubmittal of the permit application form, payment of the requisite fees, and
approval by the Municipal Engineer.
§ 181-21 CALIFORNIA CODE § 181-23
181:12 02 - 15 - 2006
C. The refusal of the municipality to reissue an expired land disturbance permit shall
contain the reasons for such refusal.
§ 181-22. Suspension and revocation.
A. Any permit issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the municipality
for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the permit.
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable law, ordinance,
rule, regulation or order relating to the project.
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during construction or
development which constitutes or creates a hazard or nuisance, or which endangers
the life, health, safety or property of others.
B. A suspended permit shall be reinstated by the municipality when:
(1) The Municipal Engineer has inspected and approved the corrections to the
stormwater management control measure(s), or the elimination of the hazard or
nuisance; and/or
(2) The municipality is satisfied that the violation of the ordinance, law, rule,
regulation and/or order has been corrected.
C. A permit which has been revoked by the municipality cannot be reinstated. The applicant
may apply for a new permit under the procedures outlined in this chapter.
ARTICLE VI
Inspections
§ 181-23. Schedule of inspections.
A. The Municipal Engineer or his designee shall inspect all phases of development of the
site, including, but not limited to:
(1) Completion of preliminary site preparation, including, but not limited to, stripping
of vegetation, stockpiling of topsoil, and construction of temporary stormwater
management and erosion control facilities.
(2) Completion of rough grading, but prior to placing topsoil, permanent drainage or
other site development improvements and ground covers.
(3) During construction of the permanent stormwater facilities, at such times as
specified by the Municipal Engineer.
(4) Upon completion of permanent stormwater management facilities, including
established ground covers and plantings.
§ 181-23 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 181-26
181:13 02 - 15 - 2006
(5) Upon completion of any final grading, vegetative control measures or other site
restoration work done in accordance with the approved plan and permit.
B. No work shall begin on a subsequent stage until the preceding stage has been inspected
and approved by the Municipal Engineer.
C. It is the responsibility of the permittee to notify the Municipal Engineer 48 hours in
advance of the completion of each identified phase of development.
D. Any portion of the work which does not comply with the approved plan must be
corrected by the permittee within 48 hours. No work may proceed on any subsequent
phase of the stormwater management plan, the subdivision or land development or
building construction until the required corrections have been made.
E. If, at any stage of work, the Municipal Engineer determines that the soil or other
conditions are not as stated or shown in the approved application, he may refuse to
approve further work and the municipality may revoke existing permits until a revised
plan is submitted and approved, as required by § 181-14 of this chapter.
ARTICLE VII
Fees and Expenses
§ 181-24. Establishment; payment prerequisite to permit issuance.
Land disturbance permit fees covering costs to the municipality for plan review, permit
issuance and inspections shall be established by motion of the Borough Council. No permit to
begin any work on the project shall be issued until the requisite fees have been paid.
§ 181-25. Modification of plans.
If it is determined that a modification to the existing stormwater management plan is required
under § 181-14 of this chapter, a new land disturbance permit shall not be issued until the
additional fees have been paid by the applicant.
§ 181-26. Expenses covered by fees.
The fees payable by an applicant shall at a minimum cover:
A. The review of the stormwater management plan.
B. The site inspection.
C. The inspection of required controls and improvements during construction.
D. The final inspection upon completion of the controls and improvements required in the
plan.
E. Any additional work required to enforce the permit provisions, correct violations, and
assure the completion of stipulated remedial actions.
§ 181-27 CALIFORNIA CODE § 181-30
181:14 02 - 15 - 2006
ARTICLE VIII
Financial Guarantees and Maintenance
§ 181-27. Performance guarantees.
The developer and landowner shall execute and submit a written performance guarantee to the
Borough, insuring the performance of all control measures, which guarantee shall be
acceptable to the Borough Solicitor, prior to any final approval of any work subject to the
provisions of this chapter. The guarantee shall be accompanied by a bond from a surety
company licensed to do business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or cash, in such
amounts as the Borough Engineer shall designate as adequate to cover all costs and expenses
to remedy any and all foreseeable failures of the control measures. The guarantee and bond
shall guarantee performance of the control measures for a period of five years from final
approval of the measures by the Borough Engineer. Any approval issued by the Borough
Engineer shall not be final until this guarantee shall have been received by the Borough.
§ 181-28. Maintenance guarantees.
The developer and landowner shall execute and submit a written maintenance guarantee to the
Borough, insuring the maintenance of all control measures, which guarantee shall be
acceptable to the Borough Solicitor, prior to any final approval of any work subject to the
provisions of this chapter. The guarantee shall be accompanied by a bond from a surety
company licensed to do business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or cash, in such
amounts as the Borough Engineer shall designate as adequate to cover all costs and expenses
to maintain the control measures. The guarantee and bond shall guarantee maintenance of the
control measures for a period of five years from final approval of the measures by the
Borough Engineer. Any approval issued by the Borough Engineer shall not be final until this
guarantee shall have been received by the Borough.
§ 181-29. Maintenance by private entity.
In cases where permanent control facilities are owned by a private entity, such entity shall be
responsible for maintenance. In this case a legally binding agreement between the entity and
the municipality shall be made providing for maintenance of all permanent control facilities,
and allowing inspection by the municipality of all such facilities deemed critical to the public
welfare at any reasonable time. A proposed agreement shall be submitted to the Borough for
review and shall be subject to the approval of the Borough Solicitor.
§ 181-30. Maintenance by individual lot owners.
A. When stormwater management control measures are located on an individual lot, and
when they are the responsibility of that landowner to maintain, a description of the
facility or system and the terms of the required maintenance shall be incorporated as part
of the deed to the property.
B. If the municipality determines at any time that any permanent stormwater management
control facility has been eliminated, altered or improperly maintained, the owner of the
property shall be advised of corrective measures required and given a reasonable period
§ 181-30 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 181-34
181:15 02 - 15 - 2006
of time to take necessary action. If such action is not taken by the property owner, the
municipality may cause work to be done and lien all costs and fees (including but not
limited to legal fees) against the property.
§ 181-31. Borough action.
Nothing in this chapter shall obligate the Borough of California to undertake corrective action,
maintenance of control measures nor any other actions, except to the extent the Borough may
be obligated to do so by applicable law.
ARTICLE IX
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 181-32. Right of entry.
Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized representatives of the municipality
may enter at reasonable times upon any property within the municipality to investigate or
ascertain the condition of the subject property in regard to any aspect regulated by this
chapter.
§ 181-33. Notice of violation.
In the event that an owner, subdivider, developer, person, entity and/or its or his agent fails to
comply with the requirements of this chapter, or fails to conform to the requirements of any
permit issued thereunder, the municipality shall provide written notification of violation. Such
notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and establish a time limit for
correction of these violation(s). Upon failure to comply within the time specified, the owner,
subdivider, developer, person, entity and/or its or his agent shall be subject to the penalty and
enforcement provisions of this chapter (§ 181-34) and other penalty and enforcement
provisions contained in the Pennsylvania Storm Water Management Act and Chapter 187,
Subdivision and Land Development, where applicable.
§ 181-34. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to a
fine of not less than $100 nor more than $600 for each violation, plus costs of
prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, by imprisonment for not
more than 30 days. Each day that the violation continues shall be a separate offense.
B. In addition, the municipality may institute injunctive, mandamus or any other appropriate
action or proceeding at law or in equity for the enforcement of this chapter. Any court of
competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or
permanent injunctions, mandamus, or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
C. Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this chapter shall also be required
to pay the Borough’s reasonable legal fees and expenses.
§ 181-35 CALIFORNIA CODE § 181-36
181:16 02 - 15 - 2006
ARTICLE X
Appeals
§ 181-35. Appeal to Borough Council.
Any person aggrieved by any action of the municipality or its agent may appeal to the
Borough Council within 30 days of the action complained of.
§ 181-36. Appeal to court.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Borough Council may appeal to the Court of
Common Pleas of Washington County within 30 days of that decision.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
181 Attachment 1:1 02 - 15 - 2006
181 Attachment 1
Borough of California
Exhibit A
[Added 5-27-1997 by Ord. No. 440]
ARTICLE III STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
§ 301. General requirements.
A. Stormwater drainage systems shall be provided in order to permit unimpeded flow
along natural watercourses, except as modified by stormwater management facilities or
open channels consistent with this ordinance.
B. The existing points of concentrated drainage that discharge onto adjacent property shall
not be relocated and shall be subject to any applicable release rate criteria specified in
this ordinance.
C. Areas of existing diffused drainage discharge shall be subject to any applicable release
rate criteria in the general direction of existing discharge, whether proposed to be
concentrated or maintained as diffused drainage areas.
If diffused flow is proposed to be concentrated and discharged onto adjacent property,
the developer must document that adequate downstream conveyance facilities exist to
safely transport the concentrated discharge, or otherwise prove that no erosion,
sedimentation, flooding, or other harm will result from the concentrated discharge.
D. Where a development site is traversed by watercourses other than permanent streams, a
drainage easement shall be provided conforming substantially to the line of such
watercourses. The terms of the easement shall prohibit excavation, the placing of fill or
structures, and any alterations that may affect adversely the flow of stormwater within
any portion of the easement. Also, maintenance and mowing of vegetation within the
easement shall be required.
E. Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this ordinance that would be
located on state highway rights of way shall be subject to approval by the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation (PADOT).
F. Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this ordinance that would be
located in or adjacent to waters of the commonwealth or potential wetlands shall be
subject to approval by PA DEP through the joint permit application process, or, where
deemed appropriate by PA DEP, the general permit process. When there is a question
whether wetlands may be involved, it is the responsibility of the developer or his agent
to show that the land in question cannot be classified as wetlands, otherwise approval to
work in the area must be obtained from PA DEP
CALIFORNIA CODE
181 Attachment 1:2 02 - 15 - 2006
G. When it can be shown that, due to topographic conditions, natural drainageways on the
site cannot adequately provide for drainage, open channels may be constructed
conforming substantially to the line and grade of such natural drainageways. Work
within natural drainageways shall be subject to approval by PA DEP through the joint
permit application process, or, where deemed appropriate by PA DEP, through the
general permit process.
H. Sinkholes. Stormwater resulting from land development activities shall not be
discharged into sinkholes.
§ 302. Stormwater management performance standards.
A. General. The following general standards shall be applied to all development within the
Borough of California to promote flow attenuation, erosion and sediment control and
flood control.1
1. All site development in the Borough of California creating or more square feet of
impervious surface cover shall submit a drainage plan consistent with the
provisions of this ordinance to the municipality for review and approval.
This criteria shall apply to the total proposed development even if the development
is to take place in stages. Impervious cover shall include, but not be limited to, any
roof, parking or driveway area and any new street or sidewalk. Any area initially
designated to be gravel or crushed stone shall be assumed to be impervious.
2. Runoff from impervious areas must be drained to pervious areas of the property.
3. Roof drains must not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers or roadside
ditches.
4. Runoff from the site shall not be concentrated or increased runoff discharged onto
adjacent property without the written consent of the adjacent land owners in the
form of a drainage easement.
B. Detention/infiltration standards.
1. Minimization of impervious surfaces and infiltration of runoff through seepage
beds, infiltration trenches, etc. are encouraged, where soil conditions permit, to
reduce the size or eliminate the need for detention facilities.
2. Postdevelopment rates of runoff from any regulated activity shall not exceed the
peak rates of runoff prior to development for both the two- and ten-year design
storms.
1 Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
181 Attachment 1:3 02 - 15 - 2006
§ 303. Design criteria for stormwater management facilities.
A. Any stormwater management facilities required or regulated by this ordinance shall be
designed to meet the performance standards presented in Section 302.B. of this
ordinance. Compensatory stormwater management facilities shall not be permitted.
B. Any stormwater management facility required or regulated by this ordinance shall be
designed to provide an emergency spillway to handle flow up to one-hundred-year
postdevelopment conditions. The height of the embankment must be set to provide a
minimum 1.0 foot of freeboard above the maximum pool elevation when the facility
functions for one-hundred-year postdevelopment inflow. Should any stormwater
management facility require a dam safety permit under PA DEP Chapter 105, the
facility shall be designed in accordance with Chapter 105 and meet the regulations of
Chapter 105 concerning dam safety.
C. All stormwater facilities shall be based upon the following "downstream impact
evaluation" requirements. Hydraulic capacity analysis shall be conducted in accordance
with the following criteria to determine if adequate hydraulic capacity exists:
1. The developer shall submit to the municipality an analysis of the impacts of
stormwater flows downstream in the watershed. The analysis shall include
hydrologic and hydraulic calculations necessary to determine the impact of
hydrograph timing modifications of the proposed development upon a dam,
highway, structure, or natural point of restricted streamflow, established with the
concurrence of the municipality, downstream of a tributary of the following size:
a. The first downstream tributary whose drainage area equals or exceeds the
drainage area contributing to the detention basin; or
b. The first downstream tributary whose peak discharge exceeds the largest
designed discharge rate of the detention basin.
c. The designated release rate of the structure shall be modified if any increase in
flooding or stream channel erosion would result at a downstream dam,
highway, structure, or point of restricted stream flow. The discharge rate of the
detention facility shall:
(i) Be reduced to a level that that will prevent any increase in flooding or
stream channel erosion at the downstream control point;
(ii) Be not less than the one-year predevelopment peak development discharge
rate.
2. If the first down stream tributary is situated in another municipality other than the
municipality where the land development activity occurs, the land developer shall
inform the affected municipality of the downstream capacity analysis and shall
provide a copy of the drainage plan to that municipality containing the proposed
capacity improvements for its review.
CALIFORNIA CODE
181 Attachment 1:4 02 - 15 - 2006
3. When any downstream capacity improvements are proposed to occur in a
municipality other than the municipality where the land development activity will
occur, the municipality, at its discretion may request the municipality where the
development activity is occurring to incorporate its comments into the subdivision
plan. Upon receipt of such a request, the municipality where the land development
activity will occur shall furnish a written response to the other municipality within
30 days of the receipt of the request stating its decision.
D. The granting of any approval by the municipality where the land development activity
will occur does not relieve the applicant from obtaining any permits or approvals from
the municipality where the capacity improvements will occur as they relate to the
design, installation or construction of the capacity improvements.
E. Any facilities that constitute water obstructions (e.g., culverts, bridges, outfalls, or
stream enclosures), and any work involving wetlands as described in PA DEP Chapter
105 regulations (as amended or replaced from time to time by PA DEP), shall be
designed in accordance with Chapter 105 and will require a permit from PA DEP. Any
other drainage conveyance facility that doesn't fall under Chapter 105 regulations must
be able to convey, without damage to the drainage structure or roadway, runoff from
the twenty-five-year design storm with a minimum 1.0 foot of freeboard measured
below the lowest point along the top of the roadway. Roadway crossings located within
designated floodplain areas must be able to convey runoff from a one-hundred-year
design storm with a minimum 1.0 foot of freeboard measured below the lowest point
along the top of roadway. Any facility that constitutes a dam as defined in PA DEP
Chapter 105 regulations may require a permit under DEP dam safety regulations. Any
facility located within a PADOT right of way must meet PADOT minimum design
standards and permit submission requirements.
F. Storm sewers must be able to convey postdevelopment runoff from a twenty-five-year
design storm without surcharging inlets.
G. Storm sewer inlet spacing and road cross section design must ensure that
postdevelopment runoff resulting from a ten-year design storm does not flood more
than one half of a driving lane.
H. Easements along open channels shall be provided. The minimum width of the required
easement shall be equal to the width of the one-hundred-year water surface (for
postdevelopment condition), including a minimum 1.0 foot of freeboard.
I. In subareas where individual stormwater management facilities would be provided for
each development site, the individual stormwater management facilities shall be
designed to ensure that the postdevelopment peak discharge at the mouth of the subarea
does not exceed the arithmetic product of the applicable release rate, specified on Plate
[add designation] of this ordinance, and the predevelopment peak discharge at the
mouth of the subarea.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
181 Attachment 1:5 02 - 15 - 2006
J. For development sites that would be located in two or more subareas, the applicable
release rate for the portions of the site located in different subareas shall be based on
natural subarea drainage boundaries. The natural drainage boundaries between subareas
shall not be modified, nor shall drainage from a development site be diverted or
otherwise conveyed from one subarea to another subarea, except where runoff naturally
crosses subarea drainage boundaries.
K. No harm option. For any development site, the developer has the option of discharging
postdevelopment runoff at a higher rate than predevelopment runoff if the developer
can prove that no harm would be caused to any person or property located upstream or
downstream of the development site. The developer must assume that the entire subarea
in which the site is located is developed. The type and amount of development that the
developer must consider shall be either based on current zoning or established by the
municipality, whichever results in a greater amount of imperviousness. Proof of no
harm must demonstrate conformance with the hydraulic capacity criteria specified in
this ordinance. Areas that drain through documented drainage problem areas would be
precluded from any no harm based peak runoff increases, except where hydraulic
capacity improvements would be provided, consistent with this ordinance.
L. Regional or subregional stormwater management facilities. For certain areas within the
watershed, it may be more cost effective to provide one stormwater management
facility for an entire subarea, group of subareas, or portion of a subarea incorporating
more than one development site than to provide an individual stormwater management
facility for each development site. The initiative and funding for any regional or sub
regional stormwater management alternatives are the responsibility of prospective
developers. The design of any regional stormwater management facilities must assume
development of the entire area that would drain to the regional facility. The type and
amount of development that the developer(s) must consider shall be either based on
current zoning or established by the municipality, whichever results in a greater amount
of imperviousness. The peak outflow from a regional stormwater management facility
would be determined on a case by case basis using TR 20. When regional or sub
regional stormwater management facilities are utilized, the effect of phased growth on
stormwater runoff flows must be considered. At no time from the initial phase through
ultimate development shall the peak runoff flows exceed the predevelopment peak
multiplied by the applicable release rate.
M. Capacity improvements. If the developer could prove that it would be feasible to
provide capacity improvements to relieve the capacity deficiency in the existing
drainage network, then adequate capacity improvements could be provided by the
developer in lieu of stormwater management facilities on the development site. Any
capacity improvements would be designed based on development of all areas tributary
to the improvement and the capacity criteria specified in this ordinance. The type and
amount of development that the developer must consider shall be either based on
current zoning or established by the municipality, whichever results in a greater amount
of imperviousness. It shall be assumed that all new development upstream of a
proposed capacity improvement would implement applicable stormwater management
techniques, consistent with this ordinance.
CALIFORNIA CODE
181 Attachment 1:6 02 - 15 - 2006
N. Adequate erosion protection shall be provided along all open channels, and at all points
of discharge.
O. Ponds and other similar water features that are not designed as stormwater management
facilities shall be designed in accordance with U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service (SCS), Ponds Planning, Design, Construction (as amended or
replaced from time to time by SCS), and shall be treated as impervious surfaces for
stormwater runoff computations.
P. The design of all stormwater management facilities shall incorporate sound engineering
principles and practices. The municipality shall reserve the right to disapprove any
design that would result in the occurrence or perpetuation of an adverse hydrologic or
hydraulic condition within the watershed.
§ 304. Calculation methodology.
A. Any stormwater runoff calculations involving drainage areas greater than 20 acres,
including on and off site areas, shall use any generally accepted calculation technique
that is based on the SCS soil cover complex method. Table 1 below summarizes
acceptable computation methods. It is assumed that all methods will be selected by the
design professional based on the individual limitations and suitability of each method
for a particular site.
The municipality, upon the recommendation of its Engineer, may approve the use of
the Rational Method to estimate peak discharges from drainage areas that contain less
than 20 acres.
Method Method Developed by Applicability
TR 20 (or commercial package
based on TR 20)
USDA SCS
Applicable where use of full hydrology computer
model is desirable or necessary.
TR 55 (or commercial computer
package based on TR 55)
USDA SCS
Applicable for land development plans within
limitations described in TR 55.
HEC 1 US Army Corps of Engineers
Applicable where use of full hydrologic computer
model is desirable or necessary.
PSRM Penn State University
Applicable where use of a hydrologic computer
model is desirable or necessary: simpler than TR
20 or HEC 1.
Rational Method (or commercial
computer package based on
Rational Method)
Emil Kuichling (1889)
For sites less than 20 acres, or as approved by the
municipality and Municipal Engineer.
Other Methods Varies
Other computation methodologies approved by the
municipality and Municipal Engineer.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
181 Attachment 1:7 02 - 15 - 2006
B. The design of any stormwater detention facilities intended to meet the performance
standards of this ordinance shall be verified by routing the design storm hydrograph
through these facilities using the Storage Indication Method. For drainage areas greater
than 20 acres in size, the design storm hydrograph shall be computed using a
calculation method that produces a full hydrograph. The municipality may approve the
use of any generally accepted full hydrograph approximation technique shall use a total
runoff volume that is consistent with the volume from a method that produces a full
hydrograph.
C. All calculations consistent with this ordinance using the soil cover complex method
shall use the appropriate design rainfall depths for the various return period storms
presented on Figure [add number] in Appendix [add designation] of this ordinance. If a
hydrologic computer model such as PSRM or HEC 1 is used for stormwater runoff
calculations, then the duration of rainfall shall be 24 hours.
D. All calculations using the Rational Method shall use rainfall intensities consistent with
appropriate times of concentration for overland flow and return periods from the
Design Storm Curves on Figure [add number] in Appendix [add designation] of this
ordinance. Times of concentration for overland flow shall be calculated using the
methodology presented in Chapter 3 of Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, SCS,
TR 55 (as amended or replaced from time to time by SCS). Times of concentration for
channel and pipe flow shall be computed using Manning a equation.
E. Runoff Curve Numbers (CN) for both existing and proposed conditions to be used in
the soil cover complex method shall be obtained from Table [add designation] in
Appendix [add designation] of this ordinance.
F. Runoff coefficients (c) for both existing and proposed conditions for use in the Rational
Method shall be obtained from Table [add designation] in Appendix [add designation]
of this ordinance.
G. Where uniform flow is anticipated, the Manning equation shall be used for hydraulic
computations, and to determine the capacity of open channels, pipes, and storm sewers.
Where non uniform flow is anticipated, the hydraulic effects of backwater caused by
hydraulic obstructions (e.g., culverts, bridges, dams, reservoirs, etc.) shall be evaluated
using the standard step method for determining water surface profiles. Values for
Manning's roughness coefficient (n) shall be consistent with Table [add designation] in
Appendix [add designation] of this ordinance.
H. Outlet structures for stormwater management facilities shall be designed to meet the
performance standards of this ordinance using any generally accepted hydraulic
analysis technique or method.
CALIFORNIA CODE
181 Attachment 1:8 02 - 15 - 2006
ARTICLE IV DRAINAGE PLAN REQUIREMENTS
§ 401. General requirements.
For any of the activities regulated by this ordinance, the final approval of subdivision
and/or land development plans, the issuance of any building or occupancy permit, or the
commencement of any land disturbance activity may not proceed until the property owner
or developer or his her agent has received written approval of a drainage plan from the
municipality.
§ 402. Exemptions.
A. Any regulated activity that meets the exemption criteria in Appendix A of this
ordinance is exempt from the drainage plan preparation provisions of this ordinance.
This criteria shall apply to the total development even if development is to take place in
phases. Exemption shall not relieve the applicant from providing adequate stormwater
management to meet the purpose of this ordinance.
B. Land disturbance associated with existing one and two family dwellings, subject to
conditions described in Subsection A of this section.
C. Use of land for gardening for home consumption.
D. Agriculture when operated in accordance with a conservation plan or erosion and
sedimentation control plan prepared by the Conservation District. The agricultural
activities such as growing crops, rotating crops, filling of soil and grazing animals and
other such activities are specifically exempt from complying with the requirements of
this ordinance when such activities are conducted in accordance with a conservation
plan prepared by the County Conservation District. The construction of buildings,
parking lots or any activity that may result in impervious surface which increases the
rate and volume of stormwater runoff should comply with the requirements of this
ordinance.
E. Forest management operations which are following the Department of Environmental
Protection management practices contained in its publication Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Guidelines for Forestry and are operating under an erosion and
sedimentation control plan.
No exemption shall be provided for regulated activities as defined in Section 104.E and
104.F of this ordinance.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
181 Attachment 1:9 02 - 15 - 2006
Appendix A
Stormwater Management Exemption Criteria
Total
Parcel Size
Minimum
Distance*
(feet)
Impervious Area
Exemption
(square feet)
< 1 acre 10 5,000
1-2 acres 100 10,000
2-5 acres 250 15,000
> 5 acres 500 20,000
NOTE:
* The minimum distance between the proposed impervious area and/or stormwater
controls/structure discharge point to the downslope property boundary.

184:1 02 - 15 - 2006
Chapter 184
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
ARTICLE I
Street Openings
§ 184-1. Permit required; fee.
§ 184-2. Application for permit; bond
required.
§ 184-3. Conditions for permit issuance.
§ 184-4. Term of bond; inspections;
correction of defects.
§ 184-5. Work performed by property
owners.
§ 184-6. Violations and penalties.
ARTICLE II
Snow and Ice Removal
§ 184-7. Responsibility of property
owners, occupants and tenants.
§ 184-8. Authority for Borough to
remove; collection of charges.
§ 184-9. Violations and penalties.
ARTICLE III
Sweeping and Cleaning of Sidewalks
§ 184-10. Responsibility of property
owners, tenants or lessees.
§ 184-11. Time frame for sweeping.
§ 184-12. Disposal of dirt, litter and
debris.
§ 184-13. Violations and penalties.
ARTICLE IV
Sidewalk and Curb Standards
§ 184-14. Permit requirements; fees.
§ 184-15. Sidewalk specifications.
§ 184-16. Curb specifications.
§ 184-17. Other laws, rules and
regulations.
§ 184-18. Violations and penalties.
ARTICLE V
Operation of Self-Propelled Devices on
Sidewalks
§ 184-19. Definitions.
§ 184-20. Prohibited zones established.
§ 184-21. Prohibited times.
§ 184-22. Obedience to traffic control
devices and regulations.
§ 184-23. Right-of-way to pedestrians.
§ 184-24. Right-of-way to motor vehicles.
§ 184-25. Ramps and devices.
§ 184-26. Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of California as indicated
in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 184-1 CALIFORNIA CODE § 184-2
184:2 02 - 15 - 2006
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles and pedalcycles — See Ch. 76.
Uniform construction codes— See Ch. 89.
Sewers— See Ch. 168.
Stormwater management— See Ch. 181.
Subdivision and land development— See Ch. 187.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 199.
Zoning—See Ch. 205.
ARTICLE I
Street Openings
[Adopted 9-16-1937 by Ord. No. 123]
§ 184-1. Permit required; fee. [Amended 2-13-1997 by Ord. No. 437]
From and after the passage and approval of this article, no person, firm or corporation, except
as noted in § 184-5 of this article, shall make any opening, trench or excavation in any part of
the public streets, alleys or sidewalks of the Borough of California without first obtaining a
permit therefor from the Borough Secretary/Treasurer for which permit the sum of $100, or
such amount as may hereafter be set by Borough Council by resolution, shall be paid into the
Borough treasury.
§ 184-2. Application for permit; bond required.
A. All application for permits to make any opening, trench or excavation in any part of the
streets, alleys or sidewalks of the Borough shall be in writing on a form to be furnished
by the Borough. All applications shall set forth the location of the proposed openings,
trenches, or excavations, the length, width and depth thereof, and every applicant shall
furnish with each application a bond, the penalty of which shall be at the rate of $2 per
square foot of excavation on improved streets, alleys or sidewalks in the Borough. In no
event shall any bond be in a penal sum less than $200, and all bonds shall be in the form
prepared by the Borough Solicitor, and be conditioned for the faithful compliance with
all of the terms and conditions of this article. Public utility corporations operating and
maintaining facilities in the Borough and being subject to regulation under the provisions
of the public utilities laws of the commonwealth shall have the right to file an annual
bond in a penal sum of $200 in lieu of an individual bond with each application, and
such annual bond shall be security for the faithful compliance with all of the terms and
conditions of this article and for all permits granted during the calendar year for which
such bond is given.
B. All applications for permits and all bonds given for the faithful compliance with the
terms and conditions of this article shall be signed by the applicant or applicants, and, in
case of corporate applicants, all such applications and bonds shall be signed and executed
by the corporate officers or by some person duly authorized in writing to sign and
execute applications and bonds on behalf of such corporate applicants. Where an
application for a permit is made by a contractor or contractors in the performance of any
work for another, the bond required to be given shall be with one or more sureties to be
approved by the Borough Secretary/Treasurer and Borough Solicitor.
§ 184-3 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 184-3
184:3 02 - 15 - 2006
§ 184-3. Conditions for permit issuance.
All permits to be issued by the Borough Secretary/Treasurer pursuant to the provisions of this
article shall be upon the following terms and conditions:
A. All permits must be at all times conspicuously posted at the scene of the work during and
while said work is in progress, and in the event said permit becomes lost or destroyed
before the completion of said work a duplicate permit shall be procured from the
Borough Secretary/Treasurer for which an additional fee of $0.50 shall be charged.
B. Excavation material and equipment shall be so placed and operations so conducted that
there may be no interference with the flow or water in any gutter, drain, pipe, ditch or
waterway, and all surplus material shall be promptly removed.
C. In case it shall be necessary to cross any street with a conduit or trench, not more than
1/2 the width of such street shall be opened or obstructed at any one time. Movement of
vehicular traffic shall at all times be kept open and if, in the opinion of the Mayor, it is
necessary to employ one or more flagmen to regulate the movement of vehicular traffic
at or along any excavation or trench, the person, firm or corporation to whom the permit
is granted shall, at the request of the Mayor employ one or more flagmen to so regulate
the movement of vehicular traffic, or the Mayor may, in the event of the failure or
refusal to comply with the request, employ one or more flagmen, the cost or whose
services shall be paid by the Borough and be recovered by appropriate action from the
person, firm or corporation to whom the permit is given.
D. All openings, trenches and excavations shall be properly guarded and suitable barricades
erected and red lights shall be displayed thereon from sunset to sunrise, so as to provide
a sufficient safeguard to persons and vehicles lawfully using the streets, alleys or
sidewalks.
E. The person, firm or corporation to whom a permit is granted shall at all times indemnify
and save harmless the Borough of California of and from any and all claims for injury or
damages suffered or sustained by others in or about the work.
F. All openings, trenches or excavations made in pursuance of this article and by virtue of a
permit granted thereunder shall be refilled and replaced in the following manner: the
ground shall be carefully filled in, rammed and tamped in layers of not more than eight
inches in thickness as the work progresses, using mechanical tampers. In unimproved
streets or alleys, the refilling and tamping shall bring the surface over the excavation to
the grade of surface existing prior to such excavation. On the improved streets the
refilling, laving and tamping shall be done so as to leave a subgrade 10 inches below the
bottom of the brick, telford, or crushed stone base. On this subgrade shall be placed a
layer of well rammed concrete composed of one part portland cement, two parts clean
sharp sand and four parts of clean washed gravel or broken stone. This concrete slab
shall be so laid as to extend a minimum of eight inches on either side of the opening,
trench or excavation at its maximum width and shall have a minimum thickness of eight
inches. The concrete so placed shall be properly cured and permitted to set not less than
48 hours, weather conditions governing, before further work proceeds. Then under brick
streets covered with bituminous concrete a cushion of clean sharp sand 1 1/2 inches shall
be spread, compacted and gauged by template to line, to receive the brick and upon this
§ 184-3 CALIFORNIA CODE § 184-4
184:4 02 - 15 - 2006
cushion the surface shall be relaid with the same kind and quality of material and in the
same manner as the original surface. Under streets laid with stone telford or crushed
stone base a cushion of clean dry clay shall be used over the concrete, the clay to be
rammed, compacted and gauged to receive the stone base. The stone base will then be
replaced in exactly the same manner as the original installation, tamped and wedged
firmly into place and covered with the bituminous course or asphaltic concrete of the
same quality and material as the original paving. All openings in improved sidewalks
shall be properly refilled and tamped and the surface replaced with the same kind and
quality of material and in the same manner as the original sidewalk. No sand cushion
shall be required in cases of concrete or bituminous type of construction.
G. On all streets paved with a concrete pavement or paved with brick on a concrete base, no
opening shall be made in such pavement, but all work shall be done by means of
tunneling; provided, however, that where in the opinion of the Street Commissioner
tunneling in impractical openings may be made in such pavements, in case of tunneling,
the work shall be done in such manner as to maintain the surface of the street in safe
condition for travel. Permits for such excavations shall stipulate thereon that the work
shall be done by tunneling and not by opening the surface. All dirt removed from tunnels
shall be replaced and repacked by means of mechanical tampers, and additional dirt
supplied to complete the refilling whenever necessary. When in the opinion of the Street
Commissioner an opening at the curb is required to begin tunneling the permit shall
stipulate thereon the exact length and width of the opening required and the work of
tunneling and backfilling shall be carried out as hereinbefore stated. When backfilling
and tamping has been completed as specified, the edges of the concrete shall be cut back
eight inches from either edge of original excavation. The edge of concrete shall be cut
neatly and to line by use of a pitching tool and concrete replaced to the exact thickness
of the original using a mixture of one part portland cement, two parts clean sand and four
parts clean washed gravel or crushed limestone. The surface shall be floated and finished
to the exact surface line of original roadway.
§ 184-4. Term of bond; inspections; correction of defects.
Any bond required to be given in pursuance of § 184-2A of this article shall remain in full
force and effect for a period of one year after completion of the work of refilling the opening,
trench or excavation and the relaying of any pavement over the same, and in the case of
annual bonds given by public utility corporations, for a period of one year after completion of
the last work done in the calendar year for which said bond is given. It shall be the duty of
the Street Commissioner to make such inspections of the work during its progress or after
completion as he or she may deem necessary, and to report any settlements in paving or
defective conditions found us a result of the work done. It shall be the duty of the Borough
Secretary/Treasurer, upon instruction of the Street Commissioner or Council, to give prompt
notice to any person, firm or corporation to whom the permit to make such opening, trench or
excavation was issued, to repair or replace any such settlement in paving or defective
condition within 30 days and, upon the failure or refusal of such person, firm or corporation
to make the necessary repairs or replacements pursuant to such notice within 30 days, the
Borough shall proceed to do the work and the cost, together with an attorney's fee of 5%,
shall be collected from the person, firm or corporation obtaining such permit by appropriate
§ 184-4 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 184-8
184:5 02 - 15 - 2006
legal action upon said bond, or against any sureties on said bond, or in any other manner
provided by law.
§ 184-5. Work performed by property owners.
Openings, trenches and excavations between the curb and the property line may be made by
any abutting property owner, his agent or agents, employee or employees, lessee or lessees, on
a permit issued free to him, and without the necessity of furnishing bond, provided however,
that all replacements, repairs and fills shall be made as herein or otherwise required.
§ 184-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article, upon
conviction thereof before a Magisterial District Judge, shall pay a fine of not less than $100
nor more than $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and
costs, by imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
ARTICLE II
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 1-9-1961 by Ord. No. 198]
§ 184-7. Responsibility of property owners, occupants and tenants.
The owner, occupant or tenant of every property abutting upon any of the streets or public
alleys in the Borough of California is hereby required to remove or cause to be removed from
all the sidewalks in front of or along such property all snow and ice thereon fallen or formed,
within 24 hours after the same shall have ceased to fall or to form; provided that the owner of
a property shall be responsible for conforming to the requirements of this section where such
property is occupied by such owner or is unoccupied or vacant, or where such property is a
multiple-business or multiple-dwelling property with a common frontage to all occupiers or
tenants of said multiple-business or multiple-dwelling property; where such a property is a
multiple-business or multiple-dwelling property in which each occupier or tenant has his or
her own individual frontage, each occupier or tenant shall be responsible for conforming to
the requirements of this section.
§ 184-8. Authority for Borough to remove; collection of charges.
In any case where the owner, occupant or tenant, as aforesaid, shall fail, neglect or refuse to
comply with any of the provisions of § 184-7 of this article within the time limit prescribed
therein, the Borough authorities may proceed immediately to clear all snow and/or ice from
the sidewalk of such delinquent, and to collect the expenses, with any additional amount
allowed by law, from such owner, occupant or tenant, as the case may be, which may be in
addition to the fine or penalty imposed under § 184-9 of this article.
§ 184-9 CALIFORNIA CODE § 184-13
184:6 02 - 15 - 2006
§ 184-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-13-2000 by Ord. No. 465]
Any owner, occupant or tenant who shall fail to remove any snow or ice from any public
sidewalk as required under § 184-7 of this article shall, upon conviction thereof before a
Magisterial District Judge of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not less than $100 nor more than $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of
payment of such fine and costs, by imprisonment for not more than 30 days. Each day that a
violation is shown to have been in effect shall constitute a separate offense. Provided that
such fines and costs may be in addition to any expenses and additional amounts authorized by
law, and as imposed as provided in § 184-8 of this article.
ARTICLE III
Sweeping and Cleaning of Sidewalks
[Adopted 6-10-1968 by Ord. No. 281]
§ 184-10. Responsibility of property owners, tenants or lessees.
All property owners, or their tenants or lessees, in the Borough of California shall have the
duty to keep the sidewalks adjoining said properties free and clear of dirt, litter and debris.
§ 184-11. Time frame for sweeping.
The said property owners, their tenants or lessees, shall sweep the said sidewalks, and remove
all dirt, litter and debris, on or before 11:00 a.m. of each day of the week, excluding Sundays.
§ 184-12. Disposal of dirt, litter and debris.
Such dirt, litter and debris shall not be placed on the cartway of any street in said Borough,
but instead shall be placed in a container by the property owner, his tenants or lessees, and
disposed of in the same manner as he disposes of his other waste materials, at the sole cost
and expense of the said property owner, his tenants or lessees.
§ 184-13. Violations and penalties.
Any property owner, tenant or lessee who shall violate the provisions of this article shall be
liable to pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $600, plus costs of prosecution, and,
in default of payment of such fine and costs, by imprisonment for not more than 30 days, for
each offense. Each day’s continuance of the offense shall constitute a new offense.
§ 184-14 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 184-15
184:7 02 - 15 - 2006
ARTICLE IV
Sidewalk and Curb Standards
[Adopted 11-8-1993 by Ord. No. 414]
§ 184-14. Permit requirements; fees.
Any person, individual, company, corporation or other entity which shall construct,
reconstruct, repair or replace any public sidewalk or public curb within the Borough of
California shall conform to the following specifications:
A. Prior to opening an existing sidewalk, a permit shall be obtained from the Borough
Secretary/Treasurer. The fee for said permit shall be $10 for the first 30 feet of
construction and $6 for each additional 10 feet of construction, except that no permit fee
is required for construction or repair done by or at the direction of the homeowner, for
construction or repair to such homeowner’s dwelling, provided such dwelling is used only
by the homeowner and his immediate family solely for dwelling purposes.
B. All sidewalks and curbs shall be constructed of concrete as specified herein and any
replacement or repair shall be done only with concrete.
C. Any area off of the sidewalk which is used for a driveway or for parking may be
surfaced with macadam or similar material.
D. All sidewalks and curbing shall conform to the specifications as detailed in §§ 184-15
and 184-16 of this article.
E. No person, individual or other entity, being the owner of any real estate within the limits
of the Borough of California, shall permit the public sidewalk adjacent to said real estate
to deteriorate so as to present a hazard or prevent the safe passage of pedestrians upon
said sidewalk. Upon notice by the Borough of a violation of this section, the sidewalk
must be repaired within a period of 45 days from the date of service of the notice upon
such owner or their agent. This first notice is to be a warning citation carrying no fine or
any other penalty. After a period of 45 days has elapsed from the service of the warning
citation, a regular citation shall be issued if the unsatisfactory condition has not been
abated. If the sidewalk remains in unsatisfactory condition 75 days after the issuance of
the warning citation, the Borough may take any appropriate measure necessary for the
abatement of the nuisance, charging the property owner for the costs of repair in addition
to any fine or costs imposed by this article or to which any person, individual or entity
may be subjected under law.
§ 184-15. Sidewalk specifications.
The following are the specifications for concrete sidewalks:
A. All concrete sidewalks shall be replaced in full slabs using
three-thousand-five-hundred-pound-per-square-inch concrete six inches thick.
B. The foundation for the bed shall be formed at a depth of 10 inches below and parallel
with the finished surface of the sidewalk unless otherwise indicated. Unsuitable material
§ 184-15 CALIFORNIA CODE § 184-15
184:8 02 - 15 - 2006
shall be removed and replaced with approved material, and the foundation shall be
thoroughly compacted and finished to a firm, even surface.
C. The aggregate shall be spread on the prepared foundation to form a compacted bed four
inches in depth. This material shall be thoroughly compacted. Satisfactory outlet for
draining the bed shall be provided.
D. Forms shall be of wood or metal, straight, free from warp and of sufficient strength when
staked to resist the pressure of the concrete without springing. If wood, they shall be
normal two-inch planks surfaced on the inside and the top; if of metal, they shall be of
approved section. Forms shall have a depth equal to the depth of the concrete and shall
be thoroughly cleaned and oiled before the concrete is placed against them. Forms that
are worn, bent or damaged shall not be used.
E. Slabs.
(1) Sidewalks shall be constructed in separate slabs 32 feet in length except for
closures. These slabs shall be separated by transverse premolded expansion-joint
filler, 1/4 inch in thickness for the full depth of the concrete. Transverse premolded
expansion-joint filler shall also be placed adjacent to existing structures where
directed. The slabs between expansion joints shall be divided into blocks four feet
in length, by scoring transversely. Where the slabs are more than five feet in width,
they shall be scored longitudinally in the center. Transverse and longitudinal
scoring shall extend for a depth of at least 1/4 of the thickness of the concrete slab.
(2) Premolded expansion-joint filler, 1/4 inch in thickness for the full depth of the
concrete, shall be placed longitudinally where the sidewalk slab is to be
constructed in contact with curbs. Where existing light standards, poles, fire
hydrants and similar structures are within the limits of the sidewalk area, the
concrete around such structures shall be scored in a block eight inches wider than
the maximum dimension of the structure at the sidewalk elevation. Prior to placing
the concrete around such structures, premolded expansion-joint filler, 1/4 inch in
thickness, shall be placed around the structure for the full depth of the concrete in
the sidewalk.
F. The concrete shall be proportioned, mixed and placed in accordance with Section 1001.3,
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Publication, Form 408, latest edition. The
concrete shall be struck off, finished and tested as directed by the Borough Engineer.
Unless otherwise directed, an edger having a radius of 1/4 inch shall be used for edging
all joints. The concrete shall be cured and protected in accordance with Section 501.3(n),
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Publication, Form 408, latest edition.
G. Side forms shall not be removed within 12 hours after the concrete has been placed.
After removal of the forms, minor honeycombed areas shall be filled with mortar
composed of one part of cement and two parts of fine aggregate. Major honeycombed
areas will be considered as defective work and shall be removed and replaced at no
expense to the Borough.
H. All expansion joints and scoring cracks, where required, shall be sealed with joint sealing
material.
§ 184-15 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 184-16
184:9 02 - 15 - 2006
I. After the concrete has cured for a period of not less than 72 hours, the spaces adjacent to
the sidewalk shall be backfilled with approved material in layers of not more than four
inches in depth, which shall be thoroughly compacted mechanically to the required
elevation and cross section.
J. No new sidewalk shall be placed with a width of less than 48 inches. All replacement of
existing sidewalk shall be at least as wide as the original section or sections replaced.
§ 184-16. Curb specifications.
The following are the specifications for concrete curbs:
A. All curbs shall be Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Type A curb, seven by
eight by 18 inches in cross section.
B. Forms for the curb shall be of metal, except wood forms may be used on sharp curves
and short tangent sections when approved by the Borough Engineer. Forms shall be
straight, free from warp and of sufficient strength, when staked, to resist the pressure of
the concrete without springing. At least three stakes shall be provided for each 10 feet of
form. Metal forms shall be approved sections and shall have a flat surface on top, and
wood forms shall be nominal two-inch surfaced planks. These forms shall be of a depth
equal to the depth of the curb, designed to permit secure fastenings of the face and back
forms at the top. These fastenings shall be constructed in a manner that will not obstruct
satisfactory finishing and edging of the top of the curb, but will permit removal of the
inside or face forms. The outside or back forms shall be straight from top to bottom. The
inside of the face forms shall have a batter from the top of the curb to the finished
surface line of the pavement and shall be straight from this line to the bottom. Steel
templates of 1/8 inch in thickness of the width of the curb shall be used to separate
adjacent sections. All forms and templates shall be thoroughly cleaned and treated with
an approved material as required to prevent the concrete from adhering thereto. Oil,
bituminous paper or other material which will adhere to or discolor the concrete shall not
be used. Forms and templates which are worn, bent, warped or broken shall not be used.
The forms shall be accurately set to line and grade in a manner to prevent settlement or
displacement.
C. Excavation shall be made to the required depth, and the material upon which the curb is
to be constructed shall be compacted to a firm, even surface.
D. The concrete shall be placed in the forms in horizontal layers not to exceed five inches
and spaded sufficiently to eliminate all voids. An approved vibrator may be used when
permitted by the Borough Engineer. Where indicated or directed, drainage openings shall
be made through the curb at the elevation and of the size required. The curb shall be
depressed as indicated or directed. The top surface of the curb shall be finished true to
line and grade in a smooth, neat and even manner by means of wood floats, and the
edges of the face and back shall be rounded to a radius of not more than 3/4 inch and 1/4
inch, respectively, while the concrete is still plastic. The finished curb shall have a
surface free from voids and honeycombs. Any additional surface finishing required shall
be performed immediately after extrusion.
§ 184-16 CALIFORNIA CODE § 184-18
184:10 02 - 15 - 2006
E. The curb shall be constructed in uniform lengths or sections of 10 feet, except where
shorter sections are necessary for closure or curves, but no section shall be less than four
feet in length. Premolded expansion-joint filler, 1/4 inch in thickness and cut to conform
to the cross section of the curb, shall be placed at the ends of sections of curved curb and
at intervals of not more than 30 feet. Intermediate joints between sections shall be
formed of two thicknesses of one-ply bituminous paper cut neatly to the cross section of
the curb and one paper placed on each side of the template. If the method of handling the
work is such that the template cannot be removed satisfactorily, the curb shall be
constructed in alternate sections.
F. The forms shall not be removed within 12 hours after the concrete has been placed. No
rubbing to correct irregularities will be permitted until the full curing period has elapsed.
Any irregular surface shall be corrected by rubbing with a carborundum stone. Brush
finishing or plastering will not be permitted, and all rejected curb shall be promptly
removed and replaced at no expense to the Borough. All joints in the curb shall be
opened from top to bottom immediately after the forms are removed, and the edges
adjacent to the joints shall be sharp and clean cut. After the forms are removed, minor
defects shall be filled with mortar composed of one part cement and two parts of fine
aggregate.
G. The curb shall be cured and protected as specified in Section 1001.3(p), Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Publication, Form 408, latest edition, except that
membrane curing will be permitted.
H. After the concrete has attained the required strength, the spaces in back of the curb shall
be backfilled with approved material in layers of not more than four inches in depth,
which shall be thoroughly compacted, mechanically, to the required elevation and cross
section.
§ 184-17. Other laws, rules and regulations.
This article is not in lieu of, but in addition to, any other laws, rules or regulations which may
apply to the construction, alteration or repair of sidewalks or curbs, including but not limited
to requirements that curbing and sidewalks be constructed so as not to hinder the use thereof
by handicapped individuals, in accordance with the criteria and standards set forth in the
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. Whenever possible, easy access ramps shall be
established for those individuals with disabilities.
§ 184-18. Violations and penalties.
A violation of the provisions of this article shall carry as a penalty a fine of not less than $100
nor more than $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and
costs, by imprisonment for not more than 30 days, plus the replacement of all work not
meeting specifications, or the cost of such replacement.
§ 184-19 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 184-21
184:11 02 - 15 - 2006
1. Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
ARTICLE V
Operation of Self-Propelled Devices on Sidewalks
[Adopted 12-12-2002 by Ord. No. 478]
§ 184-19. Definitions.
The following words or phrases, unless the content clearly indicates otherwise, shall have the
meaning ascribed to them in this section:
BICYCLE or PEDALCYCLE— A vehicle propelled solely by human-powered pedals. The
term does not mean a three-wheeled human-powered pedal-driven vehicle with a main driving
wheel 20 inches in diameter or under and primarily designed for children six years of age or
younger. 1
SELF-PROPELLED— By human power.
SKATEBOARD or SCOOTER— Any motorized or self-propelled device intended or
designed to carry a person upon a flat surface to which is mounted two or more wheels.
§ 184-20. Prohibited zones established.
A prohibited zone for the use of skates, skateboards, bicycles, scooters, tricycles, and other
self-propelled vehicles is hereby established upon all public sidewalks in the following areas,
except for such displays, demonstrations or contests approved in advance by the California
Borough Police Department:
A. Any commercial zone as established under Chapter 205, Zoning, of the Code of the
Borough of California.
B. California Technology Park.
§ 184-21. Prohibited times.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to use, ride, propel, or otherwise operate skates,
skateboards, bicycles, scooters, tricycles, or any other self-propelled vehicle on the public
sidewalk within the prohibited zone at any time.
B. Restricted hours.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to use, ride, propel, or otherwise operate skates,
skateboards, bicycles, scooters, tricycles, or any other self-propelled vehicle on any
public sidewalks within the Borough of California:
(a) Between sunset and sunrise on any day;
(b) At any other time when, due to insufficient light or unfavorable atmospheric
conditions, persons are not clearly discernible from a distance of 100 feet.
§ 184-21 CALIFORNIA CODE § 184-26
184:12 02 - 15 - 2006
2. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 3112 and 3113.
(2) Exceptions: bicycles with lamps and reflectors as prescribed by 75 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 3507 (Vehicle Code).
§ 184-22. Obedience to traffic control devices and regulations.
A. A person engaged in operating skates, skateboards, bicycles, scooters, tricycles, or any
other self-propelled vehicle in the Borough of California shall obey the instructions of a
police officer or other appropriately attired person authorized to direct, control or
regulate traffic.
B. A person engaged in operating skates, skateboards, bicycles, scooters, tricycles, or any
other self-propelled vehicle in the Borough of California shall obey traffic and pedestrian
control signals as provided under Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code, Section 3112
(relating to traffic control signals) and Section 3113 (relating to pedestrian control
signals).2
§ 184-23. Right-of-way to pedestrians.
Any person engaged in operating skates, skateboards, bicycles, scooters, tricycles, or any
other self-propelled vehicle in the Borough of California shall yield the right-of-way to any
pedestrian and may not overtake or pass a pedestrian while riding upon or propelling the
self-propelled vehicle. The operator shall dismount from his self-propelled vehicle and shall
pass or overtake the pedestrian on foot, or wait until the pedestrian passes, prior to
remounting the vehicle.
§ 184-24. Right-of-way to motor vehicles.
No person engaged in operating skates, skateboards, bicycles, scooters, tricycles, or any other
self-propelled vehicle in the Borough of California shall suddenly leave the curb, sidewalk,
berm or street or any other place of safety and ride upon or propel any self-propelled vehicle
into or toward the path of a vehicle which is so close as to constitute a hazard. Where there
are no pedalcycle lanes, persons shall exercise due care when passing a standing vehicle or
one proceeding in the same direction.
§ 184-25. Ramps and devices.
No person shall place a ramp, half-pipe or other structure used for skateboarding, skating or
bicycling stunt riding in a public thoroughfare, street, upon any sidewalk or parking lot within
the Borough of California.
§ 184-26. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the following:
§ 184-26 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 184-26
184:13 02 - 15 - 2006
A. The skates, skateboards, bicycles, scooters, tricycles, or any other self-propelled vehicle
of any person violating the provisions of this article shall be impounded by the Police
Department of the Borough for a period not exceeding 30 days and said person shall,
upon conviction in a summary proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such
fine and costs, by imprisonment for not more than 30 days. In the event said person is a
minor, the item of said minor shall be impounded by the Police Department of the
Borough for a period not exceeding 30 days and shall be released to the parent, guardian,
or other person having legal custody of said minor.
B. In lieu of the penalties set forth in Subsection A, above, when the violation of the article
is a first offense by the actor, the Police Department of the Borough of California may
issue a written warning to the person violating the article. The skates, skateboards,
bicycles, scooters, tricycles, or any other self-propelled vehicle used shall be impounded
by the Police Department of the Borough of California for a period not exceeding 15
days when a written warning has been issued under the terms of this section. If the
person violating the article is a minor, in addition to the confiscation of the item as
aforementioned, the Borough police shall notify the parents, guardian, or other person
having legal custody of said minor of the violation of this article and the impounding of
the item. If the person violating the article is a minor, the item as aforementioned shall
be released only to the parents, guardian, or other person having legal custody of said
minor. In addition, said individual shall be provided with a copy of this article at the time
of reclaiming of the item.
C. Any skates, skateboards, bicycles, scooters, tricycles, or any other self-propelled vehicle
confiscated due to violation of the provisions of this article shall be released only upon
proof of complete payment of any fines and costs incurred.

187:1 02 - 15 - 2006
Chapter 187
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
ARTICLE I
Title, Authority and Purpose
§ 187-1. Title.
§ 187-2. Authority.
§ 187-3. Purpose.
ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 187-4. Effect of chapter; compliance
required.
§ 187-5. Stricter standards to govern.
§ 187-6. Effect of changes in ordinances.
§ 187-7. Fees.
§ 187-8. Compliance with other
requirements.
§ 187-9. Amendment procedure.
ARTICLE III
Definitions
§ 187-10. Interpretation.
§ 187-11. Definitions.
ARTICLE IV
Administrative Procedures
§ 187-12. Purpose.
§ 187-13. Simultaneous processing of
applications.
§ 187-14. Preapplication conference.
§ 187-15. Official filing date.
§ 187-16. Preliminary approval
procedures.
§ 187-17. Final approval procedure.
§ 187-18. Expedited procedures for minor
subdivisions, minor land
developments, and plan
adjustments.
§ 187-19. Phased development.
§ 187-20. Modifications, waivers, and
flexibility provisions.
§ 187-21. Recording of final plan.
§ 187-22. Inspection, completion and
approval of improvements;
release of performance security.
§ 187-23. Acceptance of public
improvements.
§ 187-24. Remedies to effect completion
of required improvements.
ARTICLE V
Application Content
§ 187-25. Preapplication conference
guidelines.
§ 187-26. Preliminary application
requirements.
§ 187-27. Final application requirements.
ARTICLE VI
Design Standards
§ 187-28. Land requirements.
§ 187-29. Streets.
§ 187-30. Blocks.
§ 187-31. Lots.
§ 187-32. Easements.
§ 187-33. Erosion and sedimentation
control.
§ 187-34. Monuments.
§ 187-35. Storm drainage design.
§ 187-36. Storm drainage management.
§ 187-1 CALIFORNIA CODE § 187-3
187:2 02 - 15 - 2006
§ 187-37. Curbs and gutters.
§ 187-38. Pedestrian circulation.
§ 187-39. Sewers and water.
§ 187-40. Phased development.
ARTICLE VII
Enforcement
§ 187-41. Enforcement remedies;
violations and penalties.
§ 187-42. Preventive remedies.
§ 187-43. Construal of provisions.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of California 8-8-2002 by
Ord. No. 475. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes— See Ch. 89.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 168.
Stormwater management— See Ch. 181.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 184.
Zoning—See Ch. 205.
ARTICLE I
Title, Authority and Purpose
§ 187-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of California Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance."
§ 187-2. Authority.
The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, as reenacted and amended
by Act 170 of 1988, and as subsequently amended, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq. ("MPC"), enables
and authorizes governing bodies of municipalities to enact a subdivision and land
development ordinance to regulate subdivisions and land developments situated within the
municipality. All subdivisions and land development plats of land situated within the Borough
shall be submitted to the Borough Planning Commission for review and comment in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and to the Council of the Borough of California
for approval.
§ 187-3. Purpose.
The purposes of this chapter are as follows:
A. Assisting in the orderly and efficient integration of subdivisions and land developments
within the Borough as based on the Borough of California Comprehensive Plan.
B. Ensuring conformance of subdivision plans and land development plans with public
improvement plans.
C. Ensuring coordination of intermunicipal public improvement plans and programs.
§ 187-3 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 187-6
187:3 02 - 15 - 2006
1. Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
D. Securing the protection of water resources and drainageways.
E. Facilitating the safe and efficient movement of people and goods.
F. Securing equitable handling of all subdivision and land development plans by providing
uniform standards and procedures.
G. Regulating the subdivision and/or land development of land within any designated
floodplain district in order to promote the general health, welfare and safety of the
community.
H. Requiring that each subdivision lot in flood-prone areas be provided with a safe building
site with adequate access, and that public facilities which serve such uses be designated
and installed to preclude flood at the time of initial construction.
I. Protecting individuals from buying lands which are unsuitable for use because of flood
by prohibiting the improper subdivision and/or land development of unprotected lands
within the designated floodplain district.
J. In general, promoting the greater health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the
Borough of California.1
2. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508(4).
ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 187-4. Effect of chapter; compliance required.
No subdivision or land development of any lot, tract, or parcel of land shall be made and no
public improvements or other improvements in connection therewith shall be laid out, opened,
or dedicated for public use or travel or for the common use of occupants of buildings abutting
thereon except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 187-5. Stricter standards to govern.
Where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any
other ordinance, rule, or regulation, or other provision of law, the most restrictive provision or
that provision imposing the higher standards shall govern.
§ 187-6. Effect of changes in ordinances.
Changes or amendments of the zoning, subdivision, or other governing ordinances or plan
shall affect the approval of applications for preliminary or final plan approval as provided in
Section 508(4) of the MPC.2
§ 187-6 CALIFORNIA CODE § 187-6
187:4 02 - 15 - 2006
A. Effect on pending applications. From the time an application for approval of a
preliminary or final plat is duly filed as provided in this chapter, and while such
application is pending action by the Council of the Borough of California, the applicant
shall be entitled to a decision in accordance with the provisions of the governing
ordinances or plans at the time the application was filed and shall not be subject to any
changes to this chapter, zoning, or other governing ordinances or plans.
B. Effect on other applications; vested rights.
(1) Five-year protection period. When an application for preliminary or final plat
approval has been approved, no subsequent change to the zoning, subdivision, or
other governing ordinance or plan shall be applied to adversely affect the right of
the applicant to commence and complete any aspect of the approved development
in accordance with the terms of such approval within five years of the date of such
approval.
(2) Calculation of five-year protection period. When an approval of a final plat is
preceded by approval of a preliminary plat, the five-year period shall be counted
from the date of the preliminary plat approval. If there is any doubt as to the terms
of a preliminary plat approval, the terms shall be construed in the light of the
governing ordinances or plans as they stood at the time when the application for
such approval was duly filed.
(3) Protections afforded. When the applicant has substantially completed the required
improvements as depicted upon the final plan within the aforesaid five-year limit,
or any extension thereof as may be granted by the Council, no change to a
Borough ordinance or plan enacted subsequent to the date of filing of the
preliminary plat shall modify or revoke any aspect of the approved final plat
pertaining to zoning classification or density, lot, building, street or utility location.
(4) Protection periods for multiphase developments. In the case of a preliminary plat
calling for the installation of improvements beyond the five-year period, the
aforesaid protections afforded by substantially completing the improvements
depicted upon the final plat within five years shall apply, provided that the
applicant has not defaulted with regard to or violated any of the conditions of the
preliminary plat approval, including compliance with applicant's schedule of
submission of final plats for the various sections. For any section or sections,
beyond the initial section, in which the required improvements have not been
substantially completed within said five-year period, the protections shall apply for
an additional term or terms of three years from the date of final plat approval for
each section.
(5) Loss of protections. If an application is properly and finally denied, any subsequent
application shall be subject to the intervening change in governing regulations.
Failure of the applicant to adhere to the schedule of submission of final plats for
multiphase developments shall subject any such phase to any and all changes in
zoning, subdivision, and other governing ordinance enacted by the Borough after
the date of the initial preliminary plat submission.
§ 187-7 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 187-9
187:5 02 - 15 - 2006
3. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10510(g).
§ 187-7. Fees.
A. Borough fees. All Borough fees for review of applications for subdivision and land
development, for inspection of required improvements, and for other purposes in
accordance with this chapter shall be assessed based on a specific fee schedule adopted
by resolution of the Council and reflecting actual costs of the Borough. The review fees
may include reasonable and necessary charges by the Borough’s professional consultants
or engineer for review and report on the application. The applicable fees must be paid in
accordance with this chapter.
B. Effect of disputed fees. The applicant shall notify the Borough within 10 days of the
billing date of any dispute of review fees charged. The Borough shall not delay or
disapprove a subdivision or land development application due to the applicant’s request
over disputed fees.
C. Dispute resolution. If the Borough and the applicant cannot agree on the amount of
review fees which are reasonable and necessary, then the applicant and the Borough shall
follow the procedure for dispute resolution set forth in Section 510(g) of the MPC.3
D. Form of payment. All fees due to the Borough shall be paid by a check or money order
payable to the Borough of California. The Borough, in its sole discretion, may request a
certified check or cashier’s check.
§ 187-8. Compliance with other requirements.
A. Compliance with state and federal laws. Applicants must comply with any other relevant
state and federal codes and regulations in addition to this chapter. The approval of any
subdivision or land development application does not waive the need to obtain other
relevant land development permits or approvals.
B. Scope of approval. Approval of a plan by the Borough shall not be construed as an
indication that the plan complies with any standards, regulations, or requirements that are
not contained in this chapter and imposed by private agreement or any local, state, or
federal government agency; such approval indicates only that the plan complies with the
requirements of this chapter.
C. Compliance with private restrictions, covenants, and agreements. The Borough shall not
enforce compliance with private restrictions, covenants, and agreements.
§ 187-9. Amendment procedure.
A. Enactment following public hearing and notice. The Council may amend this chapter
after holding a public hearing on the amendment pursuant to public notice. A brief
summary setting forth the principal provisions of the proposed ordinance and a reference
to the place in the Borough where copies of the proposed amendment may be secured or
examined shall be incorporated in the public notice.
§ 187-9 CALIFORNIA CODE § 187-9
187:6 02 - 15 - 2006
4. Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
B. Planning Commission. The Council shall submit proposed amendments to this chapter to
the Borough for recommendations at least 30 days prior to the date fixed for the public
hearing on such proposed amendment, unless such proposed amendments shall have been
prepared by the Planning Commission.
C. County Planning Commission review. The Borough shall submit the proposed
amendment to the County Planning Commission for recommendations at least 30 days
before the date fixed for the public hearing on such proposed amendment.
D. Publication, advertisement and availability of ordinance.
(1) Notice of proposed enactment. Before enactment of an amendment, the Borough
Secretary/Treasurer or the Borough Secretary/Treasurer's designated representative
shall publish notice of proposed enactment of an amendment to this chapter. The
notice of proposed enactment shall include the time and place of the meeting at
which passage will be considered, a reference to a place within the Borough where
copies of the proposed amendment may be examined without charge or obtained
for a charge not greater than the cost thereof.
(2) Publication of proposed enactment. The Borough or the Borough
Secretary/Treasurer's designated representative shall publish the proposed
amendment once in one newspaper of general circulation in the Borough not more
than 60 days nor less than seven days prior to passage. Publication of the proposed
ordinance or amendment shall include either the full text thereof or the title and a
brief summary, prepared by the Borough Solicitor and setting forth all the
provisions in reasonable detail. If the full text is not included:4
(a) A copy thereof shall be supplied to a newspaper of general circulation in the
Borough at the time the public notice is published; and
(b) An attested copy of the proposed amendment shall be filed in the Washington
County Law Library or other Washington County office designated by the
Washington County Commissioners.
(3) Substantial amendments to proposed amendments. In the event substantial
amendments are made to the proposed amendment, before voting upon enactment,
the Council shall, at least 10 days before enactment, readvertise, in one newspaper
of general circulation in the Borough, a brief summary setting forth all the
provisions in reasonable detail together with a summary of the amendments.
(4) Incorporation in ordinance books by reference. Subdivision and land development
ordinance amendments may be incorporated into official ordinance books by
reference with the same force and effect as if duly recorded therein.
E. File certified copy. Within 30 days after adoption, the Borough Secretary/Treasurer or the
Borough Secretary/Treasurer's designated representative shall forward a certified copy of
any amendment of the subdivision and land development ordinance to the County
Planning Commission.
§ 187-10 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 187-11
187:7 02 - 15 - 2006
5. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
ARTICLE III
Definitions
§ 187-10. Interpretation.
Unless otherwise stated, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated as follows:
A. Singular and plural. Words in the singular include the plural and those in the plural
include the singular.
B. Building and structure. The word "structure" includes "building" and the use of either
word shall be construed as if followed by the phrase "or part thereof."
C. Shall, will, must, and may. The words "shall," "will," and "must" are mandatory, and the
word "may" is permissive.
§ 187-11. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ADT (AVERAGE DAILY TRAFFIC) — The general unit of measure for traffic on a
highway. It is the total traffic for the year divided by 365 days per year.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has filed an
application for development, including his heirs, successors and assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether preliminary, tentative
or final, required to be filed and approved prior to start of construction or development,
including but not limited to an application for a building permit, for the approval of a
subdivision plat or plan or for the approval of a development plan.
ARCHITECT — An architect registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
BLOCK — An area bounded by streets.
BOROUGH— The Borough of California, Washington County, Pennsylvania, a municipal
body having its principal address at 225 Third Street, California, Pennsylvania 15419.
BOROUGH ENGINEER— A professional engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, duly appointed by the Council as the engineer of the Borough of California.
BOROUGH SEWAGE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER— A sewage enforcement officer
certified as such by the commonwealth and appointed by the Council as the official of the
Borough who issues and reviews permit applications and conducts the investigations and
inspections as are necessary to implement Act 5375 and Chapters 71, 72, and 73 of the
Pennsylvania Code.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure having walls and a
roof. Included shall be all mobile homes and trailers used for human habitation.
§ 187-11 CALIFORNIA CODE § 187-11
187:8 02 - 15 - 2006
BUILDING LINE— A line parallel to the front, side, or rear lot line set so as to provide the
required distance between the right-of-way and any enclosed structure.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE— The line within a property defining the required minimum
distance between any enclosed structure and the adjacent right-of-way, and the line defining
side and rear yards, where required.
CARTWAY or ROADWAY— That portion of a street which is improved, designated, or
intended for vehicular use.
CHAIRMAN— The Chairman of the Borough of California Planning Commission.
CLEAR-SIGHT TRIANGLE— An area of unobstructed vision at street intersections. It is
defined by lines of sight between points at a given distance from the intersection of the street
center lines.
COMMON OPEN SPACE— A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water, or a
combination of land and water, within a development site and designed and intended for the
use or enjoyment of residents of a development, not including streets, off-street parking areas,
and areas set aside for public facilities.
COUNTY— County of Washington, Pennsylvania.
CROSSWALK — A right-of-way, publicly or privately owned, intended to furnish access for
pedestrians.
CUL-DE-SAC— A street intersecting another street at one end and terminating at the other
in a vehicular turnaround.
CUT — An excavation. The difference between a point on the original ground and a
designated point of lower elevation of the final grade. Also, the material removed in
excavation.
DEPARTMENT — Zoning Department of the Borough of California.
DESIGNATED FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS— Those floodplain districts specifically
designated in Chapter 205, Zoning, as being inundated primarily by the one-hundred-year
flood.
DEVELOPER— Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with the permission of
such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a subdivision of land or a land
development.
DEVELOPMENT— Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, the placement of mobile homes,
streets and other paving, utilities, mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation, or drilling
operations and the subdivision of land.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN— The provisions for development, including a planned residential
development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants relating to use, location and bulk of
buildings and other structures, intensity of use or density of development, streets, ways and
parking facilities, common open space and public facilities. The phrase "provisions of the
§ 187-11 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 187-11
187:9 02 - 15 - 2006
development plan" when used in this chapter shall mean the written and graphic materials
referred to in this definition.
DWELLING— A building designed and constructed for residential purposes in which people
live.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY— A building used by three or more families living
independently of each other and doing their own cooking, including apartment houses.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED (ROW) (TOWNHOUSE) — A building used
by one family, and having two party walls in common with other buildings.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED— A building used by one family, having one
dwelling unit, and having two side yards.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED— A building used by one family,
having one side yard, and one party wall in common with another building.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY DETACHED— A building used by two families, with one
dwelling unit arranged over the other, having two side yards.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED— A building used by two families, with
one dwelling unit arranged over the other, having one side yard, and having one party wall in
common with another building.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms used for living and sleeping purposes and having
a kitchen with fixed cooking facilities arranged for occupancy by one family or a single
person.
EASEMENT, UTILITY— A right-of-way granted for the limited use of land for public or
quasi-public purposes.
ENGINEER— A professional engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
ENGINEERING SPECIFICATIONS— The engineering specifications of California Borough
regulating the installation of any required improvement or for any such facility installed by
any owner, subject to public use.
EROSION— The removal of surface materials by the action of natural elements.
EXCAVATION— Any act where earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other similar material is
dug into, cut, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated or bulldozed. It shall include
the conditions resulting therefrom.
FARM — Land used for agricultural use as defined in Chapter 205, Zoning, of the Code of
the Borough of California.
FILL— Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, or rock is placed, pushed, dumped, pulled,
transported, or moved to a new location above the natural surface of the ground or on top of
the stripped surface. It shall include the conditions resulting therefrom. The difference in
§ 187-11 CALIFORNIA CODE § 187-11
187:10 02 - 15 - 2006
elevation between a point on the original ground and a designated point of higher elevation of
the final grade. The material used to make fill.
FLOODPLAIN— The area along a natural watercourse which may from time to time be
overflowed by water therefrom.
IMPROVEMENTS— See "private improvements" and "public improvements."
LAND DEVELOPMENT —
A. Any of the following activities:
(1) The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of
land for any purpose involving:
(a) A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings, whether
proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on a lot
or lots regardless of the number of occupants or tenure; or
(b) The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively,
between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means
of, or for the purpose of, streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums,
building groups or other features.
(2) A subdivision of land.
B. Land development shall not include:
(1) The addition of an accessory farm building on a lot or lots subordinate to an
existing principal farm building; or
(2) The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the confines of an
enterprise which would be considered an amusement park. For the purposes of the
definition, an "amusement park" is defined as a tract or area used principally as a
location for permanent amusement structures or rides. This exclusion shall not
apply to newly acquired acreage by an amusement park until initial plans for the
expanded area have been approved by proper authorities.
LAND DEVELOPMENT, MINOR— A land development which is a minor subdivision or a
land development which is an addition to an existing building or which is an accessory
building where the addition or accessory building will occupy less than 500 square feet of
land area.
LANDOWNER— The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land including the holder of an
option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option or contract is subject to any
condition), a lessee if he is authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner,
or other person having a proprietary interest in land.
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT — A landscape architect registered by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 187-11 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 187-11
187:11 02 - 15 - 2006
LOT— A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or otherwise as
permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a unit.
LOT AREA— The area contained within the property lines of a lot as shown on a
subdivision plan excluding space within any street, but including the area of any easement.
LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE— A lot extending between, and having frontage on, an
arterial street and a minor street, and with vehicular access solely from the latter.
LOT, THROUGH OR DOUBLE FRONTAGE— A lot with front and rear street frontage.
MAJOR DRAINAGE— A term used in stormwater drainage that requires the use of a
twenty-five-year storm frequency when computing runoff calculations. For the purpose of this
chapter, it is considered a major area when a proposed highway crosses an existing defined
watercourse.
MINOR DRAINAGE— A term used in stormwater drainage that requires the use of a
ten-year storm frequency when computing runoff calculations. Minor drainage areas include
all basic runoff from highways, paved and uniformly grassed or developed areas.
MOBILE HOME— A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for permanent
occupancy, contained in one unit, or in two or more units designed to be joined into one
integral unit capable of again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site
complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent foundation.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved with the
necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of a
single mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has been so
designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile homes.
MUNICIPALITY— A city of the second class A or third class, borough, incorporated town,
township of the first or second class, county of the second class through eighth class, home
rule municipality, or any similar general purpose unit of government which shall be created
by the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD— A flood that, on the average, is likely to occur once
every 100 years (i.e., that has a one-percent chance of occurring each year, although the flood
may occur in any year).
PERSON— Any individual or group of individuals, partnership, corporation, unincorporated
association, estate, or other legal entity.
PLAN ADJUSTMENT — Adjustments to recorded plans as follows:
A. Survey corrections.
B. Shifts in lot lines between adjacent lots where no new lots are created and public rights
and access to a street, utility lines, storm sewer lines, and sanitary sewer lines are not
affected.
§ 187-11 CALIFORNIA CODE § 187-11
187:12 02 - 15 - 2006
6. Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
C. Shifts in easements and right-of-way locations due to minor field changes during
construction of required improvements.
D. Minor adjustments in location of buildings or other site improvements which comply
with all zoning and subdivision and land development requirements and the conditions of
the approval of a land development or conditional use approval or special exception
approval as previously approved.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of land, controlled by a
landowner, to be developed as a single entity for a number of dwelling units, or combination
of residential and nonresidential uses, the development plan for which does not correspond in
lot size, bulk, type of dwelling, or use, density, or intensity, lot coverage and required open
space to the regulations established in any one district created, from time to time, under the
provisions of a municipal zoning ordinance.
PLANNING COMMISSION— The California Borough Planning Commission.
PLAN, SKETCH— An informal plan, not necessarily to exact scale, indicating salient
existing features of a tract and its surroundings and the general layout of a proposed
subdivision.
PLAT— The map or plan of a subdivision or land development, whether preliminary or
final.
PRIVATE IMPROVEMENTS— All streets, sidewalks, walkways, streetlights, street signs,
gutters, curbs, sewers, waterlines, and other utilities or related facilities, but not including
driveways and parking areas, to be operated and maintained by a private entity.
PUBLIC GROUNDS— Includes:
A. Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and other public areas;
B. Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly owned or operated
facilities; and
C. Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
PUBLIC HEARING— A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the governing
body or planning agency, intended to inform and obtain public comment, prior to taking
action in accordance with the Municipalities Planning Code.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS— All streets, sidewalks, walkways, streetlights, street signs,
gutters, curbs, sewers, waterlines, and other utilities or facilities to be dedicated to or
maintained by a public agency, or any such existing facilities accepted by a public agency.
PUBLIC MEETING— A forum held pursuant to notice under the Sunshine Act, 65
Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq. (act of October 15, 1998, P.L. 729, No. 93). 6
PUBLIC NOTICE— Notice published in accordance with 53 P.S. § 10107, in a newspaper
of general circulation in the Borough. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing
§ 187-11 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 187-11
187:13 02 - 15 - 2006
and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication
shall not be more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than seven days
from the date of the hearing.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION— The one-hundred-year flood elevation plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
RENEWABLE ENERGY SOURCE— Any method, process or substance whose supply is
rejuvenated through natural processes and including, but not limited to, biomass conversion,
geothermal energy, solar and wind energy and hydroelectric energy and excluding those
sources of energy used in the fission and fusion processes.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, PRIVATE— The area dedicated to the use of a private street or other
private purposes for use of owners, residents or visitors of a planned development or lot.
RIGHT-OF WAY, PUBLIC— The area dedicated to and accepted by the Borough, county,
or Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for a public street and other public purposes.
RUNOFF— The surface water discharge or rate of discharge of a given watershed after a
fall of rain or snow that does not enter the soil but runs off the surface of the land.
SECURITY, MAINTENANCE— Method for developer to secure structural integrity and
functioning of public improvements in accordance with the design and specifications depicted
on the final plan approved by the Borough, for a period of time following the date of
acceptance by the Council of dedication of such improvements. The maintenance security
shall be in the form of a performance bond, federal or commonwealth chartered lending
institution irrevocable letter of credit and restrictive or escrow accounts in such lending
institutions or such other security as may be acceptable to the Council. Such financial security
shall be posted with a bonding company or federal or commonwealth chartered lending
institution chosen by the party posting the financial security, provided said bonding company
or lending institution is authorized to conduct such business within the commonwealth.
SECURITY, PERFORMANCE— Method for developer to guarantee proper installation of
public and private improvements specified in the final application; the performance security
shall be in the form of a performance bond, federal or commonwealth chartered lending
institution irrevocable letter of credit and restrictive or escrow accounts in such lending
institutions or such other security as may be acceptable to the Council. Such financial security
shall be posted with a bonding company or federal or commonwealth chartered lending
institution chosen by the party posting the financial security, provided said bonding company
or lending institution is authorized to conduct such business within the commonwealth.
SEDIMENTATION— The process by which mineral or organic matter is accumulated or
deposited by moving wind, water or gravity. Once this matter is deposited (or remains
suspended in water), it is usually referred to as "sediment."
SIGHT DISTANCE— The length of roadway visible to the driver of a passenger vehicle at
any given point on the roadway when the view is unobstructed by traffic.
SLOPE— The face of an embankment or cut section; any ground whose surface makes an
angle with the plane of the horizon. Slopes are usually expressed in a percentage based upon
vertical distance in feet per 100 feet of horizontal distance.
§ 187-11 CALIFORNIA CODE § 187-11
187:14 02 - 15 - 2006
SOIL STABILIZATION— Chemical or structural treatment designed to increase or maintain
the stability of a mass of soil or otherwise to improve the engineering properties.
STREET — Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, parkway, lane,
viaduct and any other ways used or intended to be used by vehicular traffic or pedestrians
whether public or private.
STREET, MAJOR—
A. ARTERIAL STREET— A major street or highway with fast or heavy volumes of
considerable continuity and used primarily as a traffic artery for intercommunications
among large areas.
B. COLLECTOR STREET—A major street or highway which carries traffic from minor
streets to arterial streets including the principal entrance streets of a residential
development.
C. LOCAL STREET—A street used primarily for access to abutting properties.
D. LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAY— A major street or highway which carries large
volumes of traffic at comparatively high speed with access at designated points and not
from abutting properties.
STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS— A minor street which is parallel and adjacent to limited
access highways or arterial streets and which provides access to abutting properties and
protection from through traffic.
STREET, PRIVATE— A street, including the entire private right-of-way, which is intended
for private use and is a private improvement.
STREET, PUBLIC— A street, including the entire public right-of-way, which has been
dedicated or devoted to public use by legal mapping, use or other lawful means.
STRUCTURE— Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary location on or in
land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
SUBDIVISION— The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by any means
into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land including changes in existing
lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development;
provided, however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels
of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of access or any residential
dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR— A subdivision of one existing lot into three lots or less or a
resubdivision which changes lot lines of legally created lots involving the creation of three
additional new lots or less, whether done at one time or cumulatively, which does not involve
any new street or easement of access or the extension or creation of any public or private
improvements, which does not adversely affect the development of the remainder of the parcel
or adjoining property, and which is not in conflict with any provisions of this chapter or
Chapter 205, Zoning, of the Code of the Borough.
§ 187-11 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 187-13
187:15 02 - 15 - 2006
7. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10509.
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED— Where, in the judgment of the Municipal Engineer, at
least 90% (based on the cost of the required improvements for which financial security was
posted pursuant to Section 509 of the Municipalities Planning Code7 ) of those improvements
required as a condition for final approval have been completed in accordance with the
approved plan, so that the project will be able to be used, occupied or operated for its
intended use.
SURFACE DRAINAGE PLAN— A plan showing all present and proposed grades and
facilities for storm drainage.
SURVEYOR— A surveyor registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
SWALE— A low-lying stretch of land characterized as a depression used to carry surface
water runoff.
TOPSOIL— Surface soils and subsurface soils which presumably are fertile soil and soil
material, ordinarily rich in organic matter or humus debris. Topsoil is usually found in the
uppermost soil layer called the A Horizon.
UNDEVELOPED LAND— Any lot, tract or parcel of land which has not been graded or in
any other manner prepared for the construction of a building.
WATERCOURSE— A stream of water, river, brook, creek, or channel or ditch for water
whether natural or man-made.
ARTICLE IV
Administrative Procedures
§ 187-12. Purpose.
The purpose of this Article IV is to set forth the procedures for submission and processing of
applications for preliminary and final subdivision and land development and land development
approval, for modifications from requirements, for recording of final subdivision and land
development plans, for inspection of construction of required improvements with respect to
subdivisions and land developments, for release of performance security, for acceptance of
public improvements, and for completing required improvements where the developer is in
default.
§ 187-13. Simultaneous processing of applications.
Where possible, without creating an undue administrative burden on the Borough’s staff or
decision-making bodies, simultaneous processing of applications for different approvals which
may be required for the same development project shall be permitted in order to make the
review process as short as possible for a development project. However, the differing timing
procedures and sequencing requirements for certain types of applications may prevent
simultaneous reviews.
§ 187-14 CALIFORNIA CODE § 187-15
187:16 02 - 15 - 2006
§ 187-14. Preapplication conference.
A. Purpose. The purpose of preapplication conferences with the Borough administrative staff
is to provide the developer with guidance before entering into binding commitments or
incurring substantial expense in application preparation. At the preapplication conference,
waivers to application content requirements may be granted as provided in this section.
B. Administrative staff conference. Before submission of an application for preliminary or
final subdivision and land development approval, it is recommended that the applicant
meet with the Zoning Officer, the Borough Engineer, the Borough Solicitor, and other
Borough administrative officials to determine the classification, feasibility, suitability,
timing, and Borough requirements for the proposed development. The Zoning Officer
may grant requests for waivers to application content requirements only for applications
classified as minor subdivisions, minor land developments and plan adjustments.
C. Planning Commission conference. If the proposed development is classified as one which
must be reviewed by the Planning Commission, then a preapplication conference with the
Planning Commission is also recommended. The applicant must hold an administrative
staff preapplication conference before having a Planning Commission conference. After
the administrative staff preapplication conference and before submitting any application
for preliminary or final approval, the applicant may request a preapplication conference
by submitting a written request not later than five working days before the next
scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission.
D. Waivers to application content requirements. At or following the preapplication
conference the Zoning Officer or the Borough Solicitor may grant waivers to application
content requirements only in order to tailor the requirements to the information necessary
to review a particular application. If a preapplication conference is not held, the applicant
must follow the provisions of Article IV, § 187-20, to request a modification to
application content requirements. Waivers to application content requirements shall be
granted in writing and shall expire automatically if an application is not filed within 180
days of the date when the waiver was issued.
E. Consultation with municipal authority. Prior to the preparation of any plans, it is
suggested that prospective developers consult with the local water and sewage providers
concerning water service and sewage disposal facilities.
F. Consultation with County Conversation District. Prospective developers should consult
the County Conservation District representative concerning erosion and sediment control
and the effect of geologic conditions on the proposed development. At the same time a
determination should be made as to whether or not any flood hazards either exist or will
be created as a result of the subdivision or land development.
§ 187-15. Official filing date.
The official filing date for a minor subdivision, minor land development, or plan adjustment
application shall be the date that a complete submittal including payment of the applicable
filing fee is filed. The official filing date for all other subdivisions and land developments
shall be the date of the regular Planning Commission meeting next following the date the
§ 187-15 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 187-16
187:17 02 - 15 - 2006
complete submittal including payment of the applicable filing fee is filed, provided that should
the said next regular meeting occur more than 30 days following the filing of the application,
the official filing date shall be the 30th day following the day the complete application is
filed.
§ 187-16. Preliminary approval procedures.
A. Required. An application for preliminary approval of a subdivision and land development
is required for all subdivisions and land developments except those classified as plan
adjustments and except those applications exempted under the provisions of Article IV,
§ 187-14D.
B. Planning Commission authority. The Borough Planning Commission shall review and act
on all applications for approval of preliminary subdivision and land development plans
with the exception of those classified as minor subdivisions and minor developments,
which shall be reviewed by the Zoning Officer and acted on by the Council. Plan
adjustments are exempt from any preliminary review.
C. Application submission. All applications for preliminary approval of a subdivision or
land development shall be submitted to the Borough on any business day during regular
hours.
D. Determination of acceptance/rejection as incomplete. Within seven working days after a
preliminary plan application is submitted, the Zoning Officer shall certify the application
as substantially complete and accepted, thereby establishing the official filing date, or
incomplete and rejected. Within said time, the Zoning Officer shall notify the applicant
in writing that the application is essentially complete and accepted including the official
filing date and date of review by the Planning Commission, if applicable, or that the
application is incomplete and rejected, stating the deficiencies in the application and
returning the filing fee. The developer may reapply, submitting the fee and missing
material at any time.
E. Deemed acceptance. Failure of the Zoning Officer to make a determination of
acceptance/rejection shall result in deemed acceptance of the application for processing.
However, deemed acceptance for processing shall not constitute a waiver of any
deficiencies in the application or approval of the application.
F. Distribution. The Zoning Officer shall distribute one copy of the preliminary plan
application with the official filing date:
(1) To each of the following:
(a) Official Borough file;
(b) Borough Engineer;
(c) Borough Solicitor.
(2) To each of the following, as appropriate:
§ 187-16 CALIFORNIA CODE § 187-16
187:18 02 - 15 - 2006
(a) Members of the Planning Commission.
(b) When an application may have special significant impacts, applications may
be distributed to any other appropriate agency or individual, e.g., Federal
Emergency Management Agency, Washington County Conservation District.
G. County Planning Commission review. Applications for subdivision and land development
shall not be approved by the Planning Commission or Council until the County Planning
Commission report is received or until the expiration of 30 days from the date the
application was forwarded to the County Planning Commission.
H. Plan review by planning agency. The Planning Commission shall review all applications
for approval of preliminary subdivision and land development plans, with the exception
of those classified as minor subdivisions, minor land developments, or plan adjustments,
which shall be reviewed by the Zoning Officer. The Planning Commission shall review
the application at a public meeting. In its review, the Planning Commission shall
consider the report of the Borough and all review agencies. The Zoning Officer may
make a recommendation to the Planning Commission or Council, as applicable, for
approval, approval subject to conditions, or disapproval of the application setting forth
the reasons for the recommendations.
I. Decision.
(1) Authority. The Planning Commission shall make a recommendation to the Council
on all applications for preliminary approval of a subdivision or land development
except those classified as minor subdivisions, minor land developments, or plan
adjustments, which shall be acted on by the Council.
(2) Decision deadline. Not later than 90 days after the official filing date, the Council
shall render a decision on the application for approval of a preliminary subdivision
or land development plan. All decisions shall be made at a public meeting.
(3) Extension of deadline. The applicant may agree in writing to an extension of time
or change in the prescribed manner of presentation of communication of the
decision.
(4) Deemed approval. Failure to render a decision and communicate it within the
prescribed period and in the required manner, or within any extension of time or in
accordance with any change in required manner of communication, shall be
deemed an approval of the application as presented.
(5) Actions. The Council shall take one of the following actions:
(a) Approve the application; or
(b) Approve the application with conditions subject to the applicant's consent; or
(c) Disapprove the application on the basis that it does not comply with specific
standards and regulation set forth in this chapter.
§ 187-16 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 187-17
187:19 02 - 15 - 2006
8. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508(4).
J. General standards for review of preliminary plans. The Council shall approve the
preliminary plan if the preliminary plan complies with the standards and regulations set
forth in this chapter.
K. Notification of decision. The Zoning Officer shall deliver written notice of the decision
to the applicant personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, with verified
mailing receipt, within 15 days of the decision. If the decision is approval with
conditions or disapproval, the written notification shall specify all defects in the
application and shall cite with section numbers the provisions of this chapter that have
not been satisfied. If the approval is subject to conditions, the notice of the decision shall
include an acceptance block for the applicant to sign, date, and return signifying
acceptance of the conditions of approval.
L. Conditional approval acceptance/rejection. The Council may approve an application for
preliminary approval subject to conditions accepted by the applicant. Failure of the
applicant to deliver to the Borough written acceptance of the conditions of approval
within 15 days of receipt of the notification of decision shall result in automatic
rescission of such approval and automatic conversion of the decision to denial as of the
date of the original approval subject to conditions.
M. Effect of approval. After preliminary approval of a subdivision and land development
plan, the plan shall be entitled to the protections afforded by Section 508(4) of the
MPC8 and Article II, § 187-6, of this chapter.
§ 187-17. Final approval procedure.
A. Required. An application for final approval of a subdivision and land development is
required for all subdivisions and land developments.
B. Application submission and types.
(1) Filing date. Applications for final approval of a subdivision and land development
shall be submitted to the Borough on any business day during regular business
hours.
(2) Approval for construction of required improvements with extension of time for
delayed approval for recording following satisfactory completion of required
improvements.
C. Determination of acceptance/rejection as incomplete. Within five working days after a
final plan application is submitted, the Zoning Officer shall certify the application as
substantially complete and accepted, thereby establishing the official filing date, or
incomplete and rejected. Within said time, the Zoning Officer shall notify the applicant
in writing that the application is essentially complete and accepted including the official
filing date and date of review by the Planning Commission or that the application is
incomplete and rejected, stating the deficiencies in the application and returning the filing
fee. The developer may reapply, submitting the fee and missing material at any time.
§ 187-17 CALIFORNIA CODE § 187-17
187:20 02 - 15 - 2006
D. Deemed acceptance. Failure of the Zoning Officer to make a determination of
acceptance/rejection shall result in deemed acceptance of the application for processing.
However, deemed acceptance for processing shall not constitute a waiver of any
deficiencies in the application or approval of the application.
E. Distribution. The Zoning Officer shall distribute one copy of the final plan application
with any required fee and with the official filing date:
(1) To each of the following:
(a) Official Department file.
(b) Borough Engineer.
(c) Borough Solicitor.
(2) To each of the following as appropriate:
(a) Members of the Planning Commission.
(b) When an application may have special or significant impacts, applications
may be distributed to any other appropriate agency or individual, e.g.,
Federal Emergency Management Agency, Washington County Conversation
District.
F. County Planning Commission review. Applications for subdivision and land development
shall not be approved by the Council until the County Planning Commission report is
received or until the expiration of 30 days from the date the application was forwarded to
the County Planning Commission.
G. Plan review by planning agency. The Planning Commission shall review all applications
for approval of final subdivision and land development plans with the exception of those
classified as minor subdivisions, minor land developments, or plan adjustments which
shall be reviewed by the Zoning Officer. The Planning Commission shall review the
application at a public meeting. In its review, the Planning Commission shall consider
the report of the Borough Engineer and all review agencies. The Planning Commission
shall make a written recommendation to the Council for approval, approval subject to
conditions, or disapproval of the application. The Planning Commission shall set forth
the reasons for its recommendations.
H. Decision.
(1) Authority. The Council shall act on all applications for final approval of a
subdivision and land development. The Council shall render a decision at a public
meeting.
(2) Revised plans. After the review of the application for final approval by the
planning agency, 11 copies of the application, which may be revised as
recommended by the Planning Commission, shall be submitted to the Zoning
Officer and shall be forwarded to the Council. The Council shall consider the final
plan at its next regular meeting, provided the copies of the plan are submitted to
the Zoning Officer no later than seven days before the meeting date. If the revised
§ 187-17 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 187-17
187:21 02 - 15 - 2006
plan has substantial revisions from the revisions recommended by the Planning
Commission, the Council may refer the revised plan to appropriate Planning
Commission for review and recommendation.
(3) Decision deadline. Not later than 90 days after the official filing date, the Council
shall render a decision on the application for approval of a final subdivision or
land development plan for recording or for construction with delayed approval for
recording.
(4) Extension of deadline. The applicant may agree in writing to an extension of time
or change in the prescribed manner of presentation of communication of the
decision.
(5) Deemed approval. Failure to render a decision and communicate it within the
prescribed period and in the required manner, or within any extension of time or in
accordance with any change in required manner of communication, shall be
deemed an approval of the application as presented.
(6) Actions on applications for approval for recording. The Council shall take one of
the following actions:
(a) Approve the application; or
(b) Approve the application with conditions subject to the applicant's consent; or
(c) Disapprove the application on the basis that it does not comply with specific
standards and regulations set forth in this chapter.
(7) Actions on applications for approval for construction of required improvements
with delayed recording pending satisfactory completion of required improvements.
(a) The Council shall take one of the following actions:
[1] Approve the application for construction with approval for recording
delayed for one year, or any extension granted by the Council pending
the satisfactory completion of required improvements and compliance
with requirements for approval of improvements; or
[2] Approve the application for construction as in Subsection H(7)(a)[1],
with conditions subject to the applicant's consent; or
[3] Disapprove the application on the basis that it does not comply with
specific standards and regulations set forth in this chapter.
(b) Following completion of all procedures for approval of required
improvements in accordance with Article IV, § 187-22, the applicant shall
submit a written request to the Department for final approval for recording.
The request shall be considered by the Council at the next regular meeting of
the Council, provided that the request is received by the Zoning Officer no
later than seven days before the meeting date. The Council shall take one of
the following actions:
§ 187-17 CALIFORNIA CODE § 187-17
187:22 02 - 15 - 2006
9. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508(4).
[1] Approve the plan for recording;
[2] Approve the plan for recording with conditions subject to the applicant’s
consent; or
[3] Disapprove the plan for recording on the basis that it does not comply
with specific standards of this chapter.
I. General standards for review of final plans. The Council shall approve the final plan if
the final plan complies with the standards and regulations set forth in this chapter and the
preliminary plan approval. Approval for recording shall be granted only when the public
and private improvements have been satisfactorily completed or when a performance
security shall be provided before release of the plan for recording.
J. Notification of decision. The Zoning Officer shall deliver written notice of the decision
to the applicant personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, with verified
mailing receipt, within 15 days of the decision. If the decision is approval with
conditions or disapproval, the written notification shall specify all defects in the
application and shall cite with section numbers the provisions of this chapter that have
not been satisfied. If the approval is subject to conditions, the notice of the decision shall
include an acceptance block for the applicant to sign, date, and return signifying
acceptance of the conditions of approval.
K. Conditional approval acceptance/rejection. The Council may approve an application for
final approval subject to conditions accepted by the applicant. Failure of the applicant to
deliver to the Borough written acceptance of the conditions of approval within 15 days of
receipt of the notification of decision shall result in automatic rescission of such approval
and automatic conversion of the decision to denial as of the date of the original approval
subject to conditions.
L. Compliance with conditions of approval/municipal signatures. The applicant shall comply
with all conditions of approval, including construction of required improvements or
providing a performance security to guarantee satisfactory construction of required
improvements, before the proper Borough officials execute the certifications on the final
plan. When the conditions of the final approval have been met, the proper officers of the
Borough shall sign the final plan for recording and shall affix the Borough Seal.
M. Effect of approval. Final approval of a subdivision and land development plan shall be
effective for 90 days from the date of the Council’s approval unless the Council officially
renews or extends the approval date. During this period, the applicant shall meet all
conditions of approval, if any, including construction of required improvements or
providing a performance security, and recording the plan as specified in this chapter.
After the plan is recorded, the plan shall be entitled to the protections afforded by
Section 508(4) of the MPC9 and Article II, § 187-6, of this chapter.
§ 187-18 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 187-20
187:23 02 - 15 - 2006
§ 187-18. Expedited procedures for minor subdivisions, minor land developments, and
plan adjustments.
A. Minor subdivisions and land developments. Minor subdivisions and minor land
developments shall be subject to review by the Zoning Officer, the Borough Solicitor and
the Borough Engineer but shall be exempt from any review by the Planning Commission.
Some application requirements may be waived by the Zoning Officer upon
recommendation by the Borough Engineer in accordance with Article IV, § 187-14D.
Minor subdivisions and minor land developments shall be acted on by the Council.
Applications for preliminary and final approval may be combined.
B. Plan adjustments. Plan adjustments shall be reviewed by the Zoning Officer, Borough
Solicitor and the Borough Engineer and shall be exempt from Planning Commission
review. They shall be exempt from preliminary plan approval and shall have minimal
application content requirements. Plan adjustments shall be acted on by the Council.
§ 187-19. Phased development.
A. Permitted. The applicant may construct a subdivision or land development in separate
phases over time in accordance with the standards for phased development set forth in
Article VI, § 187-40.
B. Schedules for final plan submissions and modifications thereto. Where the applicant
anticipates that he will not submit final plan applications for one or more phases of the
overall development as depicted on the preliminary plan within five years of the date of
preliminary plan approval, he shall file with his preliminary plan a schedule delineating
all proposed phases as well as intended dates for filing final plan applications for each
phase. The applicant shall update such schedules annually on or before the anniversary of
the preliminary plan approval until such time as the Council has granted final plan
approval for the final phase of the overall development as depicted on the preliminary
plan. Any modification in the aforesaid schedule shall be subject to the approval of the
Council in its sole discretion.
C. Modification of phasing. Any phase that does not comply with the preliminary plan
approved by the Council will require complete resubmission of the preliminary plan
application.
§ 187-20. Modifications, waivers, and flexibility provisions.
A. Authority to grant modifications. The Council may grant modifications to the
requirements set forth in Article VI after review by the Planning Commission and the
Borough Engineer if the following criteria are met:
(1) The literal enforcement will exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions
pertaining to the land in question; and
(2) Such modification will not be contrary to the public interest; and
(3) The purpose and intent of the chapter is observed;
§ 187-20 CALIFORNIA CODE § 187-22
187:24 02 - 15 - 2006
(4) The modification is the minimum modification necessary to afford relief from
hardship; or
(5) An alternative standard can be demonstrated to provide equal or better results.
B. Authority to impose conditions. When granting modifications, the Council may impose
conditions to ensure that the public interest is preserved and the intent of the chapter is
observed.
C. Written requests for modifications. All requests for modifications shall be in writing and
shall be submitted with and be a part of an application for preliminary plan approval or
final plan approval, where preliminary plan approval is not required.
D. Record of action. The Council shall enter into the minutes of the meeting all actions on
all requests for modifications setting forth the reasons which justified the modifications
granted.
§ 187-21. Recording of final plan.
A. Time for recording. Within 90 days after the date of the final approval for recording, the
developer shall record the final plan in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of the county.
Upon written request by the developer, the approving body may grant an extension of the
approval date, which extension shall be reflected on the final plan.
B. Effect of final plan recording on Official Map. After a final plan has been approved and
recorded as provided in this chapter, all public streets and public grounds on such plan
shall be and become a part of the Official Map of the Borough, if any, without public
hearing.
C. Effect on acceptance of public improvements. Until final acceptance by ordinance, no
property or other public improvements shown on the recorded final plan shall be deemed
a part of the public improvements of the Borough, but the same shall be deemed to be
private until and unless the same have been completed in accordance with this chapter
and accepted in accordance with law.
§ 187-22. Inspection, completion and approval of improvements; release of performance
security.
A. Inspections. The Borough shall make the inspections hereinafter required and shall
promptly either approve that portion of the work which has been completed or notify
developer wherein the same fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter. Site
development plans, approved by the Borough, shall be maintained at the site during the
progress of the site development until work has been approved. The developer shall
notify the Borough in order to obtain inspection in accordance with the following
schedule, and such notification shall be made by the developer at least 48 hours before
the inspection is to be made:
§ 187-22 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 187-22
187:25 02 - 15 - 2006
(1) Initial inspection: when work is about to be commenced.
(2) Rough grading: when all rough grading has been completed.
(3) Drainage facilities: when drainage facilities are being installed and before such
facilities are backfilled.
(4) Sanitary facilities: when sanitary facilities are being installed and before and
during backfilling such facilities in critical areas.
(5) Special structures: when excavations are completed for retaining and crib walls and
when reinforcing steel is in place and before concrete is poured.
(6) Roadways: when roadways and parking areas are rough graded and when
embankments are being constructed, and before final paving.
(7) Embankments: when large embankments of fill are being constructed.
(8) Additional inspections: when, in the opinion of the Borough, other inspections are
necessary.
(9) Final inspection: when all work, including the installation of all drainage,
landscaping, and other structures, has been completed.
B. Completion of required improvements; time requirement. Within two years of the final
plat approval, the developer shall satisfactorily install and request approval of all required
improvements in accordance with the approved final plan. Upon receipt of a written
request for an extension of time to complete required improvements, including the reason
for the request, the Council may grant an extension of time for the completion of
required improvements.
C. Notification of completion by developer. When the developer has completed all of the
required improvements, the developer shall notify the Council, in writing, by certified or
registered mail, of the completion of the required improvements and shall send a copy
thereof to the Borough Engineer(s). The developer shall also submit to the Zoning
Officer one Mylar and four prints of the plans and profiles of the improvements certified
to be as-built by the designing engineer. Datum shall tie into the State Plane Coordinate
System if possible.
D. Inspection and report by the Borough Engineer(s). The Council shall, within 10 days
after receipt of such notice, direct and authorize the Borough Engineer(s) to inspect all of
the required improvements. The Borough Engineer(s) shall file a written report with the
Council and shall promptly mail a copy of the same to the developer by certified or
registered mail. The report shall be made and mailed within 30 days after receipt by the
Borough Engineer(s) of the aforesaid authorization from the Borough Council. Said
report shall be detailed and shall indicate approval or rejection of the required
improvements, either in whole or in part. If the Borough Engineer(s) reject any of the
required improvements, said report shall contain a statement of reasons for such
nonapproval or rejection.
§ 187-22 CALIFORNIA CODE § 187-23
187:26 02 - 15 - 2006
E. Borough's notification to developer. The Council shall notify the developer, within 15
days of receipt of the Borough Engineer(s)' report, in writing, by certified or registered
mail, the action of the Borough with relation thereto.
F. Completion of rejected required improvements. If any portion of the required
improvements shall not be approved or shall be rejected by the Borough, the developer
shall proceed to complete the same and, upon completion, the same procedure of
notification, as outlined herein, shall be followed.
G. No limitation of developer's rights. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to be in
limitation of the developer's right to contest or question, by legal proceedings or
otherwise, any determination of the Borough or the Borough Engineer(s).
H. Reimbursement for expense of inspections. The developer shall reimburse the Borough
for the reasonable and necessary expense incurred for the inspection of the required
improvements. See Article II, § 187-7.
I. Partial release of performance security. As the work of installing the required
improvements proceeds, the developer may request the Borough to release or authorize
the release of such portions of the performance security fairly representing the amount of
work completed. The same procedure shall be followed for partial release of performance
security as for a final release of performance security except that correspondence may be
by regular mail and the action on the request shall be acted on within 45 days of receipt
of the request. The Borough may, prior to final release at the time of completion and
certification by the Borough Engineer(s), require retention of 10% of the estimated cost
of the required improvements.
§ 187-23. Acceptance of public improvements.
A. Request for acceptance. Within 30 days of receipt of the Borough’s notification of
approval of the required improvements and not less than 10 days before the next regular
meeting of the Council, at which action is requested, the developer shall request the
Council in writing to accept the dedication of public improvements and post a
maintenance security.
B. Maintenance security. The maintenance security shall be in a form acceptable to the
Council and for a term of 18 months from the date of acceptance of dedication. The
amount of maintenance security shall be 15% of the actual cost of the installation of such
public improvements.
C. Acceptance by the Council. If the request for acceptance of public improvements and
maintenance security as specified in this section are received by the Council more than
10 days before the next regular meeting of the Council, the Council may at its next
regular meeting enact an ordinance accepting the public improvements as part of the
Borough’s public facilities.
§ 187-24 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 187-25
187:27 02 - 15 - 2006
§ 187-24. Remedies to effect completion of required improvements.
In the event that any improvements which may be required have not been installed as
provided in this chapter or in accord with the approved final plan, the Borough may enforce
any corporate bond or other security by appropriate legal and equitable remedies. If proceeds
of such bond or other security are insufficient to pay the cost of installing or making repairs
or corrections to all the improvements covered by such security, the Council may, at its
option, install part of such improvements in all or part of the subdivision or land development
and may institute appropriate legal or equitable action to recover the moneys necessary to
complete the remainder of the improvements. All of the proceeds, whether resulting from the
security or from any legal or equitable action brought against the developer, or both, shall be
used solely for the installation of the improvements covered by such security, and not for any
other municipal purposes.
ARTICLE V
Application Content
§ 187-25. Preapplication conference guidelines.
In order to obtain the best guidance from the Borough staff and Planning Commission at a
preapplication conference, it is recommended that the applicant provide the following:
A. General information. General information describing or outlining existing covenants, land
characteristics, community facilities, and utilities, and information describing the
proposed subdivision or land development such as the number of lots, typical lot width
and depth, parking areas, business areas, playgrounds, park areas, common open space,
other public areas, proposed protective covenants, proposed utilities and street
improvements.
B. Property map. A property map, drawn to a scale of one inch equals 100 feet or less and
showing the following:
(1) The proposed name of the subdivision or land development.
(2) Name of applicant.
(3) Name of the registered owner and evidence of ownership.
(4) North point, scale and date.
(5) Name of surveyor responsible for the map.
(6) Tract boundaries with bearings and distances.
(7) Approximate location of watercourses, tree masses, rock outcrops, existing
buildings, and actual location of sewers, inlets, water mains, easements, fire
hydrants, railroads, existing or confirmed streets and their established grades.
(8) Adjacent streets.
§ 187-25 CALIFORNIA CODE § 187-26
187:28 02 - 15 - 2006
C. Sketch plan. Sketch plan, drawn on a print of the property map, showing in a simple
sketch form the proposed layout of streets, lots, and other features, in relation to existing
conditions.
§ 187-26. Preliminary application requirements.
All preliminary plan applications shall include the following, plus any additional copies as
required by the Zoning Officer depending on optional distribution for review:
A. Application form. A minimum of 11 copies (five for a minor subdivision or minor land
development or for a plat adjustment) of the application form provided by the Zoning
Officer, completely and correctly executed.
B. Preliminary plan. A minimum of 11 copies (five for a minor subdivision or minor land
development or a plat adjustment) of the preliminary plan which shall meet the following
standards and show the following:
(1) The entire parcel of land being subdivided or developed.
(2) All sheet sizes shall be of standard size (18 inches by 24 inches, 24 inches by 36
inches, or multiples of these sizes) and at a scale no smaller than one inch equals
100 feet.
(3) Existing contours at vertical intervals of five feet or less as required by the
Borough.
(4) The layouts, names, and widths of right-of-way, cartway, and paving of proposed
streets, and easements.
(5) The layouts of lots showing approximate dimensions, lot numbers, and
approximate area of each lot.
(6) Parcels of land and acreage intended to be dedicated or reserved for schools, parks,
playgrounds, parking areas, common open space, or other public, semipublic or
community purposes.
(7) Borough site location map.
(8) Name of engineer, surveyor, or other qualified person responsible for preparing the
preliminary plan.
(9) Location of any designated floodplain district including information on the
one-hundred-year flood elevations.
(10) Development within floodplains.
(a) Where the subdivision and/or land development lies partially or completely
within any designated floodplain districts or where such activities border on
any designated floodplain district, the preliminary plan shall include the
following information:
§ 187-26 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 187-27
187:29 02 - 15 - 2006
[1] The location and elevation of proposed streets, utilities, and building
sites, fills, flood or erosion protection facilities;
[2] The one-hundred-year flood elevations; and
[3] Areas subject to special deed restrictions.
(b) All such maps shall show contours at intervals of two or five feet depending
upon the slope of the land and identify accurately the boundaries of the
designated floodplain districts.
C. Additional data and maps. The preliminary plan shall be accompanied by a minimum of
11 copies (five for minor subdivisions and minor land developments or plan adjustments)
of the following data and maps:
(1) A graphic showing grades of each street.
(2) Locations of existing and proposed utilities.
(3) A phasing schedule for filing applications for final approval of plans proposed to
be developed in phases.
D. Request for and explanation of modifications and waivers. All design standards shall
conform to the requirements contained herein or 11 copies (five of a minor subdivision
or minor land development or plat adjustment) of a request for and explanation of
modifications and waivers shall be submitted.
E. Fees. Except as stated herein, all fees shall be submitted when the application is
submitted or the application will be considered incomplete.
§ 187-27. Final application requirements.
All final plan applications shall include the following, plus any additional copies as required
by the Zoning Officer depending on optional distribution for review:
A. Application form. A minimum of 11 copies (five for a minor subdivision or minor land
development or for a plat adjustment) of the application form provided by the Zoning
Officer, completely and correctly executed. The applicant shall indicate on the form the
type of application.
B. Final plan for recording. A minimum of one original drawn on reproducible Mylar or
other reproducible material of equal quality and 11 copies (five for a minor subdivision
or minor land development or for a plat adjustment) of a final plan for recording which
shall meet the following standards and show the following information:
(1) The plan shall be drawn at a scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet on
sheets of 18 inches by 24 inches, 24 inches by 36 inches or multiples of these
sizes. If the plan is on more than one sheet, a map of the entire subdivision or land
development showing sheet match lines shall be provided on the plan.
§ 187-27 CALIFORNIA CODE § 187-27
187:30 02 - 15 - 2006
10. Editor’s Note: Appendixes 1 and 2, which originally accompanied this ordinance, are on file in the Borough offices.
(2) Primary control points, approved by the Borough Engineer, or description and
"ties" to such control points, to which all dimensions, angles, bearings, and similar
data on the plat shall be referred.
(3) Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines or streets, easements, and other
right-of-way, and property lines of residential lots and other sites with accurate
dimensions, bearings, or deflection angles, and radii, arcs, and central angles of all
curves.
(4) Names and right-of-way width of each street or other right-of-way.
(5) Location, dimensions, and purpose of easements.
(6) Number to identify each lot and/or site.
(7) Area of lot to nearest hundredth of an acre.
(8) Purpose for which sites other than residential lots are dedicated or reserved.
(9) Building setback lines on all lots and other sites.
(10) Locations and description of survey monuments. All permanent reference
monuments shown on the plat.
(11) Owners of record of adjoining unplatted land.
(12) Reference to record subdivision plats of adjoining platted land by record name,
date and number.
(13) Certification by a registered surveyor, licensed in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, certifying to accuracy of survey and plat.
(14) Borough site location on the recorded plan.
(15) Certification of title showing that applicant is the owner of land, agent of the
landowner or tenant with permission of the landowner.
(16) Statement by owner dedicating streets, rights-of-way and any sites for public uses
which are to be dedicated. (See Appendix 1.10 )
(17) Proposed protective covenants running with the land, if any.
(18) Proposed contours at vertical intervals of five feet, or less as required by the
Planning Commission.
(19) The location and types of erosion and sedimentation control measures.
(20) Certificates as shown in Appendix 1 shall be inscribed on the plan, as quoted and
shall be properly signed and attested when the plan is submitted to the Borough
Council.
§ 187-27 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 187-27
187:31 02 - 15 - 2006
(21) A plan for minimizing erosion and sediment as outlined in Article VI, § 187-33.
(22) The location and types of erosion and sedimentation control measures prepared.
C. Construction plan data. A minimum of 11 (five for minor subdivisions and land
developments or plan adjustments) copies of the following:
(1) Plans and profiles of streets showing grades.
(2) Cross sections of each street at critical stations (i.e., large cuts or fills, excessive
cross grades).
(3) Typical cross sections of streets showing the width of right-of-way, width of
cartway, locations and width of sidewalks, if required, and location and size of
utility mains.
(4) Construction details.
(5) Highway cross sections every 100 feet or as directed by the planning agency.
(6) Plans and profiles of proposed sanitary and storm sewers with grades and pipe
sizes indicated, location and size of stormwater impoundments and a plan of any
proposed water distribution system showing pipe sizes and location of valves and
fire hydrants.
(7) Such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements or dedications as may be required
by the Zoning Officer in the enforcement of this chapter.
D. Reviews and reports of other agencies. The applicant shall submit a minimum of 11
copies of the following as applicable (five for minor subdivisions and minor land
developments or plat adjustments):
(1) Stormwater management review. In addition to all other material required under
this section for a preliminary application and site plan review, the applicant shall
submit two copies of a drainage map (showing drainage outlets, watersheds,
watercourses, etc.), hydraulic calculations, and other analytical material as
necessary to prove compliance with "zero stormwater runoff" as described in
Article VI, § 187-36, of this chapter.
(2) Report of the Borough Sewage Enforcement Officer where septic tanks and/or
wells are to be utilized.
(3) Reports of all affected public utilities who shall be requested by the applicant to
make recommendations as to the suitability of the utility easements.
(4) Report of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation where the subdivision or
land development will front on existing or proposed state highways or has a
proposed street entering on such highway.
(5) Report of the County Planning Commission or proof of submission of the plan and
payment of the advisory review fee to the County Planning commission for review
and report.
§ 187-27 CALIFORNIA CODE § 187-29
187:32 02 - 15 - 2006
E. Fees. Except as stated herein, all fees shall be submitted when the application is
submitted or the application will be considered incomplete.
(1) Borough Engineers' fees based on the Borough Engineers' estimates of the time to
review plans and conduct all inspections and the Borough Engineers' approved
hourly rates for services.
(2) Map update reimbursement fee. The developer shall reimburse the Borough for the
reasonable and necessary expense incurred in updating the Borough maps. This fee
shall be payable to the Borough within 30 days of notification of the amount of
reimbursement due.
ARTICLE VI
Design Standards
§ 187-28. Land requirements.
Land subject to hazards to life, health or property such as quarry land, open ditches,
floodplains, etc., shall not be subdivided for residential purposes until such hazards have been
eliminated or unless adequate safeguards against such hazards are provided by the subdivision
plan.
§ 187-29. Streets.
A. General standards. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all
streets shall conform to the Official Map and to the Comprehensive Plan, if one has been
adopted, and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to
topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and in the appropriate
relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. Where not shown
on the Official Map or Comprehensive Plan, the arrangement and other design standards
of streets shall conform to the provisions found herein, exist
B. Classification of streets. To aid in the proper selection of design elements as they relate
to this chapter, streets have been classified according to their principal functions as
arterial, collector, and local streets.
(1) Arterial. Arterial streets consist of main traffic carriers that usually connect
communities, but do not directly serve residential areas [average daily traffic
(ADT) over 3,000].
(2) Collector streets. Collector streets connect local streets to arterial streets. Collectors
may penetrate neighborhood development and may carry some through traffic
(ADT 800 to 3,000).
(3) Local streets. These streets provide direct access to abutting land and connections
to higher classes of highway systems. Through traffic is usually discouraged by
design or regulations (ADT less than 800).
§ 187-29 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 187-29
187:33 02 - 15 - 2006
11. Editor’s Note: Appendixes 1 and 2, which originally accompanied this ordinance, are on file in the Borough offices.
C. Roadway right-of-way, cartway and shoulder widths. (See Appendix 2, Diagrams 1-4.11 )
Minimum street right-of-way and widths shall be as follows:
Minimum Street Right-of-way, Cartway, and Shoulder Widths
Street Type
Right-of-Way
Width
(feet)
Cartway
Width
(feet)
Shoulder Width
(feet)
Arterial streets As determined by the Borough Engineer
Collector streets 60 24 4 minimum;
8 desirable
Local streets 50 20 4 minimum;
8 desirable
Cul-de-sac 50 18 2 minimum;
6 desirable
Turnaround of cul-de-sac
(diameter)
100 80 4 minimum;
8 desirable
Marginal access streets 50 24
D. Horizontal alignment.
(1) Residential areas. Alignment in residential areas should fit closely the existing
topography so as to minimize the need for cuts or fills. There is advantage in
residential areas in purposely making the alignment of such nature as to discourage
high-speed through traffic. Caution should be taken in the design of the alignment
that the safety of the facility is not reduced.
(2) Commercial and industrial areas. Street alignment in commercial and industrial
areas should be commensurate with the topography but should be as direct as
possible.
(3) Curves. Street curves should be designed with as large a radius curve as feasible,
with the following radius controls:
(a) Local street: 150 feet minimum, 400 feet desirable.
(b) Collector street: 400 feet minimum, 700 feet desirable.
(4) Superelevated curves. Where curves are superelevated, lower values apply, but the
radius shall never be less than 115 feet for local streets and 275 feet for collector
streets.
E. Vertical alignment.
(1) Vertical curves shall be used at changes of grade and shall be designated in
relation to the extent of the grade change.
§ 187-29 CALIFORNIA CODE § 187-29
187:34 02 - 15 - 2006
(2) See Subsection F, Sight distance, of this section.
F. Sight distance. Sight distance must be provided with respect to both horizontal and
vertical alignment. Measured along the center line, 4.5 feet above grade, the sight
distance must be as follows:
(1) Minimum sight distance for collector street: 200 feet.
(2) Minimum sight distance for local street: 150 feet.
G. Intersections.
(1) Sight distance. Intersections should be designed with adequate corner sight
distance and the area kept free of obstacles. The corner sight distance for collector
streets should be a minimum of 300 feet and desirably should be 400 feet or more.
For local streets the minimum corner sight distance should be a minimum of 200
feet and desirably should be 300 feet or more. In order to maintain the minimum
sight distance, restrictions on height of embankment, locations of buildings and
screening fences may be necessary. Any landscaping in the clear sight triangle
should be low growing.
(2) Alignment. It is desirable that intersecting streets meet at approximately a
ninety-degree angle. The alignment design should be adjusted so as to avoid an
angle of intersection of less than 60°. Closely spaced offset intersections are
undesirable. Intersections involving junctions of more than two streets are
prohibited. Streets entering opposite sides of another street shall be laid out either
directly opposite one another or with a minimum offset of 150 feet between their
center lines.
(3) Intersection curve radii.
(a) At intersections of streets, the radius of the curb or edge of pavement shall
not be less than the following:
Intersection Type
Minimum Radius of Curb or
Edge of Pavement
(feet)
Collector street with collector street 35
Collector street with local street 25
Local street with local street 25
(b) Radius corners of diagonal cutoffs must be provided on the property lines
substantially concentric with or parallel to the chord of the curb radius
corners.
H. Street grades.
(1) The grades of streets shall not be less than the minimum or more than the
maximum requirements listed below:
§ 187-29 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 187-29
187:35 02 - 15 - 2006
(a) For arterial streets: minimum grade 1%; maximum grade 6%.
(b) For collector streets and minor streets: minimum grade 1%; maximum grade
12%.
(2) On minor streets, grades of 12% shall be not more than 400 feet in length.
(3) Vertical curves shall be used in changes of grade when the algebraic difference
exceeds 1%, and shall be designed for maximum visibility. Intersections shall be
approached on all sides by leveling areas. Where the grade exceeds 7%, such
leveling areas shall have a minimum length of 60 feet (measured from the
intersection of the center lines wherein no grade shall exceed a maximum of 4%.
I. Slope of banks along streets. The slope of banks along streets measured perpendicular to
the street center line shall be no steeper than the following:
(1) For fills: one foot of vertical measurement for two feet of horizontal measurement.
(2) For cuts: one foot of vertical measurement for 1.5 feet.
J. Partial and half-streets. The dedication of half-streets at the perimeter of a new
subdivision or land development is prohibited.
K. Names of streets. Names of new streets shall not duplicate or approximate existing or
platted street names, or approximate such names by the use of suffixes such as "land,"
"way," "drive," "court," or "avenue." In approving the names of streets, cognizance may
be given to existing or platted street names within the postal delivery district served by
the local post office. New streets shall bear the same name or number of any
continuation or alignment with an existing or platted street.
L. Street surfacing; pavements. Streets must be resurfaced to the grades and dimensions
drawn on the plans, profiles, and cross sections submitted by the applicant and approved
by the Borough Engineer. Before paving the street surface, the applicant must install the
required utilities and provide, where necessary, adequate stormwater drainage for the
street, acceptable to the Borough Engineer. The pavement base and wearing surface must
be constructed according to the following specifications:
(1) Arterial streets.
(a) Bituminous.
Specifications
Class 4 geotextile
6-inch aggregate subbase
7-inch bituminous concrete base course
2-inch bituminous binder course, ID-2
1-inch bituminous wearing course, ID-2
After development is complete and before final acceptance: 1-inch
bituminous wearing course ID-2
§ 187-29 CALIFORNIA CODE § 187-29
187:36 02 - 15 - 2006
(b) Concrete pavement.
Specifications
6-inch subbase
1/2-inch plain cement concrete
(2) Collector street.
(a) Bituminous.
Specifications
Class 4 geotextile
6-inch aggregate subbase
5-inch bituminous concrete base course
2-inch bituminous binder course, ID-2
1-inch bituminous wearing course, ID-2
After development is complete and before final acceptance: 1-inch
bituminous wearing course ID-2
(b) Concrete.
Specifications
6-inch aggregate subbase
8-inch plain cement concrete pavement
(3) Local street.
(a) Bituminous.
Specifications
Class 4 geotextile
6-inch aggregate subbase
4 1/2-inch bituminous concrete base course
2-inch bituminous binder course, ID-2
1-inch bituminous wearing course, ID-2
After development is complete and before final acceptance: 1-inch
bituminous wearing course, ID-2
(b) Concrete.
§ 187-29 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 187-31
187:37 02 - 15 - 2006
Specifications
6-inch aggregate subbase
5-inch plain cement concrete
M. Culs-de-sac. Culs-de-sac or dead-end streets, designed to be so permanently, shall not
exceed 600 feet in length, and shall be provided with a turnaround having minimum
dimensions for right-of-way and cartway widths as indicated in the preceding section. All
culs-de-sac shall have a minimum radius of 40 feet.
N. Private streets. Private streets not dedicated to public use shall not be approved, nor shall
a layout of lots abutting such streets be approved.
§ 187-30. Blocks.
A. Design. The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with due regard to:
(1) Provision of adequate sites for buildings of the type proposed.
(2) Topography.
(3) Requirements for safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian circulation.
B. Length. Blocks should have a maximum length of 1,600 feet and, so far as practicable, a
minimum length of 500 feet. In the design of blocks longer than 1,100 feet, special
consideration shall be given to the requirements of satisfactory fire protection.
C. Depth. Residential blocks shall be of sufficient depth to accommodate two tiers of lots,
except where reverse frontage lots bordering a major traffic street are used.
D. Pedestrian walks. Pedestrian interior walks may be required where necessary to assist
circulation or provide access to any area within the community.
§ 187-31. Lots.
The arrangement and other design standards of lots shall conform to the following
requirements:
A. Layout of lots. Every lot shall abut a public street which has been adopted into the
Borough road system or may be approved by the governing body under the terms and
conditions set forth herein. Side lot lines should be substantially at right angles or radial
to street lines.
B. Double frontage. Double frontage lots shall be avoided, except that, where desired along
limited access highways, reverse frontage lots may face on an interior street and back on
such thoroughfares. Interior lots having frontage on two streets shall be avoided except
where unusual conditions make it necessary.
C. Dimension and areas of lots. The dimensions and areas of lots shall conform to the
requirements of Chapter 205, Zoning.
§ 187-32 CALIFORNIA CODE § 187-34
187:38 02 - 15 - 2006
12. Editor’s Note: Now known as the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS).
§ 187-32. Easements.
A. Minimum width and location. The minimum width of easements shall be 20 feet for
underground public facilities, overhead public utility facilities, and drainage facilities,
and, wherever possible, easements for public utilities shall be centered on side or rear lot
lines. Additional width may be required by the Planning Commission depending on the
purpose and use of the easement.
B. Drainage easements. Where a subdivision or land development is traversed by a
watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream, there shall be provided a drainage
easement conforming substantially with the line of such watercourse, drainageway,
channel or stream, and such width as will be adequate to preserve the unimpeded flow of
natural drainage or for the purpose of widening, deepening, relocating, improving or
protecting such drainage facilities, or for the purpose of installing a stormwater sewer.
The width of such easement shall be a minimum of 20 feet. Additional width may be
required by the Planning Commission.
§ 187-33. Erosion and sedimentation control.
A. General standards.
(1) In the event that any developer shall intend to make changes in the contour of any
land proposed to be subdivided, developed, or changed in use by grading,
excavating, or the removal or destruction of the natural topsoil, trees, or other
vegetation covering thereon, the developer shall submit to the Planning
Commission for approval a plan for erosion and sedimentation controls, unless
there has been a determination by the Planning Commission that such plans are not
necessary.
(2) Erosion and sedimentation control measures used to control erosion and reduce
sedimentation shall as a minimum meet the standards and specifications of the
USDA Soil Conservation Service12 as adapted for use by the Washington County
Soil and Water Conservation District, copies of which are available from the
District.
(3) The developer, prior to final approval, shall have proof from the Washington
County Soil Conservation District and/or Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection that all necessary permits have been obtained.
§ 187-34. Monuments.
A. Locations.
(1) Monuments must be set on long tangents.
(2) Monuments must be within sight of each other.
§ 187-34 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 187-35
187:39 02 - 15 - 2006
13. Note: See Appendix 2, Diagrams 5-11, which are on file in the Borough offices.
14. Editor’s Note: Appendixes 1 and 2, which originally accompanied this ordinance, are on file in the Borough offices.
15. Editor’s Note: Now known as the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS).
(3) Locations must be coordinated with the Borough Engineer.
B. Material and size. Monuments shall be six inches square or four inches in diameter and
shall be 30 inches long. Monuments shall be made of concrete, stone, or a four-inch cast
iron or steel pipe filled with concrete.
§ 187-35. Storm drainage design. 13
A. When required. Whenever the evidence available to the Planning Commission indicates
that natural surface drainage is inadequate, the subdivider shall install storm sewers,
culverts, and related facilities, as necessary to:
(1) Permit the unimpeded flow of natural watercourses;
(2) Ensure the drainage of all low points along the line of streets;
(3) Intercept stormwater runoff along the streets at intervals reasonably related to the
extent and grade of the area drained;
(4) Provide positive drainage away from on-site sewage disposal facilities.
B. Drainage upon and on streets.
(1) Where practical, storm sewers shall be located in the right-of-way at the edge of
the cartway or curb, and shall be of sufficient size at all times to receive the water
from the street as well as any adjoining plan where said water must necessarily
drain through the plan.
(2) All storm sewers within any plan shall be constructed so that all the stormwater
and drainage in the plan shall be received and carried to the limits of the plan.
(3) All storm sewer pipe in public roadways shall have a minimum diameter of 15
inches. All inlets in public roadways shall have a maximum spacing of 250.0 feet.
C. Drainage construction details. (See Appendix 2, Diagram 7-11.14 ) All drainage
improvements shall meet the design specifications as herein contained.
D. Storm drainage runoff quantities. Storm drainage runoff quantities for land areas less
than 50 acres shall be computed using the Rational Method; for land areas greater than
50 acres, runoff shall be computed using the Hydrograph Method as described in "Urban
Hydrology for Small Watersheds," Technical Release No. 55, U.S. Soil Conservation
Service,15 January 1975. Design may all use Penn State University Method for drainage
areas of 1.5 square miles.
E. Permits. The developer must obtain a dams and encroachments permit from the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection for all active channel work.
§ 187-35 CALIFORNIA CODE § 187-37
187:40 02 - 15 - 2006
16. Note: See Appendix 2, Diagrams 1-3 and 11-15, which are on file in the Borough offices.
F. Storm frequencies. A twenty-five-year storm frequency will be used when calculating
runoff for a major drainage area. A ten-year storm frequency will be used when
calculating runoff for a minor drainage area (see definitions), to minor drainage areas
storm duration of 10 minutes.
§ 187-36. Storm drainage management.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to require land users to maintain existing surface
water flows and subsurface water recharge, in order:
(1) To prevent damage to persons and property due to increased flood levels and
increased channel erosion and sedimentation;
(2) To maintain the availability of surface and subsurface water supplies; and to
conserve fish, forests, streams, and other ecological, recreational, and scenic
resources.
B. Performance standards.
(1) Any landowner and any person engaged in the alteration or development of land
which may affect stormwater runoff characteristics shall implement such measures
as are responsible necessary to prevent injury to health, safety or other property.
Such measures shall include such actions as are required:
(a) To assure that the maximum rate of stormwater runoff is no greater after
development than prior to development activities; or
(b) To manage the quantity, velocity and direction of resulting stormwater runoff
in a manner which otherwise adequately protects health and property from
possible injury.
(2) Such water runoff should include any runoff from any portion of any existing
surface drainage system into which water from the proposed land use drains,
including but not limited to culverts, french drains, pipes, downspout, swales,
ditches, manholes, inlets, gutters, lowlands, wetlands, watercourses, water bodies,
hill slopes and land areas and any other device or method used to control or collect
stormwater runoff.
(3) In calculating the above flows, the "Rational Method formula" or equal must be
used in calculating conveyed flow, and "flood routing" or equal must be used in
calculating storage and timing. All facilities proposed to make proposed land uses
comply with these standards shall be designed to meet generally accepted
standards and not to place any unusual maintenance burden upon the Borough. The
burden of proof of compliance with these standards shall be upon the applicant.
§ 187-37. Curbs and gutters. 16
§ 187-37 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 187-40
187:41 02 - 15 - 2006
All subdivision streets shall have curbs. Curbs, gutters, or combination curbs and gutters shall
be constructed according to the specifications set forth in Section 6411, Type A.C. and D,
"Plain Cement Concrete Curb Gutter," in the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation PUB
408, latest edition (Appendix 2, Diagram 2).
§ 187-38. Pedestrian circulation.
A. Sidewalks.
(1) When required. Sidewalks within a land development or subdivision may be
required where necessary to assist circulation or provide access to any area within
the community.
(2) Location. Sidewalks shall be within the right-of-way of the street and shall extend
in width from the right-of-way line toward the curbline.
(3) Width. Sidewalks must be at least four feet wide. In the vicinity of shopping
centers, schools, recreation areas, and other such facilities, sidewalks must be at
least five feet wide and located within the street right-of-way.
(4) Specifications. Sidewalks shall be constructed according to the specifications as set
forth in Section 676, "Cement Concrete Sidewalks," in the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Specifications, latest edition.
B. Other pedestrian walks.
(1) When required. Other pedestrian walks within a land development or subdivision
may be required where necessary to assist circulation or provide access to any area
within the community.
(2) Specifications. Pedestrian walks shall be constructed in accordance with the
specifications required by the Planning Commission or the Council.
§ 187-39. Sewers and water.
A. Sewers when required. Where a public sanitary sewer system is within 1,000 feet of a
proposed subdivision or land development, the subdivider shall provide the subdivision
or land development with a complete sanitary sewer system.
B. Water when required. Where a water main supply system is within 1,000 feet of, or
where plans approved by the Borough provide for the installation of such public water
facilities, the subdivider shall provide the subdivision with a complete water main supply
system to be connected to the existing or proposed water main supply system in
accordance with Borough specifications.
§ 187-40. Phased development.
A. Preliminary plan approval to include all phases. Where an applicant proposes phased
development of a project over time, the applicant shall comply with all requirements for
§ 187-40 CALIFORNIA CODE § 187-42
187:42 02 - 15 - 2006
preliminary plan approval for all phases except where application content requirements
have been waived in accordance with Article IV, § 187-14D, of this chapter.
B. Residential subdivision minimum phase size. Each section in any residential subdivision
or land development, except for the last section, shall contain a minimum of 25% of the
total number of dwelling units as depicted on the preliminary plan, unless a lesser
percentage is approved by the Borough Council in its discretion.
C. Independence of phases. Each phase of a development shall include the required
improvements necessary to serve that phase of development as if it were the final phase
of the development, independent of any proposed future phase of development.
ARTICLE VII
Enforcement
§ 187-41. Enforcement remedies; violations and penalties.
A. Civil enforcement action. When the Borough finds that any person, partnership, or
corporation has violated any provision of this chapter or any condition imposed by the
Borough pursuant to this chapter, or has proceeded without satisfying the requirements of
this chapter, the Borough may institute civil enforcement proceedings. Magisterial
District Judges shall have initial jurisdiction in proceedings brought under this section.
B. Judgment. Where a Magisterial District Judge finds the person, partnership, or
corporation liable for such violations, the person, partnership, or corporation shall pay a
judgment of not more than $500, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees,
incurred by the Borough. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable
until the date of the determination of a violation by the Magisterial District Judge.
C. Enforcement of judgment. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil
Procedure.
D. Continuing violations. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation, unless the Magisterial District Judge, determining that there has been a
violation, further determines that there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership,
or corporation violating the chapter to have believed that there was no such violation. In
that event, there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day
following the date of the determination of a violation by the Magisterial District Judge;
thereafter, each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
E. Order of stay tolling per diem judgments. The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition,
may grant an order of stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per diem judgment pending a
final adjudication of a violation and judgment.
§ 187-42. Preventive remedies.
A. Court actions. In addition to other remedies, the Borough may institute and maintain
appropriate actions by law or in equity to restrain, correct, or abate violations, to prevent
§ 187-42 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 187-43
187:43 02 - 15 - 2006
unlawful construction, to recover damages, and to prevent illegal occupancy of a
building, structure, or premises.
B. Permit denials. The Borough shall refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval
necessary to further improve or develop any real property which has been developed or
which has resulted from a subdivision of real property in violation of this chapter. This
applies to any of the following applicants:
(1) The owner of record at the time of such violation.
(2) The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such violation without
regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had actual or constructive knowledge of
the violation.
(3) The current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent to the time of
violation without regard as to whether such current owner had actual or
constructive knowledge of the violation.
(4) The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who acquired the property
subsequent to the time of violation without regard as to whether such vendee or
lessee had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
§ 187-43. Construal of provisions.
The provisions of this chapter, so far as they are the same as those ordinances or regulations
in force prior to the enactment of this chapter or deal with the same subject matter, are
intended as a continuation of ordinances or regulations and not as new enactments. The
provisions of this chapter shall not affect any act done or liability incurred, nor shall they
affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be instituted to enforce any repealed ordinances,
regulations or parts thereof.

192:1 02 - 15 - 2006
Chapter 192
TAXATION
ARTICLE I
Earned Income and Net Profits Tax
§ 192-1. Statutory authority.
§ 192-2. Title.
§ 192-3. Definitions.
§ 192-4. Imposition of tax.
§ 192-5. Exemption.
§ 192-6. Declaration and payment of tax.
§ 192-7. Collection at source.
§ 192-8. Powers and duties of Earned
Income and Net Profits Tax
Officer.
§ 192-9. Compensation of Officer.
§ 192-10. Suit for collection of tax.
§ 192-11. Interest and penalties.
§ 192-12. Violations and penalties.
§ 192-13. Applicability.
ARTICLE II
Per Capita Tax
§ 192-14. Imposition of tax.
§ 192-15. Appointment of collector.
§ 192-16. Collection by suit.
§ 192-17. Failure to pay tax; violations
and penalties.
§ 192-18. Exemptions.
ARTICLE III
Occupational Privilege Tax
§ 192-19. Definitions and word usage.
§ 192-20. Imposition of tax; exemption.
§ 192-21. Amount of tax.
§ 192-22. Returns.
§ 192-23. Dates for determining tax
liability and payment.
§ 192-24. Duty of employers.
§ 192-25. Individuals engaged in more
than one occupation.
§ 192-26. Self-employed individuals.
§ 192-27. Employers and self-employed
individuals residing beyond
Borough limits.
§ 192-28. Administration of tax.
§ 192-29. Suits for collection.
§ 192-30. Violations and penalties.
§ 192-31. Saving clause.
§ 192-32. When effective.
ARTICLE IV
Occupation Tax
§ 192-33. Definitions and word usage.
§ 192-34. Imposition of tax.
§ 192-35. Notice of tax due.
§ 192-36. Discount and penalty.
§ 192-37. Recovery of tax.
§ 192-38. Audit of accounts.
§ 192-39. Violations and penalties.
§ 192-40. Exemption.
ARTICLE V
Realty Transfer Tax
§ 192-41. Short title.
§ 192-42. Authority.
§ 192-43. Definitions.
§ 192-44. Imposition of tax; interest.
§ 192-45. Exempt parties.
§ 192-1 CALIFORNIA CODE § 192-3
192:2 02 - 15 - 2006
§ 192-46. Excluded transactions.
§ 192-47. Documents relating to
associations or corporations and
members, partners,
stockholders or shareholders
thereof.
§ 192-48. Acquired company.
§ 192-49. Credits against tax.
§ 192-50. Extension of lease.
§ 192-51. Proceeds of judicial sale.
§ 192-52. Duties of Recorder of Deeds.
§ 192-53. Statement of value.
§ 192-54. Civil penalties.
§ 192-55. Tax to become lien.
§ 192-56. Enforcement.
§ 192-57. Regulations.
ARTICLE VI
Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights
§ 192-58. Adoption and compliance.
§ 192-59. Disclosure statement.
§ 192-60. Administrative appeals
procedures.
§ 192-61. Hearing officer.
§ 192-62. Taxpayer rights coordinator.
§ 192-63. Annual fee.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of California as indicated
in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
ARTICLE I
Earned Income and Net Profits Tax
[Adopted 12-1-1966 by Ord. No. 257; amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 192-1. Statutory authority.
This article is enacted under the authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S. § 6901 et
seq.
§ 192-2. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of California Earned Income
and Net Profits Tax Ordinance."
§ 192-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ASSOCIATION— A partnership, limited partnership or any other unincorporated group of
two or more persons.
BUSINESS— An enterprise, activity, profession or any other undertaking of an
unincorporated nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for profit whether by a
person, partnership, association or any other entity.
§ 192-3 TAXATION § 192-3
192:3 02 - 15 - 2006
CORPORATION— A corporation or joint-stock association organized under the laws of the
United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency.
CURRENT YEAR— The calendar year for which the tax is levied.
DOMICILE— The place where one lives and has his permanent home and to which he has
the intention of returning whenever he is absent. Actual residence is not necessarily
"domicile," for "domicile" is the fixed place of abode which, in the intention of the taxpayer,
is permanent rather than transitory. "Domicile" is the voluntary fixed place of habitation of a
person, not for a mere special or limited purpose, but with the present intention of making a
permanent home, until some event occurs to induce him to adopt some other permanent home.
In the case of businesses or associations, the domicile is that place considered as the center of
business affairs and the place where its functions are discharged.
EARNED INCOME— Compensation as determined under Section 303 of the Act of March
4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax Reform Code of 1971," and regulations in 61 Pa.
Code Part I, Subpart B, Article V (relating to personal income tax), not including, however,
wages or compensation paid to individuals on active military service. Employee business
expenses are allowable deductions as determined under Article III of the Tax Reform Code of
1971. The amount of any housing allowance provided to a member of the clergy shall not be
taxable as earned income.
EARNED INCOME AND NET PROFITS TAX OFFICER or OFFICER— That person,
public employee, private agency or other entity designated by the Borough Council to collect
and administer the tax on earned income and net profits.
EMPLOYER— A person, partnership, association, corporation, institution, governmental
body or unit or agency or any other entity employing one or more persons for a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation.
NET PROFITS— The net income from the operation of a business, profession, or other
activity, except corporations, determined under Section 303 of the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L.
6, No. 2), known as the "Tax Reform Code of 1971," and regulations in 61 Pa. Code Part I,
Subpart B, Article V (relating to personal income tax). The term does not include income
which is not paid for services provided and which is in the nature of earnings from an
investment. For taxpayers engaged in the business, profession or activity of farming, the term
shall not include:
A. Any interest earnings generated from any monetary accounts or investment instruments
of the farming business;
B. Any gain on the sale of farm machinery;
C. Any gain on the sale of livestock held 12 months or more for draft, breeding or dairy
purposes; and
D. Any gain on the sale of other capital assets of the farm.
NONRESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity domiciled outside the
Borough.
§ 192-3 CALIFORNIA CODE § 192-6
192:4 02 - 15 - 2006
1. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
PERSON or INDIVIDUAL— A natural person.
PRECEDING YEAR— The calendar year before the current year.
RESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity domiciled in the Borough.
SUCCEEDING YEAR— The calendar year following the current year.
TAXPAYER— Person, partnership, association or any other entity required hereunder to file
a return of earned income or net profits or to pay a tax thereon.
§ 192-4. Imposition of tax.
The following taxes are hereby imposed, for general municipal purposes and for retention by
the Borough, under the authority of Act No. 511 of 1965, the Local Tax Enabling Act:1
A. One half of 1% of all earned income earned during the current year by residents.
B. One half of 1% of all earned income earned during the current year by nonresidents for
work done or services rendered in the Borough of California.
C. One half of 1% of all net profits earned during the current year by businesses,
professions and other activities conducted by residents.
D. One half of 1% of the net profits earned during the current year by businesses,
professions and other activities conducted in the Borough of California by nonresidents.
§ 192-5. Exemption.
Persons whose total income from all sources is less than $12,000 per annum are hereby
exempted from this tax.
§ 192-6. Declaration and payment of tax.
A. Net profits.
(1) Every taxpayer making net profits shall, on or before April 15 of the current year,
make and file with the Officer on a form prescribed or approved by the Officer, a
declaration of his estimated net profits during the period beginning January 1 and
ending December 31 of the current year and pay to the Officer in four equal
quarterly installments the tax due thereon as follows: the first installment at the
time of filing the declaration and the other installments on or before June 15 of the
current year, September 15 of the current year and January 15 of the succeeding
year, respectively.
(2) Any taxpayer who first anticipates any net profit after April 15 of the current year
shall make and file the declaration hereinabove required on or before June 15 of
the current year, September 15 of the current year or December 31 of the current
§ 192-6 TAXATION § 192-6
192:5 02 - 15 - 2006
year, whichever of these dates next follows the date on which the taxpayer first
anticipates such net profit and pay to the Officer in equal installments the tax due
thereon on or before the quarterly payment dates which remain after the filing of
the declaration.
(3) Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15 of the succeeding year, make and file
with the Officer on a form prescribed or approved by the Officer a final return
showing the amount of net profits earned during the period beginning January 1 of
the current year and ending December 31 of the current year, the total amount of
tax due thereon and the total amount of tax paid thereon. At the time of filing the
final return, the taxpayer shall pay to the Officer the balance of tax due or shall
make demand for refund or credit in the case of overpayment.
(4) Any taxpayer may, in lieu of paying the fourth quarterly installment of his
estimated tax, elect to make and file with the Officer on or before January 31 of
the succeeding year, the final return as hereinabove required.
(5) The Officer is hereby authorized to provide by regulation for the making and filing
of adjusted declarations of estimated net profits and for the payments of the
estimated tax in cases where a taxpayer who has filed the declaration hereinabove
required anticipates additional net profits not previously declared or finds that he
has overestimated his anticipated net profits.
(6) Every taxpayer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of the current year
shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of business, file his final return as
hereinabove required and pay the tax due.
B. Earned income.
(1) Annual earned income tax return. Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15 of
the succeeding year, make and file with the Officer on a form prescribed or
approved by the Officer, a final return showing the amount of earned income
received during the period beginning January 1 of the current year and ending
December 31 of the current year, the total amount of tax due thereon, the amount
of tax paid thereon, the amount of tax thereon that has been withheld pursuant to
the provisions relating to the collection at source and the balance of tax due. At the
time of filing the final return, the taxpayer shall pay the balance of the tax due or
shall make demand for refund or credit in the case of overpayment.
(2) Earned income not subject to withholding. Every taxpayer who is employed for a
salary, wage, commission or other compensation and who received any earned
income not subject to the provisions relating to collection at source, shall make and
file with the Officer on a form prescribed or approved by the Officer, a quarterly
return on or before April 30 of the current year, July 31 of the current year,
October 31 of the current year and January 31 of the succeeding year, setting forth
the aggregate amount of earned income not subject to withholding earned by him
during the three-month periods ending March 31 of the current year, June 30 of the
current year, September 30 of the current year and December 31 of the current
year, respectively, and subject to the tax, together with such other information as
§ 192-6 CALIFORNIA CODE § 192-7
192:6 02 - 15 - 2006
the Officer may require. Every taxpayer making such return shall at the time of
filing thereof pay to the Officer the amount of tax shown as due thereon.
§ 192-7. Collection at source.
A. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse or other place of
business within the Borough who employs one or more persons, other than domestic
servants, for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation, who has not previously
registered, shall, within 15 days after becoming an employer, register with the Officer his
name and address and such other information as the Officer may require.
B. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch warehouse or other place of
business within the Borough who employs one or more persons, other than domestic
servants, for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation, shall deduct at the time
of payment thereof, the tax imposed by this article on the earned income due to his
employee or employees and shall, on or before April 30 of the current year, July 31 of
the current year, October 31 of the current year and January 31 of the succeeding year,
file a return and pay to the Officer the amount of taxes deducted during the preceding
three-month period ending March 31 of the current year, June 30 of the current year,
September 30 of the current year and December 31 of the current year, respectively.
Such return unless otherwise agreed upon between the Officer and employer shall show
the name and social security number of each such employee, the earned income of such
employee during said preceding three-month period, the tax deducted therefrom, the
political subdivisions imposing the tax upon such employee, the total earned income of
all such employees during such preceding three-month period and the total tax deducted
therefrom and paid with the return.
C. Any employer who for two of the preceding four quarterly periods has failed to deduct
the proper tax, or any part thereof, or has failed to pay over the proper amount of tax to
the Borough, may be required by the Officer to file his return and pay the tax monthly.
In such cases, payments of tax shall be made to the Officer on or before the last day of
the month succeeding the month for which the tax was withheld.
D. On or before February 28 of the succeeding year, every employer shall file with the
Officer:
(1) An annual return showing the total amount of earned income paid, the total amount
of tax deducted and the total amount of tax paid to the Officer for the period
beginning January 1 of the current year and ending December 31 of the current
year.
(2) A return withholding statement for each employee employed during all or any part
of the period beginning January 1 of the current year and ending December 31 of
the current year, setting forth the employee’s name, address and social security
number, the amount of earned income paid to the employee during said period, the
amount of tax deducted, the political subdivisions imposing the tax upon such
employee and the amount of tax paid to the Officer. Every employer shall furnish
two copies of the individual return to the employee for whom it is filed.
§ 192-7 TAXATION § 192-8
192:7 02 - 15 - 2006
2. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
E. Every employer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of the current year
shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of business, file the returns and
withholding statements hereinabove required and pay the tax due.
F. Except as otherwise provided in Section 9 of Act 511 of 1965,2 every employer who
willfully or negligently fails or omits to make the deductions required by this section
shall be liable for payment of the taxes which he was required to withhold to the extent
that such taxes have not been recovered from the employee.
G. The failure or omission of any employer to make the deductions required by this section
shall not relieve any employee from the payment of the tax or from complying with the
requirements of this article relating to the filing of declarations and returns.
§ 192-8. Powers and duties of Earned Income and Net Profits Tax Officer.
A. It shall be the duty of the Officer to collect and receive the taxes, fines and penalties
imposed by this article. It shall also be his duty to keep a record showing the amount
received by him from each person or business paying the tax and the date of such receipt.
B. The Officer, before entering upon his official duties, shall give and acknowledge a bond
to the Borough in such amount and with such surety as designated from time to time by
the Borough Council.
C. The Officer is hereby empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and
regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this
article, including provisions for the reexamination and correction of declarations and
returns and of payments alleged or found to be incorrect, or as to which an overpayment
is claimed or found to have occurred and to make refunds in case of overpayment, for
any period of time not to exceed six years subsequent to the date of payment of the sum
involved, and to prescribe forms necessary for the administration of this article. No rule
or regulation of any kind shall be enforceable unless it has been approved by resolution
of the Borough Council. A copy of such rules and regulations currently in force shall be
available for public inspection.
D. The Officer shall refund, on petition of and proof by the taxpayer, earned income tax
paid on the taxpayer’s ordinary and necessary business expenses to the extent that such
expenses are not paid by taxpayer’s employer.
E. The Officer and agents designated by him are hereby authorized to examine the books,
papers and records of any employer or of any taxpayer or of any person whom the
Officer reasonably believes to be an employer or taxpayer, in order to verify the accuracy
of any declaration or return or if no declaration or return was filed, to ascertain the tax
due. Every employer and every taxpayer and every person whom the Officer reasonably
believes to be an employer or taxpayer is hereby directed and required to give to the
Officer, or to any agent designated by him, the means, facilities and opportunity for such
examination and investigations, as are hereby authorized.
§ 192-8 CALIFORNIA CODE § 192-10
192:8 02 - 15 - 2006
F. Any information gained by the Officer, his agents or by any other official or agent of the
Borough, as a result of any declarations, returns, investigations, hearings or verifications
required or authorized by this article shall be confidential, except for official purposes
and except in accordance with a proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by law.
G. The Officer is authorized to establish different filing, reporting and payment dates for
taxpayers whose fiscal years do not coincide with the calendar year.
H. The Officer shall distribute earned income taxes to the appropriate political subdivisions
within 60 days of the deadline for payment by an employer as set forth in § 192-7B. The
political subdivisions shall not be required to request the Officer to distribute the funds
collected but shall at least annually reconcile their receipts with the records of the Officer
and return to or credit the Officer with any overpayment. A political subdivision shall not
be required to pay a fee or commission to the other political subdivision or its tax officer
for tax revenue distributed under this subsection. If the Officer, within one year after
receiving a tax payment, cannot identify the taxing jurisdiction entitled to a tax payment,
he shall make payment to the municipality in which the tax was collected. If earned
income taxes are not distributed to the appropriate political subdivision within one year
of receipt, the political subdivision may make a written demand on a tax officer or
political subdivision for tax revenues collected and attributable to residents of the
political subdivision making the demand. If the taxes attributable to residents of the
political subdivision making the demand are not paid within 30 days from the date of the
demand, the political subdivision, person, public employee or private agency designated
by the political subdivision may enter into an arbitration agreement with the officer under
42 Pa.C.S.A. Ch. 73, Subch. A (relating to statutory arbitration), or bring an action in an
appropriate court of common pleas in the name of the taxing district for the recovery of
taxes not distributed in accordance with this subsection. The action must be brought
within seven years of the collection of the taxes.
§ 192-9. Compensation of Officer.
The Officer shall receive such compensation for his services and expenses as determined by
the Borough Council.
§ 192-10. Suit for collection of tax.
A. The Officer may sue in the name of the Borough for the recovery of taxes due and
unpaid under this article.
B. Any suit brought to recover the tax imposed by this article shall be begun within three
years after such tax is due, or within three years after the declaration or return has been
filed, whichever date is later; provided, however, that this limitation shall not prevent the
institution of a suit for the collection of any tax due or determined to be due in the
following cases:
(1) Where no declaration or return was filed by any person although a declaration or
return was required to be filed by him under provisions of this article there shall be
no limitation.
§ 192-10 TAXATION § 192-12
192:9 02 - 15 - 2006
(2) Where an examination of the declaration or return filed by any person or of other
evidence relating to such declaration or return in the possession of the Officer
reveals a fraudulent evasion of taxes there shall be no limitation.
(3) In the case of substantial understatement of tax liability of 25% or more and no
fraud, suit shall be begun within six years.
(4) Where any person has deducted taxes under the provision of this article and has
failed to pay the amounts so deducted to the Officer, or where any person has
willfully failed or omitted to make the deductions required by § 192-7, there shall
be no limitation.
C. This section shall not be construed to limit the Borough Council from recovering
delinquent taxes by any other means provided by law.
D. The Officer may sue for recovery of an erroneous refund provided such suit is begun two
years after making such refund, except that the suit may be brought within five years if it
appears that any part of the refund was induced by fraud or misrepresentation of material
fact.
§ 192-11. Interest and penalties.
A. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6% per annum on
the amount of said tax and an additional penalty of 1/2 of 1% of the amount of the said
tax for each month or fraction thereof during which the tax remains unpaid shall be
added and collected. Where suit is brought for the recovery of any such tax, the person
liable therefor shall, in addition, be liable for the costs of collection and the interest and
penalties herein imposed.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A, the governing body may, by ordinance
or resolution, establish a one-time period during which interest or interest and penalties
that would otherwise be imposed for the nonreporting or underreporting of earned
income tax liabilities or for the nonpayment of earned income taxes previously imposed
and due shall be waived in total or in part if the taxpayer voluntarily files delinquent
returns and pays the taxes in full during the period so established. The governing body
may adopt regulations to implement the provisions of this subsection.
C. The provisions of Subsection B shall not affect or terminate any petitions, investigations,
prosecutions or other proceedings pending under the provisions of this article or prevent
the commencement or further prosecution of any proceedings by the proper authorities
for violations of this article. No proceedings shall, however, be commenced on the basis
of delinquent returns filed pursuant to Subsection B, if the returns are determined to be
substantially true and correct and the taxes are paid in full within the prescribed time.
§ 192-12. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person who fails, neglects or refuses to make any declaration or return required by
this article, any employer who fails, neglects or refuses to register or to pay the tax
deducted from his employees or fails, neglects or refuses to deduct or withhold the tax
§ 192-12 CALIFORNIA CODE § 192-15
192:10 02 - 15 - 2006
from his employees and any person who refuses to permit the Officer or any agent
designated by him to examine his books, records and papers and any person who
knowingly makes any incomplete, false or fraudulent return or attempts to do anything
whatsoever to avoid the full disclosure of the amount of his net profits or earned income
in order to avoid the payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed by this article
shall, upon conviction thereof before any Magisterial District Judge or court of
competent jurisdiction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500 for each offense
and costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to be imprisoned for a period
not exceeding 30 days.
B. Any person who divulges any information which is confidential under the provisions of
this article shall, upon conviction thereof before any Magisterial District Judge or court
of competent jurisdiction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500 for each
offense and costs and, in default of payment of said fines and costs, to be imprisoned for
a period not exceeding 30 days.
C. The penalties imposed under this section shall be in addition to any other penalty
imposed by any other section of this article.
D. The failure of any person to receive or procure forms required for making the declaration
or returns required by this article shall not excuse him from making such declaration or
return.
§ 192-13. Applicability.
This article shall not apply to any person or property as to whom or which it is beyond the
legal power of the Borough to impose the tax or duties herein provided for.
ARTICLE II
Per Capita Tax
[Adopted 12-18-1972 by Ord. No. 304]
§ 192-14. Imposition of tax.
In addition to other taxes provided by law and levied and collected annually by the Borough
of California, a per capita tax of $5 on each resident or inhabitant of the Borough of
California over 18 years of age is hereby levied and assessed for the present fiscal year for
general revenue purposes.
§ 192-15. Appointment of collector.
The said per capita tax shall be collected by such officer as the Borough of California shall by
resolution hereinafter appoint.
§ 192-16 TAXATION § 192-19
192:11 02 - 15 - 2006
3. Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 192-16. Collection by suit.
The collector may sue for the recovery of the tax due and unpaid under this article. Where
suit is brought for the recovery of said tax, the person liable therefor shall, in addition, be
liable for the costs of collection, and for any interest and penalties imposed.
§ 192-17. Failure to pay tax; violations and penalties.
Any person who fails, neglects, or refuses to pay the said tax imposed by this article shall,
upon conviction therefor before any Magisterial District Judge of California Borough,
Washington County, Pennsylvania, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more
than $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, by
imprisonment for not more than 30 days. The penalties imposed under this section shall be in
addition to any other penalties imposed by any other applicable statutes and laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 192-18. Exemptions. [Added 4-27-1978 by Ord. No. 333; amended 12-28-1978 by Ord.
No. 342; 2-12-1990 by Ord. No. 387]
A. Persons whose total income from all sources is less than $12,000 per annum are hereby
exempted from this tax. Proof of eligibility for exemption shall be the same proof
acceptable under federal and state statutes or insurance applications.3
B. Every taxpayer claiming exemption under this article shall file with the designated
Borough official on prescribed forms all such information deemed necessary to ascertain
eligibility.
ARTICLE III
Occupational Privilege Tax
[Adopted 1-8-1973 by Ord. No. 305]
§ 192-19. Definitions and word usage.
A. The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context or language clearly indicated or
requires a different meaning:
CALIFORNIA BOROUGH— The geographic and corporate limits of the Borough of
California, Washington County, Pennsylvania.
EMPLOYER— An individual, partnership, association, corporation, governmental
body, agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a salary, wage,
commission, or other compensation basis, including a self-employed person.
FISCAL YEAR— The twelve-month period beginning January 1 of any year and
ending on December 31 of the same year.
§ 192-19 CALIFORNIA CODE § 192-22
192:12 02 - 15 - 2006
4. Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
INDIVIDUAL— Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation, trade or
profession within the geographic and corporate limits of the Borough of California.
OCCUPATION— Any trade, profession, business or undertaking or any type, kind or
character, including services, domestic or otherwise, carried on or performed within the
geographic and corporate limits of the Borough of California for which compensation is
charged or received, whether by means of salary, wages, commissions or fees for
services rendered.
TAX— The occupation privilege tax in the amount of $5 levied by this article.
TAX RECEIVER— The tax receiver of the Borough of California, as appointed by the
Council to collect occupation privilege taxes.
B. "He," "his" or "him" indicates the singular and plural number as well as male, female,
and neuter gender.
§ 192-20. Imposition of tax; exemption.
A. The Borough of California hereby levies and imposes on each occupation engaged in by
individuals within the geographic and corporate limits of the Borough during the fiscal
year an occupational privilege tax. This tax is in addition to all other taxes of any kind or
nature heretofore levied by the Borough of California.
B. Persons whose total income from all sources is less than $12,000 per annum are hereby
exempted from this tax. Proof of eligibility for exemption shall be the same proof
acceptable under federal and state statutes or insurance applications. Every taxpayer
claiming exemption under this article shall file with the designated Borough official on
prescribed forms all such information deemed necessary to ascertain eligibility. [Added
4-27-1978 by Ord. No. 334; amended 12-28-1978 by Ord. No. 3434 ]
§ 192-21. Amount of tax.
Beginning 30 days after the enactment of this article, each occupation, as hereinbefore
defined, engaged in within the geographic and corporate limits of the Borough of California
shall be subject to an occupation privilege tax in the amount of $5 per annum, said tax to be
paid by the individual so engaged.
§ 192-22. Returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing the compensation of the tax on forms
to be supplied to him by the tax receiver.
§ 192-23 TAXATION § 192-27
192:13 02 - 15 - 2006
§ 192-23. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
A. Each employer shall use his employment records from the first day of January to the
15th day of May of each year for determining the number of employees from whom said
tax shall be deducted and paid over to the tax receiver on or before June of each year.
Supplemental reports shall be made by each employer, on August 15 and October 15 of
each year, of new employees as reflected on his employment records from May 15 to
August 15 and from August 15 to October 15. Payments on the supplemental reports
shall be made on September 15 and November 15, respectively.
B. For the year 1973, each employer shall use his employment records beginning from 30
days after the enactment of this article to December 31, 1973, for determining the
number of employees from whom to deduct said tax.
§ 192-24. Duty of employers.
Each employer within the Borough of California, as well as those employers situated outside
the Borough of California but who engage in business within the Borough of California, is
hereby charged with the duty of collecting from each of his employees engaged by him and
performing for him within the Borough of California the said tax of $5 per annum and making
a return and payment thereof to the tax receiver. Further, each employer is hereby authorized
to deduct the tax from each employee in his employ, whether such employee is paid by salary,
wages, or commission, and whether or not part or all such services are performed within the
Borough of California.
§ 192-25. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation.
Each individual who shall have more than one occupation within the Borough of California
shall be subject to the payment of this tax on his principal occupation, and his principal
employer shall deduct this tax and deliver to him evidence of deduction on a form to be
furnished to the employer by the tax receiver, which form shall be evidence of the deductions
having been made, and, when presented to any other employer, shall be authority for such
employer to not deduct this tax from the employee’s wages, but to include such employee on
his return by setting forth his name, address, and the name and account number of the
employer who deducted this tax.
§ 192-26. Self-employed individuals.
All self-employed individuals who perform services of any type or kind, engage in any
occupation or profession within the Borough of California, shall be required to comply with
this article and pay the tax to the tax receiver on or before September 1, 1973, or as soon
thereafter as he engages in any occupation.
§ 192-27. Employers and self-employed individuals residing beyond Borough limits.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their place of business outside
the Borough of California, but who perform services of any type or kind or engage in any
§ 192-27 CALIFORNIA CODE § 192-30
192:14 02 - 15 - 2006
occupation or profession within the geographic and corporate limits of the Borough of
California, do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject themselves to the
provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under this article with the same force and
effect as though they were residents of the Borough of California. Further, any individual
engaged in an occupation within the Borough of California, and an employee of a nonresident
employer, may, for the purpose of this article, be considered a self-employed person, and in
the event this tax is not paid, the Borough shall have the option of proceeding against either
the employer or employee for the collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 192-28. Administration of tax.
A. It shall be the duty of the tax receiver to accept and receive payments of this tax, and to
keep a record thereof showing the amounts received by him from each employer or
self-employed person, together with the date the tax was received.
B. The tax receiver is hereby charged with the administration and enforcement of this article
and is hereby charged and empowered to prescribe, adopt, and promulgate rules and
regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this
article, including provisions for the examination and correction of any return made in
compliance with this article and any payment alleged or found to be incorrect, or as to
which overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any person aggrieved by any
decision of the tax receiver shall have the right to appeal to the Court of Common Pleas
of Washington County, Pennsylvania, as in other cases provided.
C. The tax receiver is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll records of any
employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return made by an employer, or, if no
return was made, to ascertain the tax due. Each employer is hereby directed and required
to give the tax receiver the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
§ 192-29. Suits for collection.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid within 30 days after the
due dates above set forth, the tax receiver may sue for the recovery of any such tax due
or unpaid under this article together with interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6% on the amount of
said tax shall be calculated beginning with the due date of said tax and penalty of 5%
shall be added to the first rate of said tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought
for the recovery of this tax, the individual liable therefor shall, in addition, be responsible
and liable for the costs of collection.
§ 192-30. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by this article, or who
refuses inspection of his books, records or accounts in his custody and control, setting forth
the number of employees subject to this tax who are in his employment, or whoever fails or
refuses to file any return required by this article shall, upon conviction before any Magisterial
District Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $600, plus costs
§ 192-30 TAXATION § 192-33
192:15 02 - 15 - 2006
5. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, by imprisonment for not
more than 30 days, for each offense. It is further provided that the action to enforce the fine
and penalty herein provided be instituted against any person in charge of the business of any
employer who has failed or refuses to file a return required by this article.
§ 192-31. Saving clause.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the Borough of
California to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any occupation not within the
taxing power of the Borough of California under the Constitution of the United States
and the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax hereby imposed under the provision of this article shall be held by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the Constitution of the United States or of the
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the
court shall not affect or impair the right to impose or collect said taxes, or the validity of
the tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
§ 192-32. When effective.
This article shall become effective 30 days from its adoption and remain in full force and
effect for the balance of the year 1973, and thereafter pursuant to the revision of Act 511.5
ARTICLE IV
Occupation Tax
[Adopted 1-28-1980 by Ord. No. 354]
§ 192-33. Definitions and word usage.
A. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall have, for the purpose of this
article, the meaning herein indicated:
COLLECTOR— The person elected or designated by the Council of the Borough to
collect or receive the taxes imposed by this article.
PERSON— Any natural person.
RESIDENT — Any person living or residing in the Borough of California.
TAXPAYER— Any person required to pay the occupation tax hereunder.
B. The singular shall include the plural and the masculine, the feminine and the neuter.
§ 192-34 CALIFORNIA CODE § 192-39
192:16 02 - 15 - 2006
6. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 192-34. Imposition of tax.
In addition to the other taxes provided by ordinance of the Borough of California, there is
hereby imposed, for general revenue purposes, an annual tax of $5 upon every resident of the
Borough of California who shall have attained the age of 18 years on or before the first
Monday of January 1980, the first day of the fiscal year for which the tax is levied.
§ 192-35. Notice of tax due.
On or before the first day of March 1980, the collector shall send to every resident of the
Borough of California over the age of 18 years a notice of the occupation tax due by such
resident for the fiscal year 1980. Such notice shall be on a form prescribed by the Council of
the Borough of California; provided, however, that the failure or omission of the collector to
send, or of any taxpayer to receive, such notice shall not relieve such person from the
payment of such tax; provided, further, that any person who shall become a resident of the
Borough of California after the first Monday of January 1980 shall not be liable for the tax for
that fiscal year; any person who shall cease to be a resident at any time after the first Monday
of January 1980 shall be liable for the full amount of the occupation tax for such year.
§ 192-36. Discount and penalty.
All taxpayers subject to the payment of the tax under this article shall be entitled to a discount
of 2% on the amount of such tax upon making payment of the whole amount thereof within
two months after the date of the tax notice. All taxpayers who shall fail to make payment of
any such taxes imposed against them for four months after the date of the notice shall be
charged a penalty of 5%, which penalty shall be added to the taxes by the collector and
collected by him. The collector shall furnish a receipt to every person paying such tax.
§ 192-37. Recovery of tax.
All taxes levied under this article, together with all penalties, shall be recoverable by the
collector in the manner authorized by law as provided in the Local Tax Enabling Act, No.
511.6
§ 192-38. Audit of accounts.
The collector to be appointed by the Borough for the collection of this tax shall have his
accounts audited at least once every year by whomever performs the regular audit for the
Borough of California.
§ 192-39. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted before any Magisterial District Judge of violating or failing to carry out
any of the provisions of this article; or failing, neglecting, or refusing to pay any taxes or
§ 192-39 TAXATION § 192-43
192:17 02 - 15 - 2006
7. Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
penalties; or of attempting to do anything whatsoever to avoid the payment of the whole or
any part of the tax imposed under this article, shall be liable to a fine of not less than $100
nor more than $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and
costs, by imprisonment for not more than 30 days, for each and every offense; provided that
such fine or penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed by any other section of
this article.
§ 192-40. Exemption. [Amended 2-12-1990 by Ord. No. 386]
A. Persons whose total income from all sources is less than $12,000 per annum are hereby
exempted from this tax. Proof of eligibility for exemption shall be the same proof
acceptable under federal and state statutes or insurance applications.7
B. Every taxpayer claiming exemption under this article shall file with the designated
Borough official on prescribed forms all such information deemed necessary to ascertain
eligibility.
ARTICLE V
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted by Ord. No. 378; amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 192-41. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of the Borough of
California."
§ 192-42. Authority.
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon the transfer of real
estate or interest in real estate situated within the Borough of California, regardless of where
the documents making the transfer are made, executed or delivered, or where the actual
settlements on such transfer took place as authorized by Article XI-D, "Local Real Estate
Transfer Tax," 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq.
§ 192-43. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ASSOCIATION— A partnership, limited partnership, or any other form of unincorporated
enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons other than a private trust or decedent's
estate.
§ 192-43 CALIFORNIA CODE § 192-43
192:18 02 - 15 - 2006
CORPORATION— A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust, or banking
institution which is organized under the laws of this commonwealth, the United States, or any
other state, territory, foreign country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers, demises, vests,
confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title to real estate, but does not include wills,
mortgages, deeds of trust or other instruments of like character given as security for a debt
and deeds of release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not pass
to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has been paid or any
cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable over a period of time exceeding 30
years, or instruments which solely grant, vest or confirm a public utility easement.
"Document" shall also include a declaration of acquisition required to be presented for
recording under § 192-48 of this article.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION— A corporation of which at least 75% of its assets are
devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each class of stock of the
corporation is continuously owned by members of the same family. The business of
agriculture shall include the leasing to members of the same family of property which is
directly and principally used for agricultural purposes. The business of agriculture shall not be
deemed to include:
A. Recreational activities such as, but not limited to, hunting, fishing, camping, skiing, show
competition or racing;
B. The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish, cats, dogs or pets
or animals intended for use in sporting or recreational activities;
C. Fur farming;
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations; or
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
FAMILY FARM PARTNERSHIP— A partnership of which at least 75% of its assets are
devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of the interests in the partnership are
continuously owned by members of the same family. The business of agriculture shall include
the leasing to members of the same family of property which is directly and principally used
for agricultural purposes. The business of agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
A. Recreational activities, such as but not limited to hunting, fishing, camping, skiing, show
competition or racing;
B. The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish, cats, dogs or pets
or animals intended for use in sporting or recreational activities;
C. Fur farming;
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations; or
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
§ 192-43 TAXATION § 192-43
192:19 02 - 15 - 2006
LIVING TRUST — Any trust, other than a business trust, intended as a will substitute by the
settlor which becomes effective during the lifetime of the settlor, but from which trust
distributions cannot be made to any beneficiaries other than the settlor prior to the death of
the settlor.
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY— Any individual, such individual's brothers and
sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents and grandparents, the ancestors and
lineal descendants of any of the foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing, and the estate of
any of the foregoing. Individuals related by the half-blood or legal adoption shall be treated as
if they were related by the whole-blood.
ORDINARY TRUST — Any trust, other than a business trust or a living trust, which takes
effect during the lifetime of the settlor and for which the trustees of the trust take title to
property primarily for the purpose of protecting, managing or conserving it until distribution
to the named beneficiaries of the trust. An ordinary trust does not include a trust that has an
objective to carry on business and divide gains, nor does it either expressly or impliedly have
any of the following features: the treatment of beneficiaries as associates, the treatment of the
interests in the trust as personal property, the free transferability of beneficial interests in the
trust, centralized management by the trustee or the beneficiaries, or continuity of life.
PERSON— Every natural person, association, or corporation. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or both, the term "person," as applied to
associations, shall include the responsible members or general partners thereof, and as applied
to corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE—
A. All lands, tenements or hereditaments within the Borough of California including without
limitation buildings, structures, fixtures, mines, minerals, oil, gas, quarries, spaces with or
without upper or lower boundaries, trees, and other improvements, immovables or
interests which by custom, usage or law pass with a conveyance or land, but excluding
permanently attached machinery and equipment in an industrial plant.
B. A condominium unit.
C. A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation, trust or association
under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
REAL ESTATE COMPANY— A corporation or association which is primarily engaged in
the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or more of the ownership interest
in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and which:
A. Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or disposition of
real estate; or
B. Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the value of its entire
tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets which are freely transferable and
actively traded on an established market.
§ 192-43 CALIFORNIA CODE § 192-43
192:20 02 - 15 - 2006
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE—
A. Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the termination of which is
not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of years, including without limitation an
estate in fee simple, life estate, or perpetual leasehold; or
B. Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but which, either by
reason of the length of the term or the grant of a right to extend the term by renewal or
otherwise, consists of a group of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple,
life estate or perpetual leasehold, including without limitation a leasehold interest or
possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term of 30 years or more
or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real estate in which the lessee has equity.
TRANSACTION— The making, executing, delivering, accepting, or presenting for
recording of a document.
VALUE—
A. In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for actual monetary worth,
the amount of the actual consideration therefor, paid or to be paid, including liens or
other encumbrances thereon existing before the transfer and not removed thereby,
whether or not the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents, or a
commensurate part thereof where such liens or other encumbrances and ground rents also
encumber or are charged against other real estate; provided that where such documents
shall set forth a nominal consideration, the value thereof shall be determined from the
price set forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale;
B. In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the foreclosure of a
mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without consideration or for consideration less
than the actual monetary worth of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy
agreement, a leasehold or possessory interest, any exchange of properties, or the real
estate of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate determined
by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local real estate tax purposes for the
common level ratio factor developed by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue for
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax base calculations;
C. In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate the value of which is not
determinable under Subsection A or B, the actual monetary worth of such interest; or
D. The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executor agreement for the
construction of buildings, structures or other permanent improvements to real estate
between the grantor and other persons existing before the transfer and not removed
thereby or between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor of a related
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before or effective with
the transfer.
§ 192-44 TAXATION § 192-46
192:21 02 - 15 - 2006
§ 192-44. Imposition of tax; interest.
A. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for recording any
document or in whose behalf any document is made, executed, delivered, accepted or
presented for recording, shall be subject to pay, for retention by the Borough, and in
respect to the transaction or any part thereof, a tax at the rate of 1/2 of 1% of the value
of the real estate represented by such document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier
of the time the document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of
such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
B. The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the affixing of an official
stamp or writing by the recorder whereon the date of the payment of the tax, amount of
the tax and the signature of the collecting agent shall be set forth.
C. It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of the tax imposed herein on a person
or transfer shall not exceed the limitations prescribed in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act
of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq., so that if any other political
subdivision shall impose or hereafter shall impose such tax on the same person or
transfer then the tax levied by the Borough of California under the authority of that Act
shall during the time such duplication of the tax exists, except as hereinafter otherwise
provided, be 1/2 of the rate and such 1/2 rate shall become effective without any action
on the part of the Borough of California, provided, however, that the Borough of
California and any other political subdivision which imposes such tax on the same person
or transfer may agree that, instead of limiting their respective rates to 1/2 of the rate
herein provided, they will impose respectively different rates, the total of which shall not
exceed the maximum rate permitted under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
D. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate in effect at the time the
tax is due shall be added and collected.
§ 192-45. Exempt parties.
The United States, the commonwealth, or any of their instrumentalities, agencies or political
subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax imposed by this article. The exemption
of such governmental bodies shall not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from
liability for the tax.
§ 192-46. Excluded transactions.
A. The tax imposed by section shall not be imposed upon:
(1) A transfer to the commonwealth, or to any of its instrumentalities, agencies or
political subdivisions, by gift, dedication or deed in lieu of condemnation or deed
of confirmation in connection with condemnation proceedings, or a reconveyance
by the condemning body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the
time of condemnation which reconveyance may include property line adjustments
provided said reconveyance is made within one year from the date of
condemnation.
§ 192-46 CALIFORNIA CODE § 192-46
192:22 02 - 15 - 2006
(2) A document which the Borough of California is prohibited from taxing under the
Constitution or statutes of the United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, township, school district or county pursuant to
acquisition by the municipality, township, school district or county of a tax
delinquent property at sheriff sale or tax claim bureau sale.
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or confirms a
transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend or limit existing record
legal title or interest.
(5) A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passed by testate or intestate succession and held by cotenants; however, if any of
the parties take shares greater in value than their undivided interest, tax is due on
the excess.
(6) A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were previously
husband and wife who have since been divorced, provided the property or interest
therein subject to such transfer was acquired by the husband and wife or husband
or wife prior to the granting of the final decree in divorce, between parent and
child or the spouse of such child, between brother or sister or spouse of a brother
or sister and brother or sister or the spouse of a brother or sister, and between a
grandparent and grandchild or the spouse of such grandchild, except that a
subsequent transfer by the grantee within one year shall be subject to tax as if the
grantor were making such transfer.
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property passing by testate or
intestate succession from a personal representative of a decedent to the decedent's
devisee or heir.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an ordinary trust
where the transfer of the same property would be exempt if the transfer was made
directly from the grantor to all of the possible beneficiaries that are entitled to
receive the property or proceeds from the sale of the property under the trust,
whether or not such beneficiaries are contingent or specifically named. A trust
clause which identifies the contingent beneficiaries by reference to the heirs of the
trust settlor as determined by the laws of the intestate succession shall not
disqualify a transfer from the exclusion provided by this clause. No such
exemption shall be granted unless the recorder of deeds is presented with a copy of
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all possible beneficiaries.
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of a living trust from
the settlor of the living trust. No such exemption shall be granted unless the
Recorder of Deeds is presented with a copy of the living trust instrument.
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee of an ordinary
trust to a specifically named beneficiary that is entitled to receive the property
under the recorded trust instrument or to a contingent beneficiary where the
transfer of the same property would be exempt if the transfer was made by the
grantor of the property into the trust to that beneficiary. However, any transfer of
§ 192-46 TAXATION § 192-46
192:23 02 - 15 - 2006
real estate from a living trust during the settlor's lifetime shall be considered for
the purposes of this article as if such transfer were made directly from the settlor to
the grantee.
(11) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee of a living trust
after the death of the settlor of the trust or from a trustee of a trust created pursuant
to the will of a decedent to a beneficiary to whom the property is devised or
bequeathed.
(12) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from the trustee of a living trust
to the settlor of the living trust if such property was originally conveyed to the
trustee by the settlor.
(13) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to successor trustee.
(14) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration between principal and agent or
straw party; or from or to an agent or straw party where, if the agent or straw party
were his principal, no tax would be imposed under this article. Where the
document by which title is acquired by a grantee or agreement of value fails to set
forth that the property was acquired by the grantee from, or for the benefit of, his
principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the property is the property of the
grantee in his individual capacity if the grantee claims an exemption from taxation
under this clause.
(15) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation of a corporation
or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation, except where the department
reasonably determines that the primary intent for such merger, consolidation or
division is avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.
(16) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of record in the
name of the corporation or association where the grantee owns stock of the
corporation or an interest in the association in the same proportion as his interest in
or ownership of the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the grantee for more
than two years.
(17) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority to a grantee
of property conveyed by the grantee to that agency or authority as security for a
debt or the grantee or a transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority.
(18) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority to a grantee
purchasing directly from it, but only if:
(a) The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary purpose of
manufacturing, fabricating, compounding, processing, publishing, research
and development, transportation, energy conversion, energy production,
pollution control, warehousing or agriculture; and
(b) The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the real estate
transferred.
§ 192-46 CALIFORNIA CODE § 192-47
192:24 02 - 15 - 2006
(19) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in default in lieu
of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial sale in which the successful
bidder is the bona fide holder of a mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to
another person.
(20) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or persons holding
title for a religious organization if such real estate is not being or has not been
used by such transfer or for commercial purposes.
(21) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax exempt status pursuant to
Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, [68A Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C.
§ 501(c)(3)] and which has as its primary purpose preservation of land for historic,
recreational, scenic, agricultural or open space opportunities; or a transfer from
such a conservancy to the United States, the commonwealth or to any of their
instrumentalities, agencies or political subdivisions; or any transfer from such a
conservancy where the real estate is encumbered by a perpetual agricultural
conservation easement as defined by the act of June 30, 1981 (P.L. 128, No. 43),
known as the "Agricultural Area Security Law," and such conservancy has owned
the real estate for at least two years immediately prior to the transfer.
(22) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a family farm
corporation by a member of the same family which directly owns at least 75% of
each class of the stock thereof.
(23) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a family farm
partnership by a member of the same family, which family directly owns at least
75% of the interests in the partnership.
(24) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership interest in a real
estate company, family farm corporation or family farm partnership which owns
real estate.
(25) A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
(26) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or minerals and
assignments thereof.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full and complete
value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of value. A copy of the
Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of Value may be submitted for this purpose.
For leases of coal, oil, natural gas or minerals, the statement of value may be limited to
an explanation of the reason such document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 192-47. Documents relating to associations or corporations and members, partners,
stockholders or shareholders thereof.
Except as otherwise provided in § 192-46, documents which make, confirm or evidence any
transfer or demise of title to real estate between associations or corporations and the members,
partners, shareholders or stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this
§ 192-47 TAXATION § 192-49
192:25 02 - 15 - 2006
article, corporations and associations are entities separate from their members, partners,
stockholders or shareholders.
§ 192-48. Acquired company.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the ownership interest
in the company, however effected, if the change does not affect the continuity of the
company; and of itself or together with prior changes has the effect of transferring,
directly or indirectly, 90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company within
a period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family farm corporation is
an acquired company when, because of voluntary or involuntary dissolution, it ceases to
be a family farm corporation or when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because
of acquisition or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it fails
to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation under this article.
C. A family farm partnership is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm partnership or when, because of
transfer of partnership interests or because of acquisition or transfer of assets that are
devoted to the business of agriculture, it fails to meet the minimum requirements of a
family farm partnership under this article.
D. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall present a
declaration of acquisition with the recorder of each county in which it holds real estate
for the affixation of documentary stamps and recording. Such declaration shall set forth
the value of real estate holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Declaration of Acquisition may be submitted for this
purpose.
§ 192-49. Credits against tax.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real estate broker, which
property was transferred to him within the preceding year as consideration for the
purchase of other residential property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time
of the transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due upon the
transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was transferred to the
builder within the preceding year as consideration for the purchase of new, previously
unoccupied residential property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to the builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given the grantor toward the tax due
upon the transfer.
§ 192-49 CALIFORNIA CODE § 192-52
192:26 02 - 15 - 2006
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was previously sold under a
land contract by the grantor, a credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the sale
shall be given the grantor toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under this section, the
difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater than the amount of tax due, no
refund or carryover credit shall be allowed.
§ 192-50. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or option to renew or
extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge to the lessee is fixed or if a method for
calculating the rental charge is established.
§ 192-51. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid, and have priority out of the proceeds or any
judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation, claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of
the sale and of the writ upon which the sale is made except the state realty transfer tax, and
the sheriff, or other officer, conducting said sale, shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the
first moneys paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale are insufficient to
pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be liable for the remaining tax.
§ 192-52. Duties of Recorder of Deeds.
A. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by Act of July 7, 1983 (P.L. 40, No. 21),
the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for the local realty transfer tax,
including any amount payable to the Borough of California based on a redetermination of
the amount of tax due by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of the Pennsylvania realty
transfer tax, without compensation from the Borough of California.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is located in more than
one political subdivision, the Recorder shall not accept for recording such a deed unless
it is accompanied by a statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
C. On or before the 10th of each month, the Recorder shall pay over to the Borough of
California all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2% for use of the county, together
with a report containing the information as is required by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania in reporting collections of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The
two-percent commission shall be paid to the county.
D. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, the Recorder shall rerecord the deed or record the additional realty transfer
tax form only when both the state and local amounts and a rerecording or recording fee
has been tendered.
§ 192-53 TAXATION § 192-56
192:27 02 - 15 - 2006
§ 192-53. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for recording shall set
forth therein and as a part of such document the true, full and complete value thereof, or shall
be accompanied by a statement of value executed by a responsible person connected with the
transaction showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value thereof
or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under this article. A copy of the
Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of Value may be submitted for this purpose. The
provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which are
exempt from taxation based on family relationship. Other documents presented for affixation
of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy of the document and statement of value
executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction showing such connection and
setting forth the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 192-54. Civil penalties.
A. If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this article is due to fraud, there shall
be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the underpayment.
B. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this article on the date
prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is due to reasonable cause, there
shall be added to the tax 5% of the amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than
one month, with an additional 5% for each additional month or fraction thereof during
which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
§ 192-55. Tax to become lien.
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands, tenements, or
hereditaments, or any interest therein, lying, being situated, wholly or in part within the
boundaries of the Borough of California, which lands, tenements, hereditaments, or interest
therein, are described in or conveyed by or transferred by the deed which is the subject of the
tax imposed, assessed and levied by this article, said lien to begin at the time when the tax
under this article is due and payable, and continue until discharge by payment, or in
accordance with the law, and the solicitor is authorized to file a municipal or tax claim in the
Court of Common Pleas of Washington County, in accordance with the provisions of the
Municipal Claims and Liens Act of 1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., its supplements and
amendments.
§ 192-56. Enforcement.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with interest and penalties prescribed herein, shall
be recoverable as other debts of like character are recovered.
§ 192-57 CALIFORNIA CODE § 192-61
192:28 02 - 15 - 2006
§ 192-57. Regulations.
The Borough Council of the Borough of California is charged with enforcement and
collection of the tax and is empowered to regulate and enforce reasonable regulations for
enforcement and collection of the tax. The regulations which have been promulgated by the
Pennsylvania Department of Revenue under 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq. are incorporated into and
made a part of this article.
8. Editor’s Note: The Disclosure Statement is on file in the Borough offices.
9. Editor’s Note: The Act 50 Administrative Appeals Procedures are on file in the Borough offices.
ARTICLE VI
Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights
[Adopted 12-10-1998 by Ord. No. 455]
§ 192-58. Adoption and compliance.
Borough Council hereby generally adopts the provisions of the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights
and hereby mandates that Pennsylvania Municipal Service Co. ("PAMS") shall take all
appropriate action to be in compliance with the provisions of the Local Taxpayers Bill of
Rights when carrying out its duties as earned income and occupational privilege tax collector
for the Borough of California.
§ 192-59. Disclosure statement.
The Council of the Borough of California does hereby adopt the form of Disclosure Statement
of the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights attached hereto and made a part hereof,8 as amended
from time to time in order to be in compliance with applicable law, providing an explanation
of taxpayer rights and the obligations of the Borough of California by and through said
Pennsylvania Municipal Service Co.
§ 192-60. Administrative appeals procedures.
The Council of the Borough of California hereby adopts and establishes the Act 50
Administrative Appeals Procedures,9 attached hereto and made a part hereof, as amended from
time to time in order to be in compliance with applicable law, providing for the right of
taxpayers to receive determinations on petitions pertaining to the assessment, determination or
refund of eligible taxes.
§ 192-61. Hearing officer.
The Council of the Borough of California hereby appoints and designates Pennsylvania
Municipal Service Co. as hearing officer to adjudicate all taxpayer petitions pertaining to the
assessment, determination or refund of the eligible taxes.
§ 192-62 TAXATION § 192-63
192:29 02 - 15 - 2006
10. Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 192-62. Taxpayer rights coordinator.
The Council of the Borough of California hereby appoints and designates Pennsylvania
Municipal Service Co. as the taxpayer rights coordinator to act as a liaison between the
taxpayer and the local taxing authority in any disputes or with regards to any complaints.
§ 192-63. Annual fee. 10
The annual fee of PAMS, as set from time to time, for the additional services to be rendered
by it for purposes of taking all appropriate actions to be in compliance with the Local
Taxpayers Bill of Rights, including, but not limited to, acting as hearing officer and acting as
taxpayers rights coordinator, is hereby approved.

199:1 02 - 15 - 2006
Chapter 199
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
[Comprehensive legislation regulating vehicles and traffic within the Borough of
California is currently under review before the Borough Council. Upon final adoption,
said legislation will be included here.]

205:1 02 - 15 - 2006
Chapter 205
ZONING
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 205-1. Titles.
§ 205-2. Compliance with Municipalities
Planning Code.
§ 205-3. Relationship to Comprehensive
Plan.
§ 205-4. General purposes.
§ 205-5. Applicability.
§ 205-6. Compliance with chapter.
§ 205-7. Interpretation.
§ 205-8. Uses for which no provision is
made.
§ 205-9. Severability.
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 205-10. Rules of interpretation.
§ 205-11. Meanings of words.
§ 205-12. Definitions.
ARTICLE III
Establishment of Districts, Map and
General Regulations
§ 205-13. Establishment of zoning
districts.
§ 205-14. Establishment of overlay
districts.
§ 205-15. Establishment of Zoning Map.
§ 205-16. Interpretation of district
boundaries.
§ 205-17. Zoning district regulations.
§ 205-18. Explanation of use categories.
§ 205-19. Application of regulations.
§ 205-20. Permitted uses, special
exceptions and conditional uses.
§ 205-21. Lot, yard and height
requirements.
ARTICLE IV
Zoning District Regulations
§ 205-22. A-1 Agricultural District.
§ 205-23. Residential districts.
§ 205-24. R-1 Single-Family Residential
District.
§ 205-25. R-2 Multifamily Residential
District.
§ 205-26. Commercial districts.
§ 205-27. C-1 Commercial District.
§ 205-28. C-2 Mixed Use Commercial
District.
§ 205-29. MU Special Mixed Use District.
§ 205-30. Industrial district.
§ 205-31. M-1 Industrial District.
§ 205-32. I Institutional District.
ARTICLE V
Overlay District Regulations
§ 205-33. Establishment of overlay
districts.
§ 205-34. Overlay zoning maps.
§ 205-35. Interpretation of overlay
districts.
§ 205-36. Application of overlay district
regulations.
§ 205-37. F-P Floodplain Overlay District.
§ 205-38. H Historic Preservation
Overlay District.
CALIFORNIA CODE
205:2 02 - 15 - 2006
ARTICLE VI
Supplementary Regulations
§ 205-39. Application of yard
requirements.
§ 205-40. Temporary structures.
§ 205-41. Height limitations.
§ 205-42. Basement structures.
§ 205-43. Lot area measurements.
§ 205-44. Performance standards.
§ 205-45. Swimming pools.
§ 205-46. Camping or recreational vehicle
storage.
§ 205-47. Exotic animals.
§ 205-48. Oversized equipment storage.
§ 205-49. Gasoline service stations and
other drive-in uses.
§ 205-50. Motor vehicle repair garage.
§ 205-51. Individual mobile
homes/manufactured homes.
§ 205-52. Communications towers and
antennas.
§ 205-53. Kennels.
§ 205-54. Off-street parking.
§ 205-55. Off-street loading and
unloading.
§ 205-56. Joint facilities for parking or
loading.
§ 205-57. Developments and maintenance
of parking areas, structures and
loading areas.
§ 205-58. Accessible parking
requirements.
§ 205-59. Sexually oriented business
permit applications.
§ 205-60. Signs.
§ 205-61. Sign permits.
§ 205-62. Illumination.
§ 205-63. Methadone treatment facilities.
§ 205-64. Grading.
ARTICLE VII
Nonconforming Lots, Structures and Uses
§ 205-65. Intent and purpose.
§ 205-66. Nonconforming lots.
§ 205-67. Nonconforming structures.
§ 205-68. Nonconforming uses.
§ 205-69. Repairs and maintenance.
ARTICLE VIII
Administrative Provisions
§ 205-70. Appointment of Zoning Officer.
§ 205-71. Duties of Zoning Officer.
§ 205-72. Zoning permits.
§ 205-73. Certificates of occupancy.
§ 205-74. Building permits.
§ 205-75. Enforcement procedures;
violations and penalties.
§ 205-76. Appeals.
§ 205-77. Fees.
§ 205-78. Zoning Hearing Board
established.
§ 205-79. Zoning Hearing Board
administration and procedures.
§ 205-80. Special exceptions.
§ 205-81. Variances.
§ 205-82. Nonconforming uses.
§ 205-83. Mediation option.
§ 205-84. Conditional uses.
§ 205-85. Amendments to chapter.
§ 205-86. Landowner curative
amendments.
§ 205-87. Municipal curative
amendments.
Appendix 1, Lot Dimensional
Requirements
§ 205-1 ZONING § 205-2
205:3 02 - 15 - 2006
1. Editor’s Note: The administrative provisions set forth in original Sections I through VI of this ordinance are on file in
the Borough offices.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of California 12-8-2005 by
Ord. No. 496.1 Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes— See Ch. 89.
Junkyards and junk dealers —See Ch. 128.
Rental housing —See Ch. 160.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 168.
Stormwater management— See Ch. 181.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 184.
Subdivision and land development— See Ch. 187.
2. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 205-1. Titles.
A. Long title: "An ordinance of California Borough, Washington County, Pennsylvania, to
establish zoning regulations for the use of land, watercourses, other bodies of water, and
structures; defining and regulating the size, height, bulk, location, erection, construction,
repair, maintenance, alteration, demolition, area, intensity of use and dimensions of land,
structures, and bodies of water for agriculture, business, environment, industry, residence,
public service or other purposes; the density of population and intensity of use; the
provision of design specifications and performance standards; the percentage of lot which
may be occupied; the size of yards and other open spaces; the establishment of
legislative, administrative, enforcement, and appeal procedures; and the prescribing of
remedies for violations."
B. Short title. This chapter shall be known and cited as the "California Borough Zoning
Ordinance of 2005."
§ 205-2. Compliance with Municipalities Planning Code.
This chapter has been written to reflect the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code (Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as reenacted and amended)2 in that zoning
ordinances shall be designed:
A. To promote, protect and facilitate any or all of the following: the public health, safety,
morals, and the general welfare; coordinated and practical community development and
the proper density of population; the provisions of adequate light and air; access to
incident solar energy; police protection; vehicle parking and loading space,
transportation, water, sewerage, schools, recreational facilities, public grounds; the
provision of a safe, reliable and adequate water supply for domestic, commercial,
agricultural or industrial use, and other public requirements; as well as preservation of
§ 205-2 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-4
205:4 02 - 15 - 2006
the natural, scenic and historic values in the environment and preservation of forests,
wetlands, aquifers and floodplains.
B. To prevent one or more of the following: overcrowding of land, blight, danger and
congestion in travel and transportation, loss of health, life or property from fire, flood,
panic or other dangers.
C. To preserve prime agriculture and farmland considering topography, soil type and
classification, and present use.
D. To provide for the use of land within the municipality for residential housing of various
dwelling types encompassing all basic forms of housing, including single-family and
two-family dwellings, and a reasonable range of multifamily dwellings in various
arrangement, mobile homes and mobile home parks; provided, however, that this chapter
shall not be deemed invalid for the failure to provide for any other specific dwelling
type.
E. To accommodate reasonable overall community growth, including population and
employment growth, and opportunities for development for a variety of residential
dwelling types and nonresidential uses.
§ 205-3. Relationship to Comprehensive Plan.
This chapter is enacted to promote an orderly plan of development according to the goals,
objectives and recommendations of the California Borough Comprehensive Plan. The
Comprehensive Plan includes data on existing conditions with reasonable consideration to the
existing character of the various areas within the municipalities and the respective suitability
to particular land uses.
§ 205-4. General purposes.
The general purposes, which are the basis for the provisions and regulations of this chapter,
are set forth in the Borough Comprehensive Plan. The zoning regulations and districts set
forth in this chapter are made in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan for the general
welfare of the municipalities and the promotion of the health, safety, morals, convenience, and
order of present and future residents of California Borough and are intended, but not limited,
to achieving the following objectives:
A. To implement the policy goals and strategies of the Comprehensive Plan.
B. To promote a sustainable community by ensuring that future development meets the
economic and social needs of the residents in a manner that does not destroy the
productivity or health of its natural systems.
C. To promote and facilitate coordinated and practical community development in relation
to infrastructure facilities.
D. To provide standards to control the amount of open space and impervious surfaces within
a development and to control the intensity of development in areas of sensitive natural
§ 205-4 ZONING § 205-7
205:5 02 - 15 - 2006
resources or natural features in order to reduce or eliminate adverse environmental
impacts.
E. To reduce the financial burdens imposed on the community and protect the tax base by
preventing excessive or inappropriate development or uses within the municipalities.
F. To attract new businesses that will complement the existing economic structure within
the region.
G. To better utilize vacant and underutilized properties.
§ 205-5. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all zoning districts, lots, structures, land
developments and subdivisions within the municipal boundaries of California Borough,
Washington County, Pennsylvania.
§ 205-6. Compliance with chapter.
A. In all districts, after the effective date of this chapter, any existing land use, building,
structure, or any tract of land which is not in conformity with the regulations of the
district in which it is located shall be deemed as nonconforming and be subject to the
nonconforming regulations of this chapter.
B. No structure shall be located, erected, demolished, constructed, moved, altered externally,
converted, or enlarged, nor shall any structure or land be used or be designed to be used,
except in full compliance with all provisions of this chapter, and the subsequent lawful
issuance of all permits and certifications required by this chapter.
§ 205-7. Interpretation.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, these provisions shall be held to be
the minimum requirements.
A. It is not intended by this chapter to interfere with, or abrogate or annul, any ordinances,
rules, regulations, or permits previously adopted or issued, and not in conflict with any of
the provisions of this chapter, or which shall be adopted or issued, except those
specifically or implicitly repealed by this chapter, or any private restriction placed upon
property by covenant, deed, or other private agreement, unless repugnant hereto.
B. Whenever this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or
premises, open spaces or lot areas, or imposes higher standards other than those which
are required in, or under, any other statute, the provisions of the regulations made under
the authority of this chapter shall govern.
C. Provisions in any other ordinances that are concerned with design standards and which
are enacted and administered for California Borough shall not be considered to be in
conflict with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 205-8 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-10
205:6 02 - 15 - 2006
§ 205-8. Uses for which no provision is made.
Whenever, in any district established under this chapter, a use is not specifically permitted and
an individual makes an application to the Zoning Officer for such use, the Zoning Officer
shall refer the application to the Zoning Hearing Board, which shall have the authority to
permit or deny the proposed use. The use may be permitted if it is similar to, and compatible
with, permitted uses in the district and in no way is in conflict with the general purpose and
intent of this chapter or any provision permitting the same, provided that the same shall
comply and follow all requirements of this chapter.
§ 205-9. Severability.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Borough Council of California Borough that:
A. If any provision, article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence of phrase of this chapter
is for any reason held to be invalid or ineffective, in whole or in part, by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of this chapter which shall continue to be separately and fully effective; and
B. If the application of any provision or provisions of this chapter to any lot, building or
any other structure or tract of land is found to be invalid or ineffective, in whole or in
part, by a court of competent jurisdiction, the effect of such a decision shall be limited to
the person, property or situation immediately involved in the controversy and the
application of any such provisions to other persons, property or situations shall not be
affected.
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 205-10. Rules of interpretation.
For the purpose of this chapter the following rules shall apply:
A. The particular shall control the general.
B. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is
permissive.
C. If there is a difference in meaning or implication between the text of this chapter and any
caption or illustration, the text shall control.
D. Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
E. The singular includes the plural and the plural the singular.
F. The terms "occupied" or "used" shall be construed to be followed by the words "or
intended, arranged or designed to be occupied or used."
G. The word "person" includes an individual, corporation, partnership, unincorporated
association or any other similar entity.
§ 205-10 ZONING § 205-12
205:7 02 - 15 - 2006
H. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the specified example, but
is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances of similar kind and character.
I. The masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
§ 205-11. Meanings of words.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words, for the purpose of this chapter, shall
have the meaning herein indicated. When terms, phrases or words are not defined, they shall
have their ordinarily accepted meaning or such as the context may imply.
§ 205-12. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ABANDONED VEHICLE— Any vehicle that is not in a building or garage and which does
not have a current Pennsylvania registration and/or a current safety inspection sticker. This
term shall not apply to any vehicle or equipment used in the normal operation of a farm
owned or leased by the person farming the land or upon the property of a state-authorized
automotive repair facility.
ABANDONMENT — An intentional and absolute relinquishment and cessation of a use for
any period of time without intention to resume said use or the voluntary discontinuance of a
use for a continuous period of one year or more without reference to intent. Commercial or
industrial abandonment shall be measured from the date of the last record of sale or
occupancy, whichever occurs first, and residential abandonment shall be measured from the
last date of occupancy.
ACCESSORY USE— An activity or use that is incidental to, and generally found in
connection with, the principal use on the property. An accessory building contains an
accessory use.
ADULT BOOKSTORE/VIDEO STORE— A commercial establishment which, as one of its
principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or
more of the following: (1) adult media that includes books, magazines, periodicals or other
printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassette or video reproductions,
slides or other visual representations which depict or describe specified sexual activity or
specified anatomical areas; or (2) instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designated
for use in connection with specified sexual actions; and meets at least one of the following
criteria:
A. More than 30% of the floor area is devoted to adult media or instruments, devices, or
paraphernalia which are designated for use in connection with specified sexual actions
(not including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements, or any other portion of the
business not open to the public);
B. More than 30% of the gross sales (including rentals) result from the sale or rental of
adult media instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designated for use in
connection with specified sexual actions;
§ 205-12 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-12
205:8 02 - 15 - 2006
C. More than 30% of the dollar value of all merchandise displayed at any time is
attributable to adult media or instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designated
for use in connection with specified sexual actions;
D. More than 30% of all inventory consists of adult media or instruments, devices, or
paraphernalia which are designated for use in connection with specified sexual actions at
any time;
E. More than 30% of the merchandise displayed for sale consists of adult media or
instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designated for use in connection with
specified sexual actions; or
F. More than 30% of the stock-in-trade consists of such items at any time.
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial establishment
which features: persons who appear in the state of nudity; live performances which are
characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities;
or films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions that are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified anatomical areas or by specified
sexual activity.
ADULT DAY-CARE FACILITY— Any building, or portion of a building, other than the
client's residence, in which services are provided or arranged to assist in meeting the needs,
including personal care, social, nutritional, health, and educational needs for part of a
twenty-four-hour day. Care is provided for more than six persons unrelated to the operator.
The facility must be licensed by the commonwealth and conducted in accordance with
commonwealth requirements.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT — An exhibition of any adult-oriented motion pictures that are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. This also includes a live performance,
display or dance of any type which has as a significant or substantial portion of the
performance any actual or simulated performance of specified sexual activities or exhibition
and viewing of specified anatomical areas, removal of articles of clothing or appearing
unclothed, pantomiming, modeling or any other personal services offered customers.
ADULT LIVE THEATER— A theater, affair, hall, auditorium, or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features persons who appear in the state of nudity or
seminudity, or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified
anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER— A commercial establishment where, for any
form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic
reproductions or visual presentations of any kind are regularly shown which are characterized
by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT — Includes any use meeting the definition for this
term in Title 68, Chapter 55, of the Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes, as amended, and,
without limitation, the following establishments when operated for profit, whether direct or
indirect: adult bookstores; adult motion-picture theaters; adult mini motion-picture theaters;
§ 205-12 ZONING § 205-12
205:9 02 - 15 - 2006
adult drive-in movie theaters; adult motels; massage parlors; any premises to which the public,
patrons or members are invited or admitted and which are so physically arranged as to
provide booths, cubicles, rooms, studios, compartments or stalls separate from the common
areas of the premises for the purpose of viewing adult-oriented motion pictures or where an
entertainer provides adult entertainment to a member of the public, a patron or a member.
"Motion pictures" shall include material, chat rooms and other material available through the
Internet and motion pictures or videos available through cable, satellite or other television
services on computers or equipment used in the establishment; and an adult entertainment
studio or any premises that are physically arranged and used as such, whether advertised or
represented as an adult entertainment studio, rap studio, exotic dance studio, encounter studio,
sensitivity studio, modeling studio or any other term of like import. The term "booths,"
"cubicles," "rooms," "studios," "compartments" or "stalls," for purposes of defining
adult-oriented establishments, does not mean enclosures which are private offices used by the
owner, manager or persons employed on the premises for attending to the tasks of their
employment, and which are not held out to the public for the purpose of viewing motion
pictures or other entertainment for a fee, and which are not open to any persons other than
employees.
ADULT RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT — A business which offers for sale or rent
instruments, devices, gifts or paraphernalia which are designed or marketed for use in
connection with specified sexual activities, clothing that graphically depicts specified
anatomical areas or any of the material sold or rented in an adult bookstore/video store, if a
substantial or significant portion of such items are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas. Substantial or significant portion shall be construed to meet at least one of
the criteria established for adult bookstore/video store.
AGRICULTURAL BUILDING— A structure designed and constructed to house farm
implements, hay, grain, poultry, livestock, or other horticultural products. Such structure shall
not be a place of human habitation or a year-round place of employment where agricultural
products are processed, treated, or packaged; nor shall it be a building or structure open
year-round for use by the public. A farmer's market building will be considered an agricultural
building so long as it is located on the farmstead where the products are grown.
AGRICULTURAL OPERATION— An enterprise that is actively engaged in the commercial
production and preparation for market of crops, livestock and livestock products and in the
production, harvesting and preparation for market or use of agricultural, agronomic,
horticultural, silvicultural and aquacultural crops and commodities. The term includes an
enterprise that implements changes in production practices and procedures or types of crops,
livestock, livestock products or commodities produced consistent with practices and
procedures that are normally engaged by farmers or are consistent with technological
development within the agricultural industry.
AIRPORT — An area of land or water which is used, or intended to be used, for the landing
and takeoff of aircraft and any appurtenant areas which are used, or intended to be used, for
airport buildings or air navigation facilities or rights-of-way, together with all airport buildings
§ 205-12 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-12
205:10 02 - 15 - 2006
3. Editor's Note: The Nutrient Management Act was repealed 7-6-2005 by P.L. 112, No. 38. See now 3 Pa.C.S.A. § 501 et
seq.
and facilities thereon. Unless indicated otherwise, "airport" shall include heliports and public
airports.
A. PRIVATE AIRPORT — An airport that is privately owned and which is not open or
intended to be open to the public.
B. PUBLIC AIRPORT— An airport that is either publicly or privately owned and is open
to the public.
AIR RIGHTS— The ownership or control of that area of space at and above a horizontal
plane over the ground surface of land. This horizontal plane shall be at a height above the
existing or proposed development that is necessary or legally required for the full and free use
of the ground surface.
ALLEY, LANE or WAY— Any roadway or public way dedicated for public use and 20 feet
or less in width. No main building/structure shall have its frontage on an alley.
ALTERATION, STRUCTURAL— Any change or rearrangement of supporting members of
a building or structure such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, joists or rafters,
enclosing walls, or an enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height,
or the moving from one location or position to another.
AMUSEMENT PARK — An establishment existing primarily for entertainment purposes and
offering rides and exhibitions for a fee.
AMUSEMENT/RECREATION CENTER— An establishment that is not sexually oriented
and offers recreation, entertainment, or games to the general public for a fee or charge.
A. INDOOR AMUSEMENT CENTER—An entirely enclosed facility operated as a
commercial venture providing a source of amusement, entertainment, or recreation that
may include bowling alleys, athletic courts, indoor swimming pool, movie theaters,
playhouses, indoor golf centers, indoor batting cages or any other similar use.
B. OUTDOOR AMUSEMENT CENTER—A partially or entirely unenclosed facility
operated as a commercial venture providing a source of amusement, entertainment, or
recreation that may include miniature or pitch and putt golf courses, batting cages,
swimming pools, athletic courts, or any other similar use.
ANIMAL EQUIVALENT UNIT — One thousand pounds of animal weight as designated
under the Pennsylvania Nutrient Management Act.3
ANIMAL FEEDING OPERATION (AFO) — An animal housing facility that stables,
confines, and feeds or maintains animals for a total of 45 days or more in any twelve-month
period including the facility areas that do not sustain vegetation.
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY— The raising, breeding, keeping or care of farm animals or
livestock, including fowl or insects, for meat, by-products or other utility that is intended as a
business or gainful occupation, or any keeping of animals for any reason beyond what is
allowed in a permitted stable or kennel or under the keeping of pets. This term shall not
§ 205-12 ZONING § 205-12
205:11 02 - 15 - 2006
include a bulk commercial slaughterhouse or a central commercial stockyard for animals
awaiting slaughter.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has filed an
application for development, including his heirs, successors and assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether preliminary, tentative,
or final, required to be filed and approved prior to start of construction or development,
including, but not limited to, an application for a building permit for the approval of a
subdivision plan or for the approval of a development plan.
ARCHITECT — An individual registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as a
licensed architect.
ARENA— A completely enclosed structure with fixed seating for not more than 20,000
persons, which is designed to accommodate sporting, entertainment and assembly events and
which may include accessory dining and retail uses. An arena may be operated by a public or
private agency, authority or corporation.
ART, CRAFT OR ANTIQUE SHOP— Retail establishments specializing in the sale of
handmade, primitive, historical, and cultural items and artifacts.
ART GALLERY/MUSEUM — A facility used for the collection, display and/or distribution
of objects of art or science and which is typically sponsored by a public or quasi-public
agency and generally open to the public.
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY— A facility designed to provide individual dwelling units
for elderly persons who are independently mobile and are not in need of the level of service
provided by a personal care home, which provides on-site supervision and assistance available
to residents on occasional, "as needed" basis, and where at least one meal each day is
provided in a common dining area and which includes certain design features associated with
the needs of the elderly which are not customary in the construction of conventional dwelling
units, such as emergency call systems, common dining facilities, transportation facilities,
minimal housekeeping facilities, common leisure and recreational facilities, transportation
services and similar supporting services for the convenience of the residents.
AUTOMOBILE CAR WASH— Any building, site or premises, or portions thereof, used for
washing or reconditioning the interior or exterior of automobiles. An automobile car wash
shall include self-operated facilities not requiring attendants or employees, but shall not
include incidental one-bay washing facility in an automobile repair or service station where
such facilities are incidental to the operation of said automobile repair or service station.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR/SERVICE— Any building or lot used for the maintenance,
servicing, repair or painting of vehicles.
AUTOMOBILE SALES— Any facility or lot used for the sale of automobiles.
BAKERY— An establishment used for the preparation of baked goods for primarily retail
sales and may have incidental wholesale, for general distribution or consumption off-site.
§ 205-12 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-12
205:12 02 - 15 - 2006
BANK/FINANCIAL INSTITUTION— An establishment that provides services such as
retail banking, collection services, loan services, and tax and investment services to
individuals and businesses. This use does not include check-cashing businesses.
BANNER— A sign intended to be hung either with or without a frame possessing
characters, letters, illustrations or ornamentations applied to paper, plastic, or fabric of any
kind, excluding flags, emblems, and insignias or political, professional, religious, education,
or corporate organizations providing that such flags, emblems, and insignia are displayed for
noncommercial purposes.
BARBERSHOP/BEAUTY SALON— An establishment where one or more persons engage
in the practice of barbering or cosmetology including, but not limited to, shampooing, cutting,
and dressing hair, or other beauty treatments such as facials and manicures.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building or structure that is partly or completely below
grade, but having half of its clear height below the average grade of the adjoining land.
BEACON— Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at
one or more points not on the same lot or site as the light source; also, any light with one or
more beams that rotate or move.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST INN— An owner-occupied single-family dwelling that contains
not more than 10 guest bedrooms used for providing overnight accommodations to the public,
not to exceed 10 consecutive days, and in which breakfast is the only meal served and is
included in the charge for the room.
BILLBOARD— An off-premises sign which advertises an establishment, an activity, a
person, a product, or a service which is unrelated to or unavailable on the premises on which
the sign is located through which the advertising matter of any character is printed, posted or
lettered and may be either freestanding or attached to the surface of a building or other
structure, or applied directly to the surface.
BOAT AND MARINE SALES/SERVICE — Any building or lot used for the maintenance,
servicing, repair or painting of boats or other related watercraft.
BORE HOLES— Structures and appurtenant facilities to permit the introduction from the
surface to underground mining operations, or in some cases the removal from underground
mining operations to the surface, of electric power, water (with or without treatment
facilities), rock dust for safety purposes, communicating lines, compressed facilitate the
mining and removal of coal.
BOTTLE CLUB— An establishment operated for profit or pecuniary gain which is not
licensed by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board and admits patrons upon payment of a fee,
cover charge or membership fee and in which alcoholic liquors, alcohol or malt or brewed
beverages are not legally sold but where alcoholic liquors, alcohol or malt or brewed
beverages are either provided by the operator or agents or employees of the operator for
consumption on the premises or are brought into or kept at the establishment by the patrons or
persons assembling there for use and consumption. The term shall not include a licensee
under the Liquor Code. The permissibility of a use of land involving to any extent a bottle
club shall be determined according to the principal intended use.
§ 205-12 ZONING § 205-12
205:13 02 - 15 - 2006
4. Editor’s Note: Figure 1 is on file in the Borough offices.
5. Editor’s Note: Figure 2 is on file in the Borough offices.
BREWERY PUB— A facility where malt or brewed beverages are manufactured on site.
The mini-brewery may sell, transport and deliver malt beverages to various off-site locations,
however, the majority of the manufactured malt or brewed beverage products are sold and
consumed on-premises. The facility must be licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
and conducted in accordance with commonwealth requirements.
BROADCASTING STUDIO (RADIO AND TELEVISION) — Any premises or station
authorized by the appropriate regulating agency used for the purpose of providing
broadcasting services for general reception.
BUFFER AREA— A strip of land adjacent to the boundary of a property or district, not less
in width than is designated in this chapter, that is planted and maintained in shrubs, bushes,
trees, grass, or other landscaping material and within which no building or structure is
permitted except a wall, fence or sign in compliance with this chapter.
BUILDING — Any structure having enclosing walls and roofs and requiring a permanent
location on the land.
A. ACCESSORY BUILDING — A detached building customarily incidental and
subordinate to the principal building and located on the same lot.
B. PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A building in which is conducted the principal use of the
site or lot on which it is situated. In all residential districts, any dwelling shall be deemed
to be a principal building on the lot on which it is located.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the
proposed finished grades immediately adjacent to the front lot line to the highest point of the
roof for flat roofs, to the deck line for mansard roofs, to the mean height between eaves and
ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. If there are two or more separate roofs on a single
building, the height of such building shall be calculated from the highest roof. See Figure 1 in
the Appendixes.4
BUILDING MATERIAL FACILITY— A facility for the sale of home, lawn and garden
supplies and tools and construction materials such as brick, lumber, hardware and other
similar materials either within or without an enclosed building.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE— An established line within a property defining the minimum
required distance between the face of any building or structure to be erected and an adjacent
street right-of-way of a lot line. The face of the building includes basements, decks, sunrooms,
foyers, bay windows, porches, patios with footers, projecting eaves and overhangs, dormers,
and any other solid projections and solid entrances. Walks, terraces, and uncovered steps or
stoops attached to a structure are exempt. Building lines shall also apply to all accessory
buildings and structures except for signs, fences, and walls and shall apply to all yard lines.
See Figure 2 in the Appendixes.5
BUSINESS SCHOOL— A commercial enterprise involving the teaching of business or
related skills to adults.
§ 205-12 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-12
205:14 02 - 15 - 2006
BUS/OTHER TRANSIT SHELTER— A covered structure at a bus or other transit stop
providing protection against the weather.
BUS/OTHER TRANSIT STOP— A place on a bus or other transit route, usually marked by
a sign, at which buses or other transit vehicles stop for passengers to load and unload.
BUS/OTHER TRANSIT TERMINAL, DEPOT AND PASSENGER STATION— A facility,
including terminals, depots, and passenger waiting, loading, and unloading stations of bus and
other transit companies and districts. This term shall include both public and private entities
that provide transportation services primarily for people, but which may include freight
transport services incidental to its principal service. This term shall not include bus or other
transit passenger stops or the long-term parking of buses.
BUS/OTHER TRANSIT VEHICLE MAINTENANCE/STORAGE— A facility providing
any and all types of general or specialized maintenance services or storage areas for buses and
other transit vehicles of a transit company or district, public or private, providing
transportation services primarily for people, but which may transport freight as an incidental
service.
CAMPGROUND— A publicly or privately owned site designed, designated, maintained,
intended or used for the purpose of supplying a location for seasonal, recreational, and
temporary living purposes in cabins, tents or recreational equipment/vehicles open to the
public for free or for a fee.
CANOPY— A roof-like structure either projecting from a building facade and open on three
sides, or standing alone and open on four sides, and used for the purpose of protecting
pedestrians and motorists from weather-related elements.
CATERING BUSINESS— An establishment used for the preparation and delivery of food
and beverages for off-site consumption. This establishment may provide for on-site pickup but
may not provide for on-site consumption.
CEMETERY/MAUSOLEUM — An area used, or intended to be used, for the burial of the
deceased, including a columbarium, crematorium and mortuary.
CHILD DAY-CARE FACILITY— Any institution or place licensed by the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania which is maintained in whole or in part for the care of children, not of
common parentage, apart from their parents or guardians, under the age of 16 during any part
of a day with or without stated educational purposes. This definition shall include child
day-care centers and family day-care homes but shall not apply to public, private or parochial
school systems.
A. CHILD DAY-CARE CENTER — A facility in which care is provided for seven or more
children at any one time where the childcare areas are not being used as a family
residence.
B. FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — Any single-family residence, other than the child's
own home, in which child day care is provided at any time for up to six children who are
not relatives to the care giver where the childcare areas are being used as a family
residence.
§ 205-12 ZONING § 205-12
205:15 02 - 15 - 2006
CLEAR-CUTTING— The indiscriminate or complete removal of all trees on a site, or any
portion thereof greater than 0.5 acre in a contiguous area, during a single timber harvesting
operation or within a five-year period.
CLINIC — An establishment that provides patient care services, including but not limited to
medical, dental, psychological, and/or social services on an outpatient basis.
CLOTHING/WEARING APPAREL SALES AND SERVICE — The retail sales and service
of clothing and wearing apparel typically found in clothing stores, tailors, shoe stores, shoe
repair stores, and jewelry stores.
CLUB— An association, corporation, person or persons that assemble for a common social,
educational, or recreational nonprofit purpose, but not including groups organized primarily to
render a service that is customarily carried on as a business. This definition includes the
buildings and facilities owned and operated by the association, corporation, person or persons.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — A form of single-family residential development which
permits a reduction in lot area and bulk requirements, provided there is no increase in the
number of lots permitted under a conventional development and provided, further, that the
resultant land area is devoted to open space.
COAL MINING ACTIVITIES— Surface mining activities, underground mining activities,
coal preparation activities or coal refuse disposal activities as defined in this chapter.
COAL PREPARATION ACTIVITY— An operation in which coal is subject to chemical or
physical processing or cleaning, concentrating or other processing or preparation. This
includes any facility associated with the coal preparation activity and the activity by which the
land surface has been, or is, disturbed as a result of or incidental to coal preparation activity
of the operator, including but not limited to private ways and roads appurtenant to the area,
land excavations and loading facilities; storage and stockpile facilities; water treatment/storage
facilities; settling basins and impoundments; and areas in which are situated facilities,
equipment, machines, tools or other materials or property that result from or are used in the
coal preparation activity.
COAL PROCESSING WASTE— Earth materials that are separated and wasted from the
product coal during cleaning, concentrating or other processing or preparation of coal.
COAL REFUSE DISPOSAL— Any waste coal, rock, shale, slurry, culms, gob, boney, slate,
clay and related materials, associated with or near a coal seam, which are either brought
aboveground or otherwise removed from a coal mine in the process of mining coal or which
are separated from coal during the cleaning or preparation operations. The term includes
underground development wastes, coal-processing wastes, and excess spoil, but does not mean
overburden from surface mining activities.
COAL REFUSE DISPOSAL ACTIVITIES— Activities whereby a plot of land is used as a
place for disposing, dumping or storage of coal refuse. These areas may include land thereby
affected, including, but not limited to, a deposit of coal refuse on or buried in the earth and
intended as permanent disposal of or long-term storage of the material, but not including coal
refuse deposited within an active mine itself or coal refuse never removed from a mine. The
term includes activities in which the natural land surface has been disturbed as a result of or
§ 205-12 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-12
205:16 02 - 15 - 2006
incidental to the coal refuse disposal activities of the operator, including, but not limited to,
private ways and roads appurtenant to the area, land excavations, workings, tailings, repair
areas, storage areas, processing areas, shipping areas and areas in which structures, facilities,
equipment, machines, tools or other materials or property which result from or are used in
coal refuse disposal activities are situated.
COAL TIPPLE (AND CLEANING PLANT) — Structures and facilities usable and useful for
the bringing of coal and other substances from mines to the surface, for the storing of coal
(including the separation of waste material and moisture therefrom), for the processing and
classifying of coal and for the storage and loading of said coal for movement off the premises.
COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA— Any device used for transmission or reception of
radio, television, cellular telephone, pager, commercial mobile radio service, or any other
wireless communications signals, owned or operated by any person or entity licensed by the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to operate such device.
COMMUNICATIONS CO-LOCATION— The act of installing wireless communications
equipment, from more than one provider, on a single tower, building, or structure.
COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT BUILDING— An unmanned building containing
communications equipment required for the operation of communications antennas and
covering an area on the ground not greater than 250 square feet.
COMMUNICATIONS TOWER— A structure, other than a building, including any guy
wires principally intended to support facilities for receipt or transmission of broadcast for
commercial or public VHF and UHF television, FM radio, two-way radio, common carriers,
cellular telephone, fixed point microwave, low power television, or AM radio, including
accessory equipment related to telecommunications. Not included are antennas and supportive
structures for private, noncommercial and amateur purposes including but not limited to ham
radios and citizen band radios.
COMMUNICATIONS TOWER HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the ground
level to the highest point on a communications tower, including antennas mounted on the
tower.
COMMUNITY CENTER— A structure or area used for fraternal, social, cultural, and/or
recreational programs generally open to the public and designed to serve significant segments
of the local community.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN— The adopted public document for California Borough,
Washington County, Pennsylvania, prepared in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code (MPC), consisting of maps, charts, and textual material that
constitutes a policy guide to decisions about the physical and social development of the
municipality. The Comprehensive Plan is also known as the "California Borough
Comprehensive Plan."
CONCENTRATED ANIMAL FEEDING OPERATION (CAFO) —
A. An operation that is:
§ 205-12 ZONING § 205-12
205:17 02 - 15 - 2006
6. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10601 et seq.
7. Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
(1) Any livestock or poultry facility with more than 1,000 animal equivalent units;
(2) An operation with 301 to 1,000 animal equivalent units that are CAO’s; or
(3) Any other agricultural operation with a discharge to surface waters.
B. CAFO’s fall under the authority of the Federal Clean Water Act and the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System regulations and must have and implement
nutrient management plans and erosion and sedimentation control plans.
CONCENTRATED ANIMAL OPERATION (CAO) — An operation owned or managed by
a farmer with more than two animal equivalent units per acre of land suitable and available
for manure application on an annualized basis. These operations must have and implement an
approved nutrient management plan that has been approved by a county conservation district
or the State Conservation Commission.
CONDITIONAL USE— A use permitted in a particular zoning district pursuant to the
provisions in Article VI of the MPC6 and the provisions set forth within this chapter.
CONDOMINIUM — Real estate, portions of which are designated for separate ownership
and the remainder of which is designated for common ownership solely by the owners of
those portions, created under either the Pennsylvania Unit Property Act of 1963 or the
Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act.7
CONTINUING CARE FACILITY— A residential facility, licensed by the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, consisting of either a single building or a group of buildings, under common
or related ownership, located on a single lot or on contiguous lots, without reference to
contiguous streets, containing two or more of the following services: assisted living facility;
home and community based services facility; housing for the elderly; independent living
facility; nursing home; personal care home; personal support services for a continuing care
facility; skilled nursing facility.
A. HOME AND COMMUNITY BASED SERVICES FACILITY — A facility which
provides services designed to assist elderly or disabled persons, including services such
as a wellness center, therapeutic pool, geriatric assessment, rehabilitation, home health
care, meals on wheels, and transportation services.
B. PERSONAL SUPPORT SERVICES FOR A CONTINUING CARE FACILITY —
Services provided to residents of a continuing care facility, located within a main
building, such as beauty shop, barbershop, gift shop, pharmacy, bank, and laundry and
cleaning services and facilities.
CONVENIENCE STORE— A retail establishment with a sales area of 5,000 square feet or
less offering for sale food products, household items, newspapers, magazines, or freshly
prepared foods that may be available for on-site or off-site consumption. Accessory activities
may include the operation of no more than two arcade games, video games or other similar
devices, automated teller machines (ATMs), check cashing, money orders, movie rentals,
§ 205-12 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-12
205:18 02 - 15 - 2006
lottery tickets, film processing and the sale of liquefied petroleum gas and/or gasoline, but
shall not include the repair or service of vehicles. Convenience stores shall not exceed more
than four fuel islands or more than eight fueling positions.
CONVENIENCE STORE SELLING GASOLINE— Retail establishments meeting the
criteria for a convenience store that have more than four fuel islands or more than eight
fueling positions on the premises.
COPYING AND PRINTING SERVICE — An establishment that provides copying, printing,
typesetting and related clerical services and/or the retail sales of supplies used for copying and
printing. This does not include commercial publishing or printing businesses or retail sales of
copy machines.
CORRECTIONAL FACILITY— A publicly or privately operated facility housing persons
awaiting trial, serving a sentence after being found guilty of a criminal offense, being within
the jurisdiction of a federal, state or local probation, parole or corrections agency and/or
receiving treatment other than at a hospital while under the jurisdiction of such authority or
agency. The term shall include but not be limited to jails, prisons, juvenile detention centers,
work release centers, pre-release centers and treatment centers.
COUNTRY INN— An establishment that contains not more than 20 guest bedrooms in
which lodging, not to exceed 14 consecutive days, is provided for compensation and where
breakfast and other meals for lodgers may also be provided. Restaurant facilities may be open
to the general public.
COUNTY— Washington County, Pennsylvania.
COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION— The Planning Commission of Washington
County, Pennsylvania.
COURTYARD— An open, unoccupied and uncovered space partially or wholly surrounded
by the walls of a building or a structure.
CROPLAND— Land used for the production of adapted crops for harvest, along or in a
rotation with grasses and legumes, and includes row crops, small grain crops, hay crops,
nursery crops, orchard crops and other similar specialty crops.
DANCE STUDIO— A facility designed and operated to provide instruction within a
classroom environment in the art of dance.
DECIBEL— A unit of measurement of the intensity (loudness) of sound.
DEVELOPABLE LAND— That land proposed for development which excludes therefrom
all portions thereof:
A. Dedicated or to be dedicated or devoted for use as public or private streets;
B. Dedicated or to be dedicated or devoted to use as public or private improvements,
including but not limited to stormwater management facilities;
C. Defined by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection as wetlands;
§ 205-12 ZONING § 205-12
205:19 02 - 15 - 2006
D. Defined by appropriate federal or state agencies as being within a one-hundred-year
floodplain; and
E. Having a slope in excess of 25%.
DEVELOPER— Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with the permission of
such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a subdivision of land or a land
development.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN— The provisions for development, including a planned residential
development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants relating to use, location and bulk of
buildings and other structures, intensity of use or density of development, streets, way and
parking facilities, common open space and public facilities. The phrase "provisions of the
development plan" when used in this chapter shall mean the written and graphic materials
referred to in this definition.
DISTRIBUTION FACILITY— Any premises, or part thereof, which provide logistic support
for business, such as freight management, inventory control, storage, packaging and
consolidation of goods for distribution.
DOMICILIARY CARE HOME — A single-family dwelling certified by the commonwealth
(Department of Aging) for the purpose of providing a supervised living arrangement in a
homelike setting for no more than three adults who are disabled physically, mentally,
emotionally or are aged persons and who are not relatives of the operator and are unable to
live alone for a period exceeding 24 consecutive hours. These facilities must meet state and
federal fire, safety, health, sanitary and program standards.
DORMITORY/RESIDENCE HALL— Any structure designed or used primarily (greater
than 50% of occupancy capacity) or solely to provide housing for college or university
students, with rooms containing a number of beds and serving as communal quarters, which
may include communal cooking/eating and living quarters. The building may be publicly or
privately owned, leased, managed, operated or otherwise controlled. Staff and other monitors
may reside therein. Dormitories shall include fraternity and sorority houses.
DRIVEWAY— An impervious surface for vehicular access to a building, garage, parking
facility or other vehicular facility, lot or parcel of land.
DRY CLEANER— An establishment that is primarily engaged in dry cleaning and laundry
services including the pressing, repair, and dry cleaning of clothing, apparel, or other fabric,
other than personal services directly to a consumer.
DWELLING— Any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed
or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families, and any vacant land which
is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building,
structure or portion thereof.
A. SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A detached building designated for, or occupied
exclusively as, a residence by one family and containing not more than one dwelling
unit.
§ 205-12 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-12
205:20 02 - 15 - 2006
B. TWO FAMILY DWELLING — A detached building occupied by two families only,
independently of each other, including:
(1) DOUBLE HOUSE— A detached building containing two dwelling units attached
side-to-side, with separate entrances and separated by an unpierced party wall.
(2) DUPLEX —A detached building containing two dwelling units, one above the
other, each having a separate entrance.
C. MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — A dwelling or group of dwellings on one lot
containing separate living quarters that is designed for occupancy by three or more
families living independently of each other, and containing three or more dwelling units.
Such buildings shall consist of the following types:
(1) APARTMENT BUILDING — A multifamily dwelling with direct access from the
outside or through a common hall, and further provided with separate cooking,
sleeping and bathroom facilities for the exclusive use of each family.
(2) GARDEN APARTMENT — A grouping of one or more buildings, each
containing not more than eight dwelling units per building, of which the principal
feature of the development plan is composed of a building area, parking area,
service area, landscape reservations and plantings, and other land features
appropriate for its use as a dwelling, and which conforms to the standards and
requirements of this chapter.
(3) ROW HOUSE — A detached building with the dwelling units attached
side-to-side, with separate entrances and separated by an unpierced party wall.
DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one
or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and
sanitation.
A. APARTMENT — A portion of a building or a room or suite of rooms forming part of an
apartment building and which is occupied or intended or designed to be occupied by one
family for living and sleeping purposes, a single housekeeping unit, and which contains
complete kitchen, bath and toilet facilities permanently installed.
B. CONVERSION APARTMENT — Any dwelling unit created by combining space within
an existing structure.
C. TOWNHOUSE — A dwelling contained within a multifamily residential building that
has a separate entrance and sharing not more than two party walls in common with the
other dwellings.
EASEMENT— A public or private right of use over the property of another.
A. CONSERVATION EASEMENT — An easement precluding future or additional
development of the land for the purpose of protecting or preserving natural features.
B. UTILITY EASEMENT — A right-of-way granted for limited use of land for public or
quasi-public purpose.
§ 205-12 ZONING § 205-12
205:21 02 - 15 - 2006
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION— A structure or part of a structure designed and used for
the training and teaching of children, youths and/or adults, including laboratories appurtenant
thereto.
ENGINEER— A professional engineer licensed as such by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
EQUESTRIAN FACILITY— Horse, donkey and mule facilities including horse ranches,
boarding stables, riding schools and academies, horse exhibition facilities (for shows and other
competitive events), pack stations, and barns, stables, corrals and paddocks accessory and
incidental to these uses.
EQUIPMENT RENTAL/REPAIR— A business providing typical household tools and
lawn/garden equipment for repair (such as sharpening, or the repair of small motors or
engines) or rental, including hand-operated machinery, power tools, lawn mowers, hedgers,
etc. This excludes vehicles, trucks and trailers licensed for street use.
ESCORT — A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide
or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately
perform a striptease for another person.
ESCORT AGENCY/SERVICE— A person or business association who furnishes, offers to
furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip or
other consideration.
ESSENTIAL COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA— Any communications antenna owned or
operated exclusively by an agency or authority of the municipality or Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or any police, fire, emergency medical or emergency management agency or any
public utility whose rates are regulated, and are providing a service regulated by the
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission.
ESSENTIAL COMMUNICATIONS TOWER— Any communications tower used
exclusively to support essential communications antennas.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES— The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance, by public
utilities or municipal departments, of underground, surface or overhead gas, electrical, steam
or water transmission or distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal
systems, and their essential buildings, excluding communications towers and antennas as
defined herein.
EXTRACTIVE INDUSTRY— The excavation or recovery of metallic, nonmetallic, or
mineral fuels, including but not limited to coal, limestone, clay, sand, gravel or other mineral
resources, through processes and techniques such as digging, drilling, strip-mining, quarrying,
and underground methods for sale or otherwise used for commercial purposes. It shall include
the extraction of topsoil when such activities are undertaken or proposed to be undertaken as a
distinct land use.
FAIR HOUSING ACT — Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended by the Fair
Housing Amendments Act of 1988 (42 U.S.C. §§ 3600-3620).
§ 205-12 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-12
205:22 02 - 15 - 2006
FAMILY— A single person occupying a dwelling unit; or two or more individuals living
together on a nontransient basis as a single housekeeping unit and doing their cooking on the
premises, when said individuals are related by blood, marriage, or adoption, including foster
children and including not more than two boarders, roomers, or lodgers; or a maximum of
five children or adults requiring special care or supervision who are under the
twenty-four-hour or full-time care of resident "parents" or persons acting in loco parentis; or
not more than three individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit and doing their
cooking in one kitchen on the premises; or any number of persons possessing a "handicap"
within the meaning of the Fair Housing Act [42 U.S.C. § 3602(h)] who reside in one dwelling
unit and live and cook together as a single housekeeping unit. This definition does not include
a collective body of persons occupying a hotel, dormitory, lodge, boarding/rooming house,
group care facility, commune, or institution.
FAMILY CARE FACILITY— A facility providing shelter, counseling, and other
rehabilitative services in a family-like environment for four to six residents, plus such
minimum supervisory personnel as may be required to meet standards of the licensing agency.
Residents may not be legally related to the facility operators or supervisors and, by reason of
mental or physical disability, chemical or alcohol dependency, or family or school adjustment
problems, require a minimal level of supervision but do not require medical or nursing care or
general supervision. A family care facility must be licensed and/or approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare and may include uses such as foster homes,
community residential alternative facilities, or home individual programs. A family care
facility shall be considered a single-family detached dwelling and be permitted as such.
FARM — Any parcel of land which is gainfully used in the production of agricultural,
horticultural, arboricultural, viticulture, and dairy products; and animal husbandry including
the keeping of livestock, poultry and bee raising, including necessary farm structures and
equipment.
FARMERS' MARKET — A place with or without buildings or structures, where fruit,
vegetables, produce, dairy products, and the like are sold from more than one fruit or
vegetable stand operated partially or wholly by persons who do not reside on the property.
FENCE— A barrier constructed for the purpose of protection, confinement, enclosure or
privacy. The term "fence" shall include screening walls and shall also include hedges and
evergreen shrubbery exceeding 36 inches in height.
A. PRIVACY FENCE — A fence erected or constructed to block the view of the enclosed
property.
B. SECURITY FENCE — A fence erected or constructed to serve as a barrier to persons,
animals or vehicles entering and leaving the property.
FILL— Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is placed, pushed,
dumped, pulled, transported or moved to a new location above the natural surface of the
ground or on top of the stripped surface, including the conditions resulting therefrom; the
difference in elevation between a point on the original ground and a designated point of
higher elevation on the finished grade; the material used to make a fill.
§ 205-12 ZONING § 205-12
205:23 02 - 15 - 2006
FINISHED GRADE— The resulting level of the ground after the final grading where there
is a cut, and after normal settlement where there is a fill.
FLEA MARKET— A place where any person or group of vendors, whether professional or
nonprofessional, offer for sale, trade, or barter any goods regardless of whether they are new,
used, antique, or homemade; and regardless of whether they are offered for sale in open air,
buildings, or temporary structures. The term "flea market" does not include the offering for
sale of goods by the owner thereof at owner's residence at what are commonly referred to as
"garage sales" or "yard sales," providing that such sales do not occur more frequently than
once every 60 days. The term "flea market" also shall not include any business or occupation
which has a valid business license or special use permit pertaining to the sale, trade, or barter
of goods.
FLOOD— A general, but temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally
dry land areas from the overflow of streams, rivers and other waters.
A. ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that, on the average, is likely to occur
once every 100 years (i.e., that has a one-percent chance of occurring each year, although
the flood may occur in any year).
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — A map of the municipality on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has delineated both the special flood
hazard areas and the flood risk premium zones applicable to the municipality.
A. SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area subject to inundation by the
base flood, designated zones A, A1-30, AE, AH, AO, V, V1-30, or VE on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map.
FLOODPLAIN— The lands adjoining a river or stream that have been, or may be expected
to be, inundated by floodwaters in a one-hundred-year frequency flood.
FLOOD-PRONE AREA— Any land area susceptible to being inundated by floodwater from
any source.
FLOODWAY— The channel of a watercourse and portions of the adjoining floodplains
reasonably required to carry and discharge the one-hundred-year frequency flood. Unless
otherwise specified, the boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance
studies provided by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies have defined the
boundary of the one-hundred-year frequency floodway, it is assumed, absent evidence to the
contrary, that the floodway extends from the stream to 50 feet from the top of the bank of the
stream.
FLOOR AREA— Sum of the gross livable area of several floors of a building or buildings
measured from the face of the exterior walls, or from center lines of walls that separate two
buildings. In particular, floor area includes but is not limited to the following:
A. Basement space, if the floor to ceiling measures seven feet or more.
B. Elevator shafts, stairwells and attic space (whether or not a floor has been laid),
providing structural headroom of eight feet or more.
§ 205-12 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-12
205:24 02 - 15 - 2006
C. Roofed terraces, exterior balconies, breezeways or porches, provided that over 50% of
the perimeter of these is enclosed.
D. Any other floor space used for dwelling purposes, no matter where located within a
building.
E. Accessory buildings, excluding space used for accessory off-street parking or used for
loading berths.
F. Any other floor space not specifically excluded, excluding space used for
air-conditioning machinery or cooling towers and similar mechanical equipment serving
the building and cellar space.
FLOOR AREA, BUILDING— The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors of a
building or structure and its accessory buildings on the same lot, excluding cellar and
basement floor areas not used as primary living sleeping or business areas, but including the
area of roofed porches and roofed terraces.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS— The total area of a building measured by taking the outside
dimensions of the building at each floor level intended for occupancy or storage.
FLOOR AREA, HABITABLE— The sum of the floor area of all heated, furnished rooms
within a dwelling unit, used on a daily basis for habitation. Such area may include living
rooms; recreation rooms; kitchens; dining rooms; bedrooms; bathrooms; hallways; closets;
heated and finished basements, cellars and attics; attached garages which have been converted
into an integral part of the living quarters; but does not include garages, porches whether
roofed, unroofed, or enclosed; roofed terraces; unfinished and unheated basements; attics;
cellars; garages, etc.
FLOOR AREA, NET USABLE— The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors
of a building and its accessory buildings on the same lot, excluding cellar and basement floor
areas not intended to be occupied or leased, stairways, fire towers, elevator shafts, public
lobby area, public rest rooms and mechanical rooms. For purposes of determining off-street
parking requirements, under no circumstances shall the net usable floor area be less than 80%
of the floor area of a building.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — Determined by dividing the gross floor area of all
buildings on a lot by the area of that lot.
FLOOR AREA, RETAIL NET — All that space used by customers and retail employees to
consummate retail sales, and to include display areas used to indicate the variety of goods
available for sale but not to include office space and other general administrative areas.
FLORIST SHOP— An establishment for the retail sales of flowers, plants and accessories
that may include the storage of merchandise inside of the building and the outside display of
plants and flowers.
FOREST MANAGEMENT OPERATIONS— All activities connected with growing and
harvesting of forest products, including site preparations, which include the construction and
maintenance of roads, and the cultivation and logging of trees.
§ 205-12 ZONING § 205-12
205:25 02 - 15 - 2006
FORESTRY— The management of forests and timberlands when practiced in accordance
with accepted silvicultural principles, through developing, cultivating, harvesting, transporting,
and selling trees for commercial purposes, which does not involve any land development.
Forestry specifically does not include clear cutting.
FORTUNE TELLER; PSYCHIC; ASTROLOGER— A business offering personal services
to individuals based on the art of astrology, palmistry, phrenology, fortune telling,
clairvoyance, clairaudience, crystal gazing, prophecy, augury, necromancy and other similar
practices.
FOUNDATION, PERMANENT — A full perimeter masonry or poured concrete foundation
resting upon a suitable concrete footer, said footer to be at least three feet below finished
grade. The foundation wall shall have a minimum width of six inches with the footer
projecting at least three inches on each side.
FREIGHT TERMINAL— The premises and building(s) where cargo is stored and where
railroad cars, aircraft, and trucks load and unload cargo for shipment or distribution on a
regular basis, and which may include facilities for the temporary storage of loads prior to
shipment and facilities for the maintenance of transport vehicles.
FRONT BUILDING LINE— A line parallel to the front lot line, at a distance measured
perpendicular therefrom as prescribed in this chapter for a required yard. Where there is no
required yard then the lot line shall be the front building line.
FRONT YARD— The open space extending across the entire width of the lot between the
front line of the building and the street right-of-way. The front yard is measured perpendicular
to the building at the closest point to the street right-of-way.
FRUIT AND VEGETABLE STAND— A place, with or without buildings or structures,
where fruit, vegetables, produce, dairy products, and the like are sold from one fruit or
vegetable stand.
FUELING POSITION— A location at which a single vehicle may be fueled from a fuel
dispenser.
FUEL ISLAND— A concrete platform measuring a minimum of six inches in height from
the paved surface on which fuel dispensers are located.
FUNERAL HOME (INCLUDING MORTUARIES) — A building or part thereof used
exclusively for human burial services. Such building may contain space and facilities for:
A. Embalming and the performance of other services used in the preparation of the dead for
burial;
B. The performance of autopsies and other surgical procedures;
C. The storage of caskets, funeral urns, and other related funeral supplies; and
D. The storage of funeral vehicles, but shall not include facilities for cremation.
§ 205-12 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-12
205:26 02 - 15 - 2006
GARAGE— A building or portion thereof completely enclosed, designed and/or used for
storage or servicing of vehicles, but not including automobile sales.
A. GARAGE, COMMUNITY— A group of private garages, detached or under one roof,
arranged in a row or around a common means of access and erected for use of residents
in the immediate vicinity.
B. GARAGE, PRIVATE— A garage for housing only with a capacity for not more than
three motor vehicles. A garage exceeding a three-vehicle capacity, intended primarily for
housing of cars belonging to the occupants of the premises, shall be considered a private
garage if the lot whereupon such garage is located contains not less than 1,500 square
feet for each vehicle capacity.
C. GARAGE, PUBLIC—A building structure or any portion thereof used for housing or
repairing motor vehicles, including rooms for storing, exhibiting or showing cars for sale.
GARBAGE— Unwanted or discarded material, including animal and vegetable waste
resulting from the handling, storage, sale and preparation, cooking and serving of food that
has insufficient liquid content to be free flowing. This term includes refuse and rubbish.
GARDEN CENTER— Land and buildings where the wholesale or retail sale of nursery
stock and garden supplies takes place. Such nursery stock and supplies may include any of the
following: ornamental plants, flowers, shrubs and trees cultivated in a nursery; seed, fertilizer,
garden pesticides and herbicides in retail quantities and packaging; garden hand tools; plant
containers; garden statuary and furniture; landscape lighting; bird feeders and supplies; and
seasonal ornaments and novelties such as Christmas wreaths and decorations. Such use may
include the provision of landscape design and or installation services, provided that such
services are ancillary to the principal use and offered to clients whose residence or place of
business exists elsewhere. Outdoor storage of lawn and garden supplies such as mulch,
fertilizer, topsoil and related landscape or garden supplies, such as ornamental stone or gravel,
are permitted only where expressly authorized by the regulations governing the jurisdictional
zoning district.
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION— An establishment where the principal use is the retail
sale of gasoline, oil, or other motor vehicle fuel and no more than 15% of the floor area is
used for convenience and variety goods. The premises may include, as an accessory use only,
facilities for polishing, greasing, washing, or otherwise cleaning, servicing, or repairing motor
vehicles, but does not include liquefied petroleum gas distribution facilities.
GAS SUBSTATION— An assemblage of equipment for purposes other than generation or
utilization, through which gas energy in bulk is passed for the purposes of switching or
general public, provided that a gas substation permitted in a residential district shall not
include rotating equipment, storage of materials, trucks or repair facilities or housing or repair
crews.
GOVERNING BODY— The Borough Council of California Borough, Washington County,
Pennsylvania.
GRADE— The average elevation of the proposed finished grade line of the ground at the
front of street side of the proposed building.
§ 205-12 ZONING § 205-12
205:27 02 - 15 - 2006
GRADE, NEW OR FINISHED— The resulting level of the ground after the final grading
where there is a cut, and after normal settlement where there is a fill.
GRADING— The stripping or excavation of any material; the filling of any existing ground
with natural or man-made material; and/or the relation on any lot, tract or parcel of each or
other material. Except for the surface stripping of coal, topsoil, rock and other commonly
mined substances, such grading constitutes a change in use of the land.
GREENHOUSE— A structure consisting primarily of glass, clear plastic, or other
light-transmitting material in which temperature and humidity can be controlled for the
cultivation or protection of plants or seedlings for research or instruction.
A. COMMERCIAL GREENHOUSE — An agricultural enterprise using a controlled
environment (temperature and humidity) for the commercial cultivation and production
of plants.
GROUP CARE FACILITY— A facility that functions as a single housekeeping unit
providing shelter, counseling, and other rehabilitative services for more than six but fewer
than 15 residents, plus such minimum supervisory personnel as may be required to meet
standards of the licensing agency. Residents may not be legally related to the facility
operators or supervisors and, by reason of mental or physical disability, chemical or alcohol
dependency, or family or school adjustment problems, require a minimal level of supervision
but do not require medical or nursing care or general supervision. A group care facility must
be licensed and/or approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare.
GROUP CHILD DAY-CARE FACILITY— A facility, located in a single-family residence,
that provides supervised care, protection and supervision for remuneration to more than six
but less than 12 children who are unrelated to the operator and meeting all applicable
licensing/registration requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare. The
term includes, but is not limited to, "family child day-care home" as defined by Title 55 of the
Pennsylvania Code.
GROUP HOME— A residential facility used as living quarters by a maximum of five
unrelated persons, consisting of children or adults requiring special care, and their attending
supervisors. A group home is specifically designed to create a single-family residential setting.
The individuals requiring special care must be deemed permanent residents and their
supervisors must provide twenty-four-hour or full-time equivalent coverage of the facility. A
group home in a residential district shall not be used for meetings by staff that is not on duty.
HABITABLE AREAS, BASEMENT — Any basement which meets the criteria for habitable
space, which has a stairway as a means of ingress and egress, and in which the ceiling area at
a height of 7 1/3 feet above basement floor is no less than 100 square feet.
HABITABLE AREAS, FLOOR— Any floor usable for living purposes which includes
sleeping, eating, cooking, recreation, or any combination thereof. A floor used only for
storage purposes is not a habitable floor.
HABITABLE AREAS, ROOM OR SPACE— Space in a structure for living, sleeping,
eating or cooking, bathroom toilet compartments, closets, foyers, halls, storage or utility
space, and similar areas are not considered habitable space.
§ 205-12 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-12
205:28 02 - 15 - 2006
HALFWAY HOUSE— A dwelling for the supervision of transitionally institutionalized
individuals, who are involved in drug or alcohol rehabilitation and/or individuals who have
violated the law, and who are sent to a halfway house upon release from, or in lieu of being
sent to, a penal institution or juvenile detention center.
HANDICAPPED INDIVIDUAL— A person with a physical or mental impairment
(blindness, hearing impairment, mobility impairment, HIV infection, mental retardation,
mental illness, alcoholism, drug addiction, chronic fatigue, learning disabilities, and head
injury) that substantially limits one or more major life activities (seeing, hearing, breathing,
walking, working, speaking, caring for yourself, and learning).
HARDWARE/HOME IMPROVEMENT STORE— An establishment for the retail and/or
service for hardware, building materials, tools, equipment, plumbing fixtures, tiles, paint,
windows, etc.
HEALTH CLUB— Any establishment including, but not limited to, an athletic club,
exercise center, health spa, figure salon, gymnasium, physical fitness center, or any other
establishment by any other name that provides exercise equipment and one or more of the
following: steam cabinet, steam room, sauna, vapor room, vapor cabinet, toilet facilities,
lavatories, showers, lockers, and dressing rooms intended for patron use, excluding facilities
used by or under direct supervision and control of licensed medical personnel located in a
medical facility, facilities located in athletic departments of schools, and facilities of
professional athletic teams. Accessory uses within the facility may include massage therapy,
aerobics and physical fitness services (aerobic and strength training activities, group exercise
classes, fitness assessment and counseling, and education seminars).
HELIPORT — Any area of land, water, or structure which is used or intended to be used for
the landing or takeoff of helicopters and any appurtenant areas which are used for heliport
buildings or helicopter facilities or rights-of-way, together with all heliport buildings and
facilities thereon.
HORTICULTURE— Any use of a lot or parcel of land to cultivate, propagate, and grow
trees, shrubs, vines, and other plants, including the buildings, structures, and equipment
customarily incidental and accessory to the principal use.
HOSPITAL— An institution providing primary health services and medical or surgical care
to persons, primarily inpatients, suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity and
abnormal physical and mental conditions, and including, as an integral part of the institution,
related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient facilities or training facilities, as defined in
current state licensure requirements.
HOTEL/MOTEL— A building or group of buildings where, for consideration, rooms or
suites of rooms with no culinary facilities are used for temporary lodging of more than 10
persons, usually individually, with or without meals, wherein the occupants are furnished
hotel services, including restaurant and maid service. Any such use that customarily involves
the housing of persons for periods of time longer than 30 days shall be considered a
boardinghouse and shall meet the requirements of that use.
§ 205-12 ZONING § 205-12
205:29 02 - 15 - 2006
HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY— Multifamily, multistory dwelling designed for, and
occupied by, persons 65 years of age or older and conforming to all requirements of state and
federal laws and regulations pertaining to housing for the elderly.
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — That portion or percentage of the lot or lot area covered by
buildings, paved areas, or other hard-surfaced areas, which do not absorb rainfall.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any material placed on or above the earth, the artificial
impacting of the earth, or any material change in the natural surface of the earth which
substantially reduces or prevents the natural percolation of water or which reduces the
undisturbed open space areas on a lot which has a coefficient of runoff of 0.65 or greater.
Area required to be left in pervious surfaces may be located in a different zoning district than
the use, provided that such land area is abutting or adjacent and that is deed restricted from
further development. Examples include but are not limited to structures, including eaves, roofs
and roof overhangs; parking areas (whether hard surfaced or not); driveways; sidewalks;
patios and decks; sport courts; and pools.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO— This is also the "maximum impervious coverage" and
is measured by dividing the total areas of all impervious surfaces within the site by the total
site area.
INCINERATOR— An enclosed device using controlled combustion for the primary purpose
of thermally breaking down solid waste, and that is equipped with a flue for the sole purpose
of providing incineration service to the public.
INDEPENDENT LIVING FACILITY— A facility designed to provide individual dwelling
units for elderly persons who are independently mobile and not in need of supervision, but
which includes certain design features associated with the needs of the elderly which are not
customary in the construction of conventional dwelling units, such as emergency call services,
common dining facilities, common laundry facilities, transportation services and similar
supporting services for the convenience of the residents.
INDUSTRIAL PARK — An area of land arranged and/or constructed in accordance with a
plan for a group of industrial purposes, having separate building sites designed and arranged
on streets and having utility services, setbacks, side yards, and covenants or other such
regulations controlling or restricting uses.
INDUSTRY— A use engaged in the processing of raw materials or the manufacture of
materials or products.
INSTITUTION— A residential property used by six or more unrelated occupants for a
common, lawful purpose (i.e., educational, recreational, religious, therapeutic, rehabilitative,
correctional) including, where necessary to serve such purpose, twenty-four-hour or full-time
equivalent professional supervision. The term "institution" shall not include a religious use,
primary or secondary school, or residential care facility for senior citizens.
INSTITUTIONAL HOME— A public or private charitable establishment devoted to the
shelter, maintenance, or education and care of minor children; homeless, aged or infirm
persons; or members of a religious community. This definition shall not include almshouses,
penal or reformatory facilities and nursing homes.
§ 205-12 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-12
205:30 02 - 15 - 2006
8. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
JUNK— Any worn, cast off or discarded article or material which is ready for destruction or
which has been collected or stored for sale, resale, salvage or conversion to some other use.
JUNKYARD— An area or land, with or without buildings, where scrap, dismantled or
discarded materials are bought, sold, exchanged, abandoned or stored.
KENNEL— A use of land and structures in combination wherein four or more domestic
animals or pets six months or older are groomed, bred, trained and/or kept.
LABORATORY— A place where scientific studies are conducted, including testing,
research, or analysis of a medical, chemical, physical, biological, mechanical, or electronic
nature.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
A. The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of land for
any purpose involving a group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on a lot or
lots regardless of the number of occupants or tenure;
B. The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively, between or
among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of,
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other features;
C. A subdivision of land; or
D. Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the MPC.8
LANDFILL— See "solid waste disposal area."
LANDOWNER— The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including the holder of
an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option or contract is subject to any
condition), a lessee if he/she is authorized under the lease to exercise the right of the
landowner, or other person having a proprietary interest in land.
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT — A registered professional landscape architect licensed as
such by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
LAUNDROMAT — A commercial establishment where self-service washing machines and
clothes dryers are available for public use on the premises to wash and/or dry clothing,
apparel, or other fabric.
LIBRARY— Any premises, building or part of a building where books, films, maps and
other educational materials are kept for reading, reference and lending by the public.
LIVESTOCK INTENSIVE OPERATION (LIO) — Any agricultural operation in
Pennsylvania in which the average animal density exceeds two animal equivalent units per
acre of cropland, or per acre suitable for application of animal manure on an annualized basis.
§ 205-12 ZONING § 205-12
205:31 02 - 15 - 2006
9. Editor’s Note: Figure 2 is on file in the Borough offices.
10. Editor’s Note: Figure 2 is on file in the Borough offices.
LOADING SPACE— A space, accessible from a street or alley in a building or on a lot for
the temporary use of vehicles while loading or unloading merchandise or materials.
LOT— A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or otherwise as
permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a unit.
LOT AREA— The acreage contained within the property lines of a lot, as defined in the
deed or as shown on an approved subdivision plan. For the purposes of compliance with
minimum lot area requirements, the following shall be excluded: any area used for gas, oil,
natural gas, electric, water or communications; or any area within a street or other
transportation right-of-way, existing or proposed; or any area within a permanent drainage
easement.
LOT, CORNER— A lot at the junction of and abutting two or more intersecting streets,
where the interior angle of intersection is less than 135°. A lot abutting a curved street or
streets shall be considered a corner lot if the tangents to the curve at the points of intersection
of the lot lines with the street intersect at an interior angle of less than 135°. Each yard
abutting a street shall be considered a front yard. If a lot is adjacent to two intersecting streets,
then a front yard shall be provided adjacent to each of those streets. Every corner lot shall
include one rear yard, which shall be identified as the yard opposite the front yard as
determined by the Zoning Officer.
LOT COVERAGE— The area of a lot or parcel that is covered by principal and/or
accessory buildings or structures. See Figure 2 in the Appendixes.9
LOT DEPTH— The average distance between the street right-of-way and the rear lot line,
measured perpendicular or radial to the right-of-way.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE— A lot with front and rear street frontage.
LOT, FLAG— A lot which has less than the minimum required lot width at the public street
frontage, but which provides the minimum required lot width at a distance from the lot
frontage, usually in excess of the minimum required setback, and which lot includes a strip of
land in fee simple ownership for access to the public street from the buildable area of the lot
which lies behind another property which fronts on the public street. Flag lots shall have a
minimum frontage on a public street of 50 feet.
LOT FRONTAGE— That side of a lot abutting on the street right-of-way and regarded as
the front of the lot.
LOT, INTERIOR— A lot where the side property lines do not abut a street.
LOT LINE— A line bounding a lot that divides one lot from another or from a street or any
other public or private space. See Figure 2 in the Appendixes.10
A. FRONT LOT LINE — The dividing line between the street and the lot. The street lot
line shall be the same as the legal right-of-way, provided, where a future right-of-way
§ 205-12 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-12
205:32 02 - 15 - 2006
width for a road or street has been established, that width shall determine the location of
the street lot line.
B. REAR LOT LINE — Any lot line which is parallel to or within 45° of being parallel to a
street lot line, except for a lot line that is itself a street lot line, and except that in the
case of a corner lot the owner shall have the option of choosing which of the two lot
lines are not considered a rear lot line. In the case of a lot having no street frontage or a
lot of an odd shape, only the one lot line farthest from any street shall be considered a
rear lot line. Where there is only one lot line other than street lot lines, it shall be
considered the rear lot line.
C. SIDE LOT LINE — Any lot boundary line that is not a street lot line or a rear lot line.
In the case of a triangular lot those lot lines other than the street lot line shall be
considered side lot lines.
LOT MEASUREMENTS—
A. LOT DEPTH — The mean distance from the right-of-way line of the lot to its opposite
rear line measured in a direction parallel to the sidelines of the lot. Lot depth for
triangular lots shall be the mean distance from the street line to the point of intersection
of the side yards.
B. LOT, MINIMUM WIDTH — The minimum lot width at the building setback line.
C. LOT WIDTH — The distance measured between side lot lines, at the required building
setback line. In a case where there is only one side lot line, lot width shall be measured
between such side lot line and the opposite rear lot lines or street line.
LOT OF RECORD— A lot that has been recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds.
LOT, THROUGH— An interior lot in which the front line and rear line abut upon streets.
Where a single lot under individual ownership extends from a street to a street, the widest
street shall be deemed the street upon which the property fronts.
LOT WIDTH— The horizontal distance between side lot lines measured along a straight line
parallel to the front lot line at the minimum required building setback line.
LUMBERYARD— The principal use of land and structures involving the loading and
unloading, storage and sales of lumber and millwork materials.
MANUFACTURED HOME— A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in
the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length,
when erected on site, is 640 or more square feet in floor area, and which is built on a
permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating,
air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; or a structure that otherwise comes
within the definition of a "manufactured home" under the National Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, as amended (42 U.S.C. §§ 5401-5445).
§ 205-12 ZONING § 205-12
205:33 02 - 15 - 2006
MANUFACTURING— The process of making wares by hand, by machinery or by other
agency, often with the provision of labor and the use of machinery.
A. HEAVY MANUFACTURING — Manufacturing that includes the production,
processing, cleansing, testing and distribution of materials, foods, foodstuffs and products
that, due to the nature of the materials, equipment or process utilized, is considered to be
unclean, noisy, hazardous or is associated with other objectionable elements.
B. LIGHT MANUFACTURING — Manufacturing that includes the production, processing,
cleaning, testing and distribution of materials, goods, foodstuffs and products that, by the
nature of the materials, equipment and process utilized, is considered to be clean, quiet,
and free of any objectionable or hazardous elements.
MEDICAL CENTER— A facility which, in addition to providing primary health services,
also provides tertiary and quaternary care with an emphasis on subspecialty medical and
surgical care of patients and medical education, and which may include ancillary activities
such as laboratories, clinics, rehabilitation facilities, training facilities, conference facilities,
vehicular ambulance service, pharmacies, cafeterias and gift shops as accessory uses and
which are customarily incidental to and in direct support of the primary health care mission of
the medical center.
MEDICAL CLINIC— An institution providing outpatient mental health services and
medical or surgical care of the sick, handicapped or injured but not including health clinics
and doctors' offices.
METHADONE TREATMENT FACILITY— A facility licensed by the Pennsylvania
Department of Health to use the drug methadone in the treatment, maintenance or
detoxification of persons.
MINE— Underground areas contained within a continuous barrier of undisturbed minerals
and openings to the surface from those areas where the extraction of minerals or stones from
the earth is used for commercial purposes.
MINERAL— Any aggregate or mass of mineral matter, whether or not coherent. This term
includes, but is not limited to, limestone and dolomite, sand and gravel, rock and stone, earth,
fill, slag, iron ore, zinc ore, vermiculite and clay, anthracite and bituminous coal, coal refuse,
peat and crude oil and natural gas.
MINERAL EXTRACTION— All or part of the process involved in the extraction and
processing of petroleum products or natural gas and/or minerals such as coal, ores, rock, sand
and gravel, including mining, drilling, digging, and quarrying. This includes surface and
underground mining operations.
MINING ACCESSORY STRUCTURE— Any accessory structure to mining use, which is
incidental, and subordinate thereto, including coal tipples, disposal areas, and ventilation
shafts.
MINING, OPEN PIT — Includes all activity which removes from the surface or beneath the
surface of the land some material, mineral resource, natural resource, or other element of
economic value, by means of mechanical excavation necessary to separate the desired
materials from an undesirable one, or to remove the strata or material which overlies or is
§ 205-12 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-12
205:34 02 - 15 - 2006
11. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
above the desired material in its natural condition and position. Open pit mining includes, but
is not limited to, the excavation necessary to the extraction of sand, gravel, rock, topsoil,
limestone, sandstone, coal, clay, shale, and iron ore for commercial or industrial consumption.
MINING PORTAL— Structures and appurtenant facilities utilized for the access and egress
of men and materials in deep mine operations.
MIXED USE STRUCTURE— A building or structure in which the configuration of the
building includes a space for commercial use on the primary or first floor and additional
upper floors dedicated to residential use.
MOBILE HOME— A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for permanent
occupancy contained in one unit or in two or more units designed to be joined into one
integral unit capable of again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site
complete and ready for occupancy, except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent foundation. These
units do not qualify under the definition of a manufactured home in the National
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, as units categorized,
as mobile homes are primarily those units built before 1976, when HUD standards became
effective.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved with the
necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of a
single mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has been so
designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile home lots for the placement
thereon of mobile homes.
MOVIE THEATER— A facility that provides fixed seating for customers to view motion
pictures, including accessory snack and/or food and beverage services.
MPC— The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as
reenacted and amended).11
MUNICIPAL FACILITIES— Any building, structure, or other facility designed or intended
to facilitate the offering of municipal services to the Borough, including, but not limited to,
municipal buildings, post offices, storage facilities, police stations, fire stations, ambulance
stations, equipment garages, or other structures of similar purpose.
MUSEUM— A use or building that contains objects of art or history for public education
where admission is generally charged.
NATURAL STATE— A condition of property in which it is substantially retained in the
condition which exists at the time of submission of any preliminary site plan; provided,
however, that any clearing, grubbing, planting, grading and filling within the area to be
retained in its natural state shall be approved by the municipality and shall only be authorized
if the municipality shall determine that the work would improve the buffering characteristics
of the area to be retained in its natural state.
§ 205-12 ZONING § 205-12
205:35 02 - 15 - 2006
NIGHTCLUB— A place of assembly, other than a dwelling unit, including private clubs that
may offer food, drink, and entertainment, either live or recorded, and characterized by low
light levels and closely packed tables, whether or not the consumption of alcoholic beverages
is permitted or allowed on the premises. A nightclub may also be operated as a restaurant
during all or part of its hours of operation. An adult cabaret shall not be considered a
nightclub.
NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS— A business or commercial activity
administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly secondary to the use as a
residential dwelling and which involves no customer, client or patient traffic, whether
vehicular or pedestrian, pickup, delivery or removal functions to or from the premises, in
excess of those normally associated with the residential use.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE— A building, structure or part thereof
manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable use or extent of use provisions in this
chapter or amendments heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such building or structure
lawfully existed prior to the enactment of such chapter or amendment, or prior to the
application of this chapter or amendments to its location by reason of annexation. Such
nonconforming structures include, but are not limited to, nonconforming signs.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, the area or dimension of which was lawful prior to the
adoption or amendment of this chapter, but which fails to conform to the requirements of the
zoning district in which it is located by reasons of such adoption or amendment.
NONCONFORMING USE— A use, whether of land or of structure, which does not comply
with the applicable use provisions in this chapter or amendment heretofore or hereafter
enacted, where such use was lawfully in existence prior to the enactment of such chapter or
amendment, or prior to the application of such chapter or amendment to its location by reason
of annexation.
NUDITY/STATE OF NUDITY— The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic
area, vulva, anus, anal cleft, cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the
nipple, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
NURSERY— Any building or lot, or portion thereof, used for the cultivation or growing of
plants, trees, shrubs, or flowers and for the selling of plants and landscaping/gardening
supplies. All merchandise, other than plants, is kept within an enclosed building or a fully
screened enclosure and fertilizer of any type is stored and sold in package form only.
NURSERY SCHOOL— A school designed to provide daytime care or instruction for two or
more children of preschool age.
NURSING HOME— A facility licensed as a nursing home by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
OFFICE— An establishment primarily engaged in providing professional, financial,
administrative, management, clerical or other services not involving the manufacture,
§ 205-12 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-12
205:36 02 - 15 - 2006
12. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10401 et seq.
assembly or repair of goods, or the storage or direct transfer of goods to the customer on the
premises, except as may be incidental to a service provided on the premises.
A. PROFESSIONAL OFFICE—An office in which business is conducted by physicians
and surgeons, lawyers, members of the clergy, architects, insurance agents, insurance
adjusters, realtors, engineers, or other similar professions.
OFFICE BUILDING— A building that is divided into offices, either single or suites, for the
transaction of business other than for mercantile or manufacturing purposes where
merchandise is on display and offered for sale. Offices used for a professional business or for
public or semipublic activities in whole or part are included in this definition.
OFFICIAL MAP— A map adopted by ordinance pursuant to Article IV of the MPC.12
OPEN SPACE— Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved and set aside,
dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use or enjoyment, or for the use and
enjoyment of owners and occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space.
A. COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel of land or an area of water, or a combination of
land and water within a development site and designed and intended for the use or
enjoyment of residents of a development, not including streets, off-street parking areas,
and areas set aside for public facilities.
B. PRIVATE OPEN SPACE — Common open space held in common ownership in which
the use is normally limited to occupants of a single dwelling or building.
C. PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — Lands dedicated to and/or owned by the Borough or other
public entity and maintained by it for the use and enjoyment of the general public.
PARCEL DELIVERY FACILITY— Any premises or part thereof used for courier and
freight forwarding operations that involves collecting, temporary storage of, sorting and
dispatching packages.
PARK— A parcel of ground along with its buildings and fixtures intended primarily for
beautification and aesthetic improvement and designated as recreational land.
A. PRIVATE PARK FOR PUBLIC USE — Privately owned property available for use by
the public and containing recreational uses authorized pursuant to this chapter.
PARKING FACILITY— An open portion of land with an impervious surface designed and
used for parking of vehicles including parking spaces, aisles and maneuvering areas.
A. COMMERCIAL PARKING FACILITY — An open area, other than a street or other
public way, used for the parking of automobiles and available to the public, whether for
a fee, free or as an accommodation for clients or customers.
B. RESIDENTIAL PARKING FACILITY — An open area, other than a street or other
public way, used for the parking of automobiles in residential zones and available to the
public, whether for a fee, free or as an accommodation for residents of the municipality.
§ 205-12 ZONING § 205-12
205:37 02 - 15 - 2006
PARKING SPACE— An all-weather surfaced area, not in a street or alley, having an area
not less than 180 square feet, exclusive of driveways, permanently reserved for the temporary
storage of one automobile and connected with a street or alley.
PASSENGER TERMINAL — The premises or building(s) where the staging and
transportation of passengers is conducted, including bus and rail depots and air terminals.
PATIO— An area consisting of natural or man-made material constructed at or near grade
level, intended for use as an outdoor living area, and not enclosed by a permanent roof or
awning.
PERMIT — A document issued by the governing body authorizing an applicant to undertake
certain activities.
A. BUILDING PERMIT — A permit indicating that a proposed construction, alteration or
reconstruction of a structure is in accordance with the construction provisions of any
building code that may be adopted by the municipality and authorizing an applicant to
commence with construction, alteration or reconstruction. Such a permit shall not be
confused with a zoning permit as required under the terms of this chapter.
B. OCCUPANCY PERMIT — A statement signed by the Zoning Officer setting forth either
that a building or structure complies with this chapter or that a building, structure or
parcel of land may lawfully be employed for specified uses of both.
C. ZONING PERMIT — A permit issued indicating that a proposed use, building or
structure is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and authorizing an applicant
to proceed with said use, building or structure.
PERSONAL CARE FACILITY— A facility, licensed by the commonwealth and conducted
in accordance with commonwealth requirements, providing health-related care and service
provided on a regular basis to more than three patients who are resident individuals and who
do not require hospital or skilled nursing care, but who, because of mental or physical
conditions or age, require the services under a plan of care supervised by licensed and
qualified personnel.
PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment occupied by a business
which performs services on-site related to the care of the personal self, household pets or the
repair/maintenance of small home appliances, clothing, jewelry or other smaller items.
Activities include but are not limited to barbershops; beauty parlors; self-service laundry and
dry-cleaning establishments; radio and television repair; repair shops for home appliances,
tools, bicycles, guns, locks, shoes and watches; tattoo studios; tailor and dressmaking shops;
and pet grooming with no overnight boarding. This does not include massage parlors or
related services.
PET SHOP— A store where the primary business is the sale of animals to be used as pets,
excluding boarding, veterinary and breeding services.
PHARMACY— A retail store which primarily sells prescription drugs, patient medicines,
and surgical and sickroom supplies.
§ 205-12 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-12
205:38 02 - 15 - 2006
13. Editor's Note: See 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq.
PHOTOGRAPHIC STUDIO— A retail establishment for the purpose of photographing
subjects and processing photographs for commercial purposes, but not including photography
requiring professional models.
PLACE OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY— Any place designated for, or used in whole or in part
for, the congregation or gathering of persons in one building whether such gathering is of
public, restricted or private nature including an assembly hall, church, school auditorium,
recreation hall, pavilion, place of amusement, dance hall, opera hall, motion-picture house,
establishment for the consumption of food or drink, or other similar establishment.
PLACE OF WORSHIP/RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION— A church, synagogue, temple,
mosque or other building used exclusively for public religious worship, including customary,
incidental, educational and social activities in conjunction therewith.
PORCH— A roofed or unroofed structure projecting from the front, side or rear wall of a
building, not having walls more than 30 inches high, and open on all sides, except the side(s)
adjoining the building.
A. OPEN PORCH— A roofed, open structure projecting from the front, side or rear wall of
a building and having no enclosed features of glass, wood, or other material more than
30 inches above the floor thereof, except the necessary columns to support the roof.
PRESERVATION or PROTECTION— When used in connection with natural and historic
resources, shall include means to conserve and safeguard these resources from wasteful or
destructive use, but shall not be interpreted to authorize the unreasonable restriction of
forestry, mining or other lawful uses of natural resources.
PUBLIC GROUNDS— Land designated or maintained for parks, playgrounds, trails, paths
and other recreational areas and other public areas; sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse
disposal and other publicly owned or operated facilities; or publicly owned or operated for
scenic or historic sites.
PUBLIC HEARING— A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by Borough Council
intended to inform and obtain public comment, prior to taking action in accordance with the
MPC.
PUBLIC MEETING— A forum held pursuant to notice under 65 Pa.C.S. Ch. 7 (relating to
open meetings).13
PUBLIC NOTICE— Notice published once each week for two successive weeks in a
newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. Such notices shall state the time and
place of the hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the public
hearing. The first publication shall not be more than 30 days and the second publication shall
not be less than seven days from the date of the public hearing.
PUBLIC UTILITY— An enterprise regulated by the Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission or a government agency, or an activity offered by an authority or municipally
§ 205-12 ZONING § 205-12
205:39 02 - 15 - 2006
owned agency, that renders a public service deemed necessary for public health, safety, and
welfare, excluding police, fire and similar emergency services and is required by law to:
A. Serve all members of the public upon reasonable request;
B. Charge just and reasonable rates subject to review by a regulatory body;
C. File tariffs specifying all of its charges; and
D. Modify or discontinue its service only with the approval of the regulatory agency.
PUBLIC UTILITY FACILITY/STRUCTURE— Any tank, structure, building or part of a
building used for the provision of gas, electricity, broadcasting, television and
telecommunication services to serve the local area.
PUBLIC UTILITY TRANSMISSION TOWER— A structure owned and operated by a
public utility electric company regulated by the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission,
designed and used to support overhead electricity transmission lines.
QUARRY; SAND PIT; GRAVEL PIT; BORROW PIT — Land or part thereof from which
stone, sand, clay, gravel, or topsoil is or are extracted primarily for sale, but not including a
lot which is graded in preparation for the construction of a building for which application for
a building permit has been made.
RACE TRACK — A commercial establishment for the racing of animals or motor vehicles.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE— A vehicle or piece of equipment, whether self-powered or
designed to be pulled or carried, intended primarily for leisure time or recreational use.
Recreational vehicles or units include, but are not limited to, the following: travel trailers,
truck-mounted campers, motor homes, folding tent campers, autos, buses or trucks adapted for
vacation use, snowmobiles, minibikes, all terrain vehicles, go-carts, boats, boat trailers, and
utility trailers.
A. INDEPENDENT UNIT— A unit containing a built-in toilet, lavatory and kitchen sink
connected directly to the park water supply and sewer system or to permanently installed
water and holding tanks of not less than 20 gallons' capacity each. Any such unit, if
occupied at any time during the months of December, January, or February, shall be
considered a dependent unit.
B. DEPENDENT UNIT —Any unit other than an independent unit.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK — A plot of ground designed and laid out for
occupancy by recreational vehicles, including tents on a temporary basis, to be used as living
quarters.
RECREATION, PRIVATE — Developed or undeveloped open spaces and/or structures and
facilities that are provided by individuals or private organizations for the use of specified
individuals or private organizations sharing common relationships or associations for the
purposes of play, amusement or relaxation.
RECREATION, PUBLIC— Developed or undeveloped open spaces and/or structures and
facilities that are provided by a governmental body for the purposes of play, amusement or
§ 205-12 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-12
205:40 02 - 15 - 2006
relaxation by the public that may include sports facilities, parks, assembly buildings, passive
areas, gardens and related amenities.
RECREATION SPACE— Open space for active and passive recreation.
A. ACTIVE RECREATION AREAS — Include major paved pedestrian ways, tennis courts,
swimming and boating areas, shuffleboard courts, bridle paths, play lots, playgrounds and
playfields.
B. PASSIVE RECREATION AREAS — Include outdoor sitting areas such as sundecks,
roofs, gardens, parks, natural areas for walking and picnicking and areas abutting minor
pedestrian walkways.
RECYCLING FACILITY— A facility that accepts recyclable material from the public by
donation, redemption, or purchase and separates or recovers reusable materials that can be
sold to or reused by a manufacturer as a substitute for, or a supplement to, virgin raw
materials. The term does not include transfer facilities, municipal waste landfills, composting
facilities or resource recovery facilities.
RENEWABLE ENERGY SOURCE— Any method, process or substance whose supply is
rejuvenated through natural processes and, subject to those natural processes, remains
relatively constant, including, but not limited to, biomass conversion, geothermal energy, solar
and wind energy and hydroelectric energy and excluding those sources of energy used in the
fission and fusion processes.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT FACILITY— A structure or complex of structures
designed or used primarily for research and development functions related to industry and
similar fields.
RESOURCE RECOVERY FACILITY— A processing facility that provides for the
extraction and utilization of materials or energy from municipal waste that is generated
off-site, including, but not limited to, a facility that mechanically extracts materials from
municipal waste, a combustion facility that converts the organic fraction of municipal waste to
usable energy, and any chemical and biological process that converts municipal waste into
fuel products. The term also includes any facility for the combustion of municipal waste that
is generated off-site, whether or not the facility is operated to recover energy. The term does
not include:
A. Any composting facility.
B. Methane gas extraction from a municipal waste landfill.
C. Any separation and collection center, drop-off or collection center from recycling, or any
source separation or collection center for composting leaf waste.
D. Any facility, including all units in the facility, with a total processing capacity of less
than 50 tons per day.
§ 205-12 ZONING § 205-12
205:41 02 - 15 - 2006
RESTAURANT — That part or the whole of any building, structure or facility which is used
for the preparation or processing of food for sale to the general public for the consumption on
or off premises. Restaurants may be classified as:
A. CARRY OUT — An establishment whose principal business is the sale of food, desserts,
or beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, in edible or disposable
containers, which is primarily consumed off the premises.
B. DRIVE THROUGH — A fast-food restaurant characterized by limited menu and
catering to drive-through traffic.
C. FAST FOOD — An establishment whose principal business is the sale of food or
beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, either at seating facilities within
the restaurant or carry-out consumption off the premises, and whose method of operation
includes the serving of food in edible or disposable containers.
D. SIT DOWN, LOW TURNOVER — A restaurant where customers are served at a table
or counter by a restaurant employee and given an individual menu. Included in this group
are restaurants that serve cocktails or have cocktail lounges.
RETAIL STORE/SHOP— A building wherein the principal activity is the sale of
merchandise at retail to the general public, and where such merchandise is typically sold in
small quantities and broken lots, and not in bulk. Retail stores and shops shall include
drugstores; news stands; food stores and supermarkets; candy shops; dry goods, notions and
clothing stores; boutiques and gift shops; hardware, home furnishings and household
appliance and electronics stores; antique shops; furniture stores; florist shops; opticians; shoe
stores; jewelry stores; auto accessory stores; and music stores.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — An easement for public or private use, usually granting the right to
cross over the land of another and/or to install utilities such as gas, electric, sewer or water
lines or communication systems.
RIPARIAN BUFFER— Any area within 100 feet of any stream bank.
SALVAGE YARD— An area more than 200 square feet outside of a building on any lot for
the handling or storage of scrap metal, paper, rags or discarded, salvaged or waste materials of
any kind. This includes automobile wrecking yards, used lumber yards, junkyards and storage
of salvaged house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment, but does not include
yards for the storage or sale of operable used cars or machinery or the incidental processing of
used or salvaged materials where permitted, as part of the lawful manufacturing or industrial
use on the same premises.
SCHOOL, PRIMARY OR SECONDARY— An educational institution licensed by, and
meeting the requirements of, the Pennsylvania Department of Education that primarily
provides education for students in kindergarten through 12th grade. This definition does not
include any privately operated school of trades, vocations, avocations or business.
SCHOOL, TRADE— A facility that is clearly primarily intended for education of a
work-related skill or craft or hobby and that does not primarily provide state-required
education.
§ 205-12 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-12
205:42 02 - 15 - 2006
SCREENING— The use of plant materials, fencing and/or earthen berms to aid in the
concealment of such features as parking areas and vehicles within them, and to provide
privacy between two or more different land uses which abut one another.
SELF-SERVICE LAUNDRY— A business that provides home-type washing, drying or
ironing machines, or dry-cleaning machines for hire to be used by customers on the premises.
SELF-STORAGE FACILITY— An establishment that rents storage space for personal use
by the renter and where no materials of a hazardous nature (toxins, highly inflammable, etc.)
are stored. The warehousing of wholesale and/or retail materials and/or products shall not be
permitted.
SEMINUDE— A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic
region, and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting
straps or devices.
SEWAGE TREATMENT FACILITY— A place or premises, including buildings, where
sewage and other solid or liquid wastes are treated or screened before discharge.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS— An adult arcade, adult bookstore/video store, adult
cabaret, adult live theater, adult motel, adult motion-picture theater, adult retail establishment,
escort agency, nude model studio, sexual encounter center, or viewing booths.
SHOPPING CENTER— A group of commercial establishments planned and developed as a
unit.
SIGN— Any letter, numeral, symbol, emblem (including device, symbol, logo, or
trademark), flag (including banner or pennant), or any other device, figure or similar character
used to announce, inform, identify, advertise or otherwise make anything known which is
visible from outside the building or structure.
A. BUILDING SIGN — A sign attached to and deriving its major support from a building.
(1) ARCADE SIGN — A building sign projecting beneath the underside of any
structural overhang or passageway, either vehicular or pedestrian.
(2) AWNING SIGN — A building sign displayed on any structure made of cloth and
metal frame attached only to a building and projecting from the same when so
erected as to permit its being raised to a position flat against the building when not
in use.
(3) CORNICE SIGN — A building sign attached or inscribed on a horizontal molded
projection which crowns or finishes the wall of a building.
(4) MARQUEE SIGN — A building sign attached to a covered structure projecting
from, or extended from, a building facade when such canopy, or covered structure,
is supported by the building, including signs mounted on a cantilever where there
is no other structural purpose for the cantilever.
(5) PARAPET SIGN — A building sign attached to a wall above the roofline or above
any balcony line.
§ 205-12 ZONING § 205-12
205:43 02 - 15 - 2006
(6) PLAQUE SIGN — A building sign consisting of flat plate or tablet intended only
for orientation use for building or occupant notification, and containing only the
name of the resident, title of person practicing or profession, name of building or
name of agent.
(7) PROJECTING SIGN — A building sign that extends in excess of eight inches
beyond any vertical surface of the building that supports it.
(8) ROOF SIGN — A building sign erected above the finished roof level of a building
and attached to the roof structure.
B. DIRECTIONAL SIGN — A sign conveying instructions or directions with respect to the
use of the premises or a portion of the premises on which it is maintained or a use or
practice being conducted on the premises; or directional, informational, or public service
signs such as those advertising availability of rest rooms, conveniences, and street
address numbers.
C. FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign supported by upright structural members on or by
supports on or in the ground, not attached to any building.
(1) BULLETIN BOARD SIGN — A freestanding sign listing the names, uses and
location of various services, offices, or activities within a building or group of
buildings of a public use; a charitable use; a professional or semiprofessional use;
a medical center; a clinic or hospital; or signs listing church services and religious
activities.
(2) BUSINESS DISTRICT IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A freestanding sign attached
to a pole approved as a component of a business district streetscape plan and
designed to announce the entrance to the business district.
(3) DOUBLE-FACED SIGN — A freestanding sign carrying the same message on
two faces, only one of which is visible from any ground position, the faces of
which are not separated by more than 18 inches.
(4) POST AND PANEL SIGN — A freestanding sign other than a pole sign which is
supported by two posts placed in the ground not exceeding eight feet in total
height from the most adjacent ground surface, and not attached to any building,
including any object placed on the ground in any manner advertising a particular
enterprise or parcel.
(5) OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN — A freestanding sign on which is portrayed
information that directs attention to a business or service not necessarily related to
the other uses existing or permitted on the lot upon which the sign is located.
Billboards are included in this definition.
(6) POLE SIGN— A freestanding sign greater than eight feet in height. Pole signs
may be supported by a single pole structure, or by two or more uprights or braces
placed in the ground.
§ 205-12 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-12
205:44 02 - 15 - 2006
(7) PYLON SIGN — A freestanding sign with a dimension character of narrow depth,
medium width and tall height, and with a sign face having a vertical dimension in
excess of its horizontal dimension.
D. INCIDENTAL SIGNS — A flag, sign, pennant, valance, or advertising display that is to
be displayed for a limited time.
(1) FLAG — A display of fabric without frame which moves with the movement of
the wind and which advertises no product, service, or entertainment. This shall not
be deemed to include a flag or insignia of the United States, the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, Washington County, or California Borough.
(2) PENNANT — A display of fabric which moves with the movement of the wind
and which advertises a product, a service or an entertainment.
(3) TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign not permanently attached to a structure or the
ground that can be easily transported to any location.
(4) TEMPORARY EXTERIOR SIGN — A sign which offers premises for sale, rent
or development, advertises the services of professionals or building trades during
promotional sales or events, construction or alteration of the premises upon which
the sign is located or advertises a special nonrecurring event.
(5) TEMPORARY INTERIOR SIGN — A sign whose intended use is to promote
products or services of special interest reduced process or notification to the public
and which is being erected or affixed primarily to attract the public outside of the
building.
(6) PORTABLE SIGN — A temporary sign that by its description or nature will be,
or may be, moved from one location to another.
(7) SANDWICH SIGN — A temporary exterior sign with two faces that are adjoined
at the top and displayed at an angle, which is not permanently anchored or secured.
(8) VEHICLE-MOUNTED SIGN — A temporary sign painted or attached to a vehicle
that is related to the business activity, use, service, or product of the owner of the
vehicle or to the sale of the vehicle, and which sign is incidental to the primary use
of the vehicle.
E. SNIP SIGN — A sign nailed or otherwise attached to any object, tree, or building or
structure advertising any business commodity, service, facility, or entertainment sold or
offered elsewhere than upon the same lot where the sign is located.
F. WALL SIGN — A sign attached to the wall of the building.
G. WINDOW SIGN — A sign attached to a display window, visible through a display
window, or any sign regardless of its location or intent that can be read from the street or
adjoining property on or through the window of an establishment.
SIGN FACE— The plane upon, against or through which an advertisement or display is
illustrated.
§ 205-12 ZONING § 205-12
205:45 02 - 15 - 2006
14. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10601 et seq. and § 10901 et seq., respectively.
SIGN, GROSS SURFACE AREA OF— The entire area with a single continuous perimeter
enclosing the extreme limits of such sign and in no case passing through or between any
adjacent elements of same. The gross surface area of signs having more than one surface
visible to the public (double-faced or multiple-faced signs) shall have only one side
considered, provided that both faces are identical and not more than 36 inches apart. If the
interior angle formed by both faces of a double-faced sign is greater than 45°, both sides of
the sign shall be used in computing the sign area.
SIGN HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from ground level to the highest point on
the sign and its supporting structure.
SKILLED NURSING FACILITY— A facility which provides nursing care and related
medical or other personal health services on a continuous twenty-four-hour basis for
individuals not in need of hospitalization but who, because of age, illness or other infirmity,
require high-intensity comprehensive planned nursing care. The facility shall be licensed by
the appropriate state agency.
SLAUGHTERHOUSE— A place where livestock is slaughtered and may be cut, packaged,
and/or processed.
SLOPE— The face of an embankment, fill, or cut whose surface makes an angle with the
plane of the horizon. Slope is expressed as a percentage based upon the vertical difference in
feet per 100 feet of horizontal distance.
SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL AREA— An area permitted for use for the disposal of solid
waste under the Solid Waste Management Act (35 P.S. §§ 6018.101 to 6018.1003).
SPECIAL EXCEPTION— A use permitted in a particular zoning district granted by the
Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to the provisions of Articles VI and IX of the MPC14 and this
chapter.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — The human genitals, pubic region, anus, buttocks,
female breast(s) below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or human male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES—
A. Includes any of the following:
(1) The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks,
anus, or female breast;
(2) Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral
copulation, masturbation, or sodomy; or
(3) Excretory functions as a part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth
in Subsection A(1) or (2).
B. The term does not include any of the following: medical publications or films or bona
fide educational publications or films; any art or photography publications which devote
§ 205-12 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-12
205:46 02 - 15 - 2006
at least 25% of the linage of each issue to articles and advertisements dealing with
subjects of art or photography; any news periodical which reports or describes current
events and which from time to time publishes photographs of nude or seminude persons
in connection with the dissemination of the news; or any publication or films which
describe and report different cultures and which from time to time publish or show
photographs or depictions of nude or seminude persons when describing cultures in
which nudity or seminudity is indigenous to the populations.
STABLE— A building, structure or portion thereof which is used for the shelter or care of
horses, cattle or other similar animals either permanently or transiently.
A. COMMERCIAL BOARDING STABLE— A building and premises used for the keeping
and/or riding and training of horses or other similar animals for the purpose of monetary
gain but prohibiting their rental to the general public.
B. PRIVATE STABLE— A detached accessory building for the keeping of not more than
two animals, horses, cattle or other similar animals, owned by the occupants of the
premises and not kept for hire or sale.
C. RIDING/RENTAL STABLE—A building and premises used for the keeping and/or
riding and training of horses or other similar animals, which exceed a total number of 10
animals per acre, for the purpose of monetary gain, including the rental of animals and
instruction in the art of horseback riding to the general public.
STORY— The portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the
surface of the next floor above it, or, if there is no floor above it, then the space between such
floor and the ceiling above it.
A. STORY, HALF— A story under a gabled, hipped or gambrel roof, the wall plates of
which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than two feet above the
finished floor of such story.
STREET— A street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, parkway, lane, alley,
viaduct and any other ways used or intended to be used by vehicular traffic or pedestrians,
whether public or private.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS— Any change in the supporting members of a building or
structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.
STRUCTURE— Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary location on or in
land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
A. ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A detached structure customarily incidental and
subordinate to the principal structure and located on the same lot.
B. PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE — The structure or portion thereof housing the main use of
the land.
C. TEMPORARY STRUCTURE — Any structure which is erected to be in place for not
more than 12 months, including but not limited to tents, air-supported structures, portable
§ 205-12 ZONING § 205-12
205:47 02 - 15 - 2006
bandstands, reviewing stands, bleachers, mobile office units, construction sheds, sales
offices for lots or dwellings or other structures of a similar character.
STUDIO, DANCING OR MUSIC— The use of a premises by a teacher of music and/or
dance where students are taught these arts for a fee and where more than one student may be
taught in a class at one time. This term is synonymous with "dancing school" and "music
school" and similar terms.
SWIMMING POOL— Any structure which demands a permanent location in or on the soil
which is devoted or intended to be devoted to the art or sport of swimming or diving and the
within definition is intended to include swimming pools regardless of whether the same are
portable or nonportable, containing in excess of six inches of water.
A. COMMERCIAL SWIMMING POOL — A swimming pool operated for profit and open
to the public upon payment of a fee.
B. PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL — A swimming pool that is an accessory structure
appurtenant to a one-family or a two-family dwelling and used only by persons residing
on the same lot and their private guests.
C. PUBLIC SWIMMING POOL — A swimming pool operated by a unit of government for
the general public.
D. SEMIPUBLIC SWIMMING POOL — A swimming pool that is an accessory structure
appurtenant to a multiple-family dwelling, hotel, motel, church, club, etc., and used by
persons who reside or are housed on the same lot or who are regular members of such
organizations.
TAVERN/DRINKING ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment engaged in the preparation
and retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises and that derives in a
six-month period less than 50% of its gross revenues from the sale of food and beverages for
consumption on the premises. This term also includes "bar."
TELEPHONE EXCHANGE BUILDING— A building, and equipment therein, used or to be
used for the purpose of facilitating transmission and exchange of telephone messages between
subscribers, but in a residential district not including public business facilities, storage of
outside plant materials, trucks or repair facilities, or housing for outside repair crews.
TEMPORARY SHELTER— A structure, or part thereof, operated on a nonprofit basis to
temporarily house families or individuals who are victims of disaster, who are affected
through action on the part of or on behalf of the municipality other than routine
redevelopment-related relocation activities, or who have bona fide emergency housing needs.
THEATER— A building or part of a building devoted to the showing of movies, musical
performances, dance or theatrical productions, usually on a paid admission basis.
THEATER, DRIVE-IN— An open lot or part thereof, with its appurtenant facilities devoted
primarily to the showing of movies or to theatrical productions, usually on a paid admission
basis, to patrons seated in motor vehicles or on outdoor seats.
§ 205-12 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-12
205:48 02 - 15 - 2006
15. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10601 et seq. and § 10901 et seq., respectively.
TRANSFER FACILITY— A facility that receives and temporarily stores solid waste at a
location other than the generation site, and which facilitates the bulk transfer of accumulated
solid waste to a facility for further processing or disposal.
TRANSPORTATION SERVICES — A facility for private taxicab, limousine, bus service
and similar passenger service.
TRAVEL PLAZA— A facility that provides auto and/or truck fuel and convenience items
and includes more than four fuel islands and more than eight fueling positions; or facilities
that are intended for use by cargo transportation. Accessory activities may include the
operation of no more than two arcade games, video games or other similar devices, automated
teller machines (ATMs), check cashing, money orders, movie rentals, lottery tickets, film
processing, showers, and restaurants.
TRAVEL TRAILER— A portable, vehicular structure built on a chassis designed as a
temporary dwelling for travel, recreation, vacation, and other short-term use. This term shall
include portable campers that can be attached to the bed of pickup trucks.
TRUCK TERMINAL— A facility where trucks load and unload goods, products, cargo
and/or other materials to be broken down or aggregated in different size loads and reshipped
to other destinations.
USABLE OPEN SPACE— A portion of a lot used for residential purposes, exclusive of
required front and side yard areas, which is not covered by buildings or parking areas and is
suitable for use as outdoor open space for the residents thereon.
USE— Any purpose for which a building or other structure or a tract of land may be
designed, arranged, intended, maintained or occupied, or any activity, occupation, business or
operation carried on in a building or other structure on a tract of land.
VARIANCE— Relief granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and Articles VI and
IX of the MPC.15
VEHICLE— Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a street, excepting tractors, agricultural machinery, devices moved
by human power or used upon stationary rails or tracks.
VEHICLE SALES, RENTAL AND SERVICE— A facility for the sales, rental and service
of automobiles, trucks, buses, boats and marine equipment, motorcycles, campers, motor
homes, and recreational vehicles, but not including heavy equipment.
VETERINARY OFFICE/ANIMAL HOSPITAL— A facility where animals are given
medical or surgical treatment. Use as a kennel shall be prohibited except for animals or pets
undergoing medical or surgical treatment.
§ 205-12 ZONING § 205-12
205:49 02 - 15 - 2006
VIEWING BOOTHS— Booths, stalls, portions of a room, rooms or other enclosures that are
available for viewing:
A. Films, movies, videos, or visual reproductions of any kind depicting or describing
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or
B. Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity or who offer performances or
presentations characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified
sexual activities.
WAREHOUSE— A structure primarily used for the storage of goods and materials.
WETLANDS— Lands regulated as wetlands by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection and/or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Such areas are inundated
or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support,
and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted
for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas.
WILD OR EXOTIC ANIMAL— Any animal of a species prohibited by Title 50, Code of
Federal Regulations, or otherwise controlled by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. It shall
include any animal that is wild, fierce, dangerous, noxious or naturally inclined to do harm.
"Wild animals," however domesticated, shall also include but not be limited to:
A. Dog family (Canidae): all except domesticated dogs, including wolf, fox, coyote, dingo,
wolf hybrids, etc.;
B. Cat family (Felidae): all except commonly accepted domestic cats, including lions,
pumas, panthers, mountain lions, leopards, jaguars, ocelots, margays, tigers, wild cats,
etc.;
C. Bears (Ursidae): all bears, including grizzly bears, brown bears, black bears, etc.;
D. Weasels (Mustelidae): all, including weasels, martens, mink, wolverine, ferrets, badgers,
otters, ermine, mongoose, etc.;
E. Raccoons (Procyonidae): all raccoons and civets;
F. Porcupine (Erethizontidae): all porcupines;
G. Skunks;
H. Snakes: all venomous and constricting snakes;
I. Venomous lizards;
J. Crocodilians: all alligators, caimans, crocodiles, gavials, etc.;
K. Venomous fish and piranha; and
L. Venomous invertebrates.
WINERY— A facility designed for crushing, pressing, fermenting, bottling and cellaring
wine for retail and wholesale purposes that produces less than 50,000 cases of wine a year.
§ 205-12 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-12
205:50 02 - 15 - 2006
WHOLESALE ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment primarily engaged in selling
merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional business
users, or to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for, or
selling to, such individuals or companies.
YARD— An open space at grade between the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and
unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise
provided herein.
A. FRONT YARD — A yard extending along the full width along the front lot line and
back to a line drawn parallel to the front lot line at a horizontal distance therefrom equal
to the depth of the required front yard. On a corner lot, the Zoning Officer shall have the
authority to determine which yard is the front yard, based upon the predominate pattern
in the area.
B. REAR YARD — A yard extending along the full length of the rear lot line and back to a
line drawn parallel to the rear lot line at a horizontal distance therefrom equal to the
depth of the required rear yard.
C. SIDE YARD — An area between any building and side lot line, as defined herein,
extending from the front yard to the rear yard, or on through lots, from one front lot line
to the other lot line.
YARD SALE— A sale of limited duration conducted from the yard, porch or garage of a
single-family or two-family dwelling but including no sales in a public right-of-way. Such
sale shall be of clothing and household items belonging to the residents only and not
purchased for the purpose of resale on the premises. Yard, porch or garage sales shall be
considered an accessory use and not a home occupation, and shall be limited to not more than
12 days or any part of a day in a calendar year.
ZONING APPROVAL— Approval under the provisions of this chapter certifying that an
application for development or application for zoning approval for occupancy and use has
fulfilled the requirements of this chapter.
ZONING HEARING BOARD— The Zoning Hearing Board of California Borough.
ZONING MAP— The California Borough Zoning Map together with all amendments
subsequently adopted.
ZONING OFFICER— The person appointed by the governing body of California Borough,
having the powers and subject to the provisions set forth in the MPC, whose duty it shall be
to administer this chapter and such other ordinances that may be assigned by the governing
body.
§ 205-13 ZONING § 205-16
205:51 02 - 15 - 2006
ARTICLE III
Establishment of Districts, Map and General Regulations
§ 205-13. Establishment of zoning districts.
The municipality is divided into the zoning districts hereunder and shown by the zoning
district boundary lines on the zoning district map:
A-1 Agricultural District
R-1 Single-Family Residential District
R-2 Multifamily Residential District
C-1 Commercial District
C-2 Mixed Use Commercial District
MU Special Mixed Use District
M-1 Industrial District
I Institutional District
§ 205-14. Establishment of overlay districts.
In addition to the zoning districts, this chapter establishes overlay districts. The overlay
districts shall be superimposed where applicable over the basic districts. The overlay district is
designed to reflect two or more zone districts regulating the same area. The uses permitted by
the underlying district are to be allowed subject to the additional regulations imposed by the
overlay district, which are as follows:
F-P Floodplain Area Overlay District
H Historic Preservation Overlay District
§ 205-15. Establishment of Zoning Map.
A map entitled the "California Borough Municipal Zoning Map" is or may be adopted as part
of this chapter that identifies the boundaries of the zoning districts. The zoning district map
and all notations, references and other information shown thereon are a part of this chapter
and have the same force and effect as if they were all fully set forth or described herein. The
original, properly attested zoning district map shall be available for examination at the
California Borough municipal building and shall be reviewed annually by the governing body,
the Zoning Hearing Board and others as applicable, and amended as deemed necessary by the
governing body. All approved changes to zoning districts shall be recorded on the Zoning
Map and shall adhere to the requirements set forth under this chapter.
§ 205-16. Interpretation of district boundaries.
A. The district boundaries on the zoning district map are intended to follow property lines;
center lines of roads, watercourses, or railroads; other identifiable physical features; or
measured distances from property lines, center lines or identifiable physical features.
§ 205-16 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-16
205:52 02 - 15 - 2006
B. Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts, as shown
on the Zoning Map, said district boundary line should be determined as follows:
(1) The district boundaries are center lines of public rights-of-way unless otherwise
shown, and where the indicated boundaries on the Zoning Map are approximately
public rights-of-way, said center lines of public rights-of-way shall be construed to
be the boundaries.
(2) Where the district boundaries shown are not on or approximately on public
rights-of-way but are on or approximately on lot lines of property that has been or
is hereafter subdivided, the district boundaries shall be construed to be such lot
lines; provided, however, that where such district boundaries substantially deviate
from such lot lines the district boundary line as shown on the Zoning Map shall
control.
(3) In unsubdivided property, the district boundary lines, unless otherwise shown, shall
be determined by use of the scale on the Zoning Map.
(4) A street, way, alley, lane, railroad or railroad right-of-way, watercourse, channel,
or body of water included on the Zoning Map shall, unless otherwise indicated, be
included within the district of the adjoining property on either side thereof; and
where such street, way, alley, lane, railroad or railroad right-of-way, watercourse,
channel, or body of water serves as the boundary between two or more districts, a
line midway in such street, way, alley, lane, railroad or railroad right-of-way,
watercourse, channel, or body of water, and extending in the general direction of
the long dimension thereof shall be considered the boundary between districts.
(5) In the event that a street, way, alley, or lane shown on the Zoning Map is vacated,
the property formerly in said street, way, alley or lane shall be included within the
district of the adjoining property on either side of said vacated street, way, alley or
lane. In the event said street, way, alley, or lane was a boundary of one or more
districts, said new district boundary or boundaries shall be the former center line of
said vacated street, way, alley, or lane.
C. The following shall apply when a district boundary line divides a lot held in single or
separate ownership at the effective date of this chapter:
(1) Where the lot is large enough to be subdivided into two or more lots, each with a
single zoning district, no zoning approval will be given for any authorized use
which would utilize any portion of the lot other than that portion of the lot in
which the principal use is located. Further development will require a subdivision;
or
(2) The permitted use on the lot is limited to those uses permitted in the zoning district
in which the largest part of the lot is located, and the smaller part of the lot located
in another zoning district will be subject to the zoning ordinance provisions where
the largest portion of the lot is located.
(3) Where this section creates an undue hardship, the Zoning Hearing Board has
jurisdiction to grant such relief as deemed necessary.
§ 205-17 ZONING § 205-19
205:53 02 - 15 - 2006
§ 205-17. Zoning district regulations.
A. The provisions, restrictions, and controls intended to regulate development in each
district are set forth in the following sections and apply to all zoning districts and all lots.
Except when stated, all provisions of this chapter shall apply to all uses.
B. All approved changes to zoning districts shall be promptly recorded on the Zoning Map
and these changes must follow the procedures established in this chapter.
C. Any land that is annexed into the municipalities after the effective date of this chapter
shall be automatically classified as an R-1 Residential District, and shall remain so
classified until the governing body has adopted a zoning plan for the annexed area.
§ 205-18. Explanation of use categories.
The following are classifications of zoning uses established in this chapter, which vary in their
impact upon the municipalities and in the procedures by which the uses are authorized:
A. Uses by right: Authorized uses for which zoning approval will be issued by the Zoning
Officer upon review of the application and certification of compliance with this chapter.
Principal uses within each district, the purpose for which a building or other structure or
a tract of land may be designed, arranged, intended, maintained or occupied, or any
activity, occupation, business, or operation carried on in a building, other structure, or
tract of land.
B. Conditional uses: Authorized uses that are permitted by approval of the governing body
in accordance with this chapter and the requirements of the MPC.
C. Special exceptions: Authorized uses that are permitted by approval of the Zoning Hearing
Board in accordance with this chapter and the requirements of the MPC.
D. Uses not specifically listed: Where a use is proposed, which is similar in nature and
intent to those already listed in a zoning district, but not actually listed therein, the
Zoning Officer shall refer the request to the Zoning Hearing Board who shall approve or
deny the request based upon:
(1) The purpose and intent of this chapter; and
(2) The similarity of the use to the listed uses and intent of the district.
§ 205-19. Application of regulations.
A. No building or land shall be used or occupied and no building or part shall be erected,
moved or altered unless in conformity with the regulations specified for the district in
which it is located.
B. No yard or other open space provided around any building for the purpose of complying
with the provisions of this chapter shall be considered as providing a yard or open space
for any other building, and no yard or other space on one lot shall be considered as
providing a yard or open space for a building on any other lot.
§ 205-19 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-22
205:54 02 - 15 - 2006
16. Editor’s Note: See Art. IV, Zoning District Regulations.
17. Editor's Note: See § 205-37.
18. Editor's Note: Appendix 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
C. Uses in each category shall be according to the definitions set forth in Article II of this
chapter. For those uses not defined in this chapter their meanings shall be according to
the common meaning of the term.
D. Only one principal use per lot in any district shall be permitted.
§ 205-20. Permitted uses, special exceptions and conditional uses.
A. The permitted uses, special exceptions and conditional uses for each district are found in
Tables 4-1 through 4-8.16
B. The permitted uses, special exceptions and conditional uses for the overlay districts are
found in Table 5-1.17
C. Special exceptions may be granted or denied by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance
with the express standards and criteria of this chapter and the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.
D. Conditional uses may be granted or denied by the governing body in accordance with the
express standards and criteria of this chapter and the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.
§ 205-21. Lot, yard and height requirements.
The minimum lot area, maximum lot coverage by buildings and structures, minimum depth of
front, rear, and side yard requirements, maximum height of structures and other bulk
requirements for each district shall be as specified herein. See Appendix 1.18
ARTICLE IV
Zoning District Regulations
§ 205-22. A-1 Agricultural District.
A. It is the intent of the A-1 Agricultural District to encourage and protect land suitable for
farming, dairy, livestock, forestry operations and other agricultural activities while
providing for limited, low-density residential development; protect land used for food
production and other agricultural uses from encroachment by untimely and unplanned
development; protect the rural character of the land and encourage rural conservation by
preserving natural features, such as watersheds, forests and watercourses, to perpetuate
the rural atmosphere, open space and scenic landscapes; preserve productive agricultural
land resources; and encourage residential development that will blend with agricultural
uses.
§ 205-22 ZONING § 205-22
205:55 02 - 15 - 2006
19. Editor’s Note: Appendix 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
B. Authorized uses by right, special exception and/or conditional use are listed in Table 4-1.
Area and bulk regulations are listed in Appendix 1.19 Parking and other regulations shall
conform to the requirements established in Article VI of this chapter.
Table 4-1
Permitted Uses, Special Exceptions and Conditional Uses
A-1 Agricultural District
Permitted Uses
Accessory uses
Agricultural building
Agricultural operation
Animal feeding operation (AFO)
Animal husbandry
Animal raising and care
Bed-and-breakfast inn
Campground
Cemetery/mausoleum
Communications antenna
Communications equipment building
Communications tower
Country inn
Domiciliary care home
Essential communications antenna
Essential communications tower
Essential services
Equestrian facility
Fairground
Farm
Farmer's market
Flea market
Forest management operations
Forestry
Fruit and vegetable stand
Greenhouse
Greenhouse (commercial)
Group care facility
Home occupation
§ 205-22 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-22
205:56 02 - 15 - 2006
Table 4-1
Permitted Uses, Special Exceptions and Conditional Uses
A-1 Agricultural District
Permitted Uses
Horticulture
Kennel
Manufactured home
Mobile home (park)
Nursery
Public parks/grounds
Recreational vehicle park
Renewable energy source
Riding stable school (public/private)
Single-family dwelling
Stables
Swimming pool (private)
Veterinary clinic
Winery
Table 4-1
Permitted Uses, Special Exceptions and Conditional Uses
A-1 Agricultural District
Special Exceptions
Airport (private)
Airport (public)
Assisted living facility
Club
Coal mining activities
Coal tipple (and cleaning plant)
Drive-in theater
Educational institution
Essential communications antenna
Essential communications tower
Extractive industry
Family child day care
Mining/mineral extraction
Places of public assembly
Places of worship/religious institution
§ 205-22 ZONING § 205-24
205:57 02 - 15 - 2006
20. Editor’s Note: Appendix 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
Table 4-1
Permitted Uses, Special Exceptions and Conditional Uses
A-1 Agricultural District
Conditional Uses
Concentrated animal operation (CAO)
Concentrated animal feeding operation (CAFO)
Livestock intensive operation (LIO)
C. The development of any parcel of ground in this zoning district shall conform with the
requirements established in this chapter and any other adopted policies or ordinances
related to land development in the municipalities.
§ 205-23. Residential districts.
In addition to the goals set forth in § 205-4, General purposes, the districts established in these
regulations are intended to achieve the following:
A. To provide sufficient space for a variety of housing types adequate to meet the needs of
the present and projected population of the municipalities consistent with the policies set
forth in the Comprehensive Plan.
B. To assure light, air and privacy by controlling the spacing and height of buildings.
C. To protect residential areas against the hazards of fire, offensive noise, vibration, smoke,
odors, glare, and other objectionable influences.
D. To prevent congestion and environmental blight by regulating the density of population
and the bulk of buildings.
E. To make provisions for public and private educational, recreational, health and similar
facilities serving the needs of the residents in an effective and efficient manner.
§ 205-24. R-1 Single-Family Residential District.
A. It is the intent of the R-1 Single-Family Residential District to provide for the
development and maintenance of single-family residential neighborhoods within the
Borough, together with such activities that are compatible and normally associated with
residential neighborhoods.
B. Authorized uses by right, special exception and/or conditional use are listed in Table 4-2.
Area and bulk regulations are listed in Appendix 1.20 Parking and other regulations shall
conform to the requirements established in Article VI of this chapter.
§ 205-24 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-25
205:58 02 - 15 - 2006
Table 4-2
Permitted Uses, Special Exceptions and Conditional Uses
R-1 Single-Family Residential District
Permitted Uses
Accessory uses
Child day-care center
Essential services
Family child day care
Greenhouse
Home occupation
No-impact home-based business
Planned residential development
Single-family dwelling
Swimming pool (private)
Table 4-2
Permitted Uses, Special Exceptions and Conditional Uses
R-1 Single-Family Residential District
Special Exceptions
Bed-and-breakfast inn
Bus stop
Cemeteries
Country inn
Educational institution
Fruit and vegetable stand
Nursery
Places of worship/religious institutions
C. The development of any parcel of ground in this zoning district shall conform to the
requirements established in this chapter and any other adopted policies or ordinances
related to land development in the municipalities.
§ 205-25. R-2 Multifamily Residential District.
A. It is the intent of the R-2 Multifamily Residential District to provide various alternatives
to single-family development within areas that have acceptable levels of infrastructure
and access and to maintain the appropriate density of development for the region. The
Multifamily Residential District shall serve to support the community of California
University of Pennsylvania by providing housing opportunities to support off-campus
§ 205-25 ZONING § 205-25
205:59 02 - 15 - 2006
21. Editor’s Note: Appendix 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
living by students of the University, and shall provide the residents of the Borough a
more diverse array of housing opportunities within the community.
B. Authorized uses by right, special exception and/or conditional use are listed in Table 4-3.
Area and bulk regulations are listed in Appendix 1.21 Parking and other regulations shall
conform to the requirements established in Article VI of this chapter.
Table 4-3
Permitted Uses, Special Exceptions and Conditional Uses
R-2 Multifamily Residential District
Permitted Uses
All uses as permitted in the R-1 District
Bed-and-breakfast inn
Country inn
Educational institution
Group care facility
Housing for the elderly
Independent living facility
Multifamily dwelling
Public parks/grounds
Public utility service structure
Row house
Two-family dwelling
Table 4-3
Permitted Uses, Special Exceptions and Conditional Uses
R-2 Multifamily Residential District
Special Exceptions
Apartment building
Assisted living facility
Athletic club
Barbershop/beauty salon
Bus stop
Community center
Continuing care facility
Domiciliary care home
Funeral home/mortuary
Nursery school
§ 205-25 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-27
205:60 02 - 15 - 2006
Table 4-3
Permitted Uses, Special Exceptions and Conditional Uses
R-2 Multifamily Residential District
Special Exceptions
Personal care facility
Places of public assembly
Places of worship/religious institution
Public utility service facility
Skilled nursing facility/nursing home
Transportation services
Table 4-3
Permitted Uses, Special Exceptions and Conditional Uses
R-2 Multifamily Residential District
Conditional Uses
Amusement and recreation service
C. The development of any parcel of ground in this zoning district shall conform to the
requirements established in this chapter and any other adopted policies or ordinances
related to land development in the municipalities.
§ 205-26. Commercial districts.
In addition to the goals set forth in § 205-4, General purposes, the districts established in these
regulations are intended to achieve the following:
A. To provide sufficient space for a variety of commercial and service establishments
including the adequate provision for merchandising requirements and off-street parking
facilities while insuring safe circulation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
B. To encourage land uses and building development that promote commercial
development, enhance the character of commercial areas, protect nearby residential
districts and conserve the value of land and buildings, and promote increased tax
revenues.
§ 205-27. C-1 Commercial District.
A. It is the intent of the C-1 Commercial District to create an economically viable district
providing a range of commercial and service activities oriented to the immediate
community and contiguous vicinity served by highway systems; provide for the
development of uses which are intended and designed to serve the local traveling public;
prevent areas near interchanges from developing at an intensity which is beyond the
capability of the intersecting roadways serving the highway to accommodate traffic
§ 205-27 ZONING § 205-27
205:61 02 - 15 - 2006
22. Editor’s Note: Appendix 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
generated by such development; and enhance public safety by preventing excessive curb
cuts, regulating the location and spacing of ingress and egress points, and establishing
appropriate sight distances along intersecting roadways serving the highways.
B. Authorized uses by right, special exception and/or conditional use are listed in Table 4-4.
Area and bulk regulations are listed in Appendix 1.22 Parking and other regulations shall
conform to the requirements established in Article VI of this chapter.
Table 4-4
Permitted Uses, Special Exceptions and Conditional Uses
C-1 Commercial District
Permitted Uses
Amusement and recreation service
Art gallery/museum
Athletic club
Automobile repair/service
Automobile sales
Bakery
Bank/financial institution
Bus and other transit terminal, depot and passenger station
Bus stop
Car wash/automobile car wash
Catering business
Child day-care center
Clinic
Clothing/wearing apparel sales and service
Club
Convenience store
Convenience store selling gasoline
Copying/printing service
Dance studio
Dry cleaner
Electric sales and contracting
Essential communications antenna
Essential communications tower
Essential services
Farmer's market
Flea market
§ 205-27 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-27
205:62 02 - 15 - 2006
Table 4-4
Permitted Uses, Special Exceptions and Conditional Uses
C-1 Commercial District
Permitted Uses
Florist shop
Fortune teller/psychic/astrologer
Funeral home/mortuary
Gasoline service station
Greenhouse (commercial)
Hardware/home improvement store
Health club
Hospital
Hotel/motel
Library
Movie theater
Municipal facilities
Nursery school
Parking facilities (commercial)
Pharmacy
Photographic studio
Places of public assembly
Places of worship/religious institution
Professional offices/group practices
Public parks/grounds
Public utility service structure
Restaurant
Retail stores less than 5,000 square feet
Shopping center
Tavern/drinking establishment
Transportation services
Travel plaza
Veterinary clinic
Table 4-4
Permitted Uses, Special Exceptions and Conditional Uses
C-1 Commercial District
Special Exceptions
Communications antenna
§ 205-27 ZONING § 205-28
205:63 02 - 15 - 2006
Table 4-4
Permitted Uses, Special Exceptions and Conditional Uses
C-1 Commercial District
Special Exceptions
23. Editor’s Note: Appendix 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
Communications equipment building
Communications tower
Community center
Continuing care facility
Domiciliary care home
Family child day care
Housing for the elderly
Independent living facility
Personal service establishment
Self-storage facility
C. The development of any parcel of ground in this zoning district shall conform to the
requirements established in this chapter and any other adopted policies or ordinances
related to land development in the municipalities.
§ 205-28. C-2 Mixed Use Commercial District.
A. It is the intent of the C-2 Commercial District to promote the development of land within
the established commercial areas of the Borough, traditionally referred to as the
"downtown" or "business district" areas, by permitting a mix of land uses that will be
compatible with the established character of the community, the existing nature of the
buildings and structures located in the area, and provide development potential for
commercial sites to serve the immediate daily needs of the surrounding neighborhoods.
These areas shall be limited in size and activity and not be permitted to expand into
area-wide centers.
B. Authorized uses by right, special exception and/or conditional use are listed in Table 4-5.
Area and bulk regulations are listed in Appendix 1.23 Parking and other regulations shall
conform to the requirements established in Article VI of this chapter.
Table 4-5
Permitted Uses, Special Exceptions and Conditional Uses
C-2 Mixed Use Commercial District
Permitted Uses
Accessory uses
Apartment building
§ 205-28 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-28
205:64 02 - 15 - 2006
Table 4-5
Permitted Uses, Special Exceptions and Conditional Uses
C-2 Mixed Use Commercial District
Permitted Uses
Art, craft or antique shop
Art gallery/museum
Assisted living facility
Athletic club
Automobile car wash
Bakery
Bank/financial institution
Barbershop/beauty salon
Bed-and-breakfast inn
Boat and marine sales/service
Bottle club/brew pub
Bus and other transit terminal, depot and passenger station
Bus stop
Catering business
Child day-care center
Clinic
Clothing/wearing apparel sales and service
Club
Community center
Continuing care facility
Convenience store
Copying/printing service
Dance studio
Dry cleaner
Educational institution
Electric sales and contracting
Equipment rental/repair
Essential services
Farmer's market
Flea market
Florist shop
Fortune teller/psychic/astrologer
Fruit and vegetable stand
Funeral home/mortuary
Garage
§ 205-28 ZONING § 205-28
205:65 02 - 15 - 2006
Table 4-5
Permitted Uses, Special Exceptions and Conditional Uses
C-2 Mixed Use Commercial District
Permitted Uses
Garden center
Gasoline station
Group care facility
Hardware/home improvement store
Health club
Home occupation
Hotel/motel
Housing for the elderly
Independent living facility
Laundromat
Library
Medical facility
Mixed use structure
Movie theater
Multifamily dwelling
Municipal facilities
Nightclub
Nursing homes
Office
Parking facilities (commercial)
Personal care home
Personal services
Pet shop
Pharmacy
Photographic studio
Plumbing sales/contracting
Places of public assembly
Places of worship/religious institution
Professional offices/group practices
Public parks/grounds
Public utility service structure
Restaurant
Retail stores less than 5,000 square feet
Retail stores greater than 5,000 square feet
School (public/private)
§ 205-28 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-29
205:66 02 - 15 - 2006
Table 4-5
Permitted Uses, Special Exceptions and Conditional Uses
C-2 Mixed Use Commercial District
Permitted Uses
24. Editor’s Note: Appendix 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
Single-family dwelling
Skilled nursing facility
Tavern/drinking establishment
Transportation services
Two-family dwelling
Vehicle sales/rental and service
C. The development of any parcel of ground in this zoning district shall conform to the
requirements established in this chapter and any other adopted policies or ordinances
related to land development in the municipality.
§ 205-29. MU Special Mixed Use District.
A. It is the intent of the MU Special Mixed Use District to create an area for development
of an integrated land use region, including the existing California Technology Park and
surrounding land, which will promote flexible and innovative land use in this region of
the Borough. The Special Mixed Use District shall permit the development of
commercial, and light industrial uses, as well as higher density, nontraditional housing in
a harmonized manner, and shall encourage the integration of services and other uses
which support the Special Mixed Use District. These areas shall be limited in nature and
shall contain regulations to protect the public safety and encourage orderly land use
development.
B. Authorized uses by right, special exception and/or conditional use are listed in Table 4-6.
Area and bulk regulations are listed in Appendix 1.24 Parking and other regulations shall
conform to the requirements established in Article VI of this chapter.
Table 4-6
Permitted Uses, Special Exceptions and Conditional Uses
MU Special Mixed Use District
Permitted Uses
Accessory uses
Assisted living facility
Athletic club
Automobile car wash
Bakery
Bank/financial institution
§ 205-29 ZONING § 205-29
205:67 02 - 15 - 2006
Table 4-6
Permitted Uses, Special Exceptions and Conditional Uses
MU Special Mixed Use District
Permitted Uses
Barbershop/beauty salon
Bus and other transit terminal, depot and passenger station
Bus stop
Cluster development
Convenience store
Copying/printing service
Distribution plant/parcel delivery facility
Dry cleaner
Essential services
Florist shop
Garden apartment
Group care facility
Home occupation
Hotel/motel
Industrial park
Institutional home
Laboratory
Medical facility
Municipal facilities
Nursing homes
Office
Parking facilities (commercial)
Personal care home
Personal services
Pharmacy
Places of public assembly
Places of worship/religious institution
Professional offices/group practices
Public parks/grounds
Public utility service structure
Radio and television broadcasting studio
Research and development
Restaurant
Retail stores less than 5,000 square feet
Retail stores greater than 5,000 square feet
§ 205-29 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-30
205:68 02 - 15 - 2006
Table 4-6
Permitted Uses, Special Exceptions and Conditional Uses
MU Special Mixed Use District
Permitted Uses
Row house
School (public/private)
Shopping center
Skilled nursing facility
Swimming pool (public)
Two-family dwelling
Table 4-6
Permitted Uses, Special Exceptions and Conditional Uses
MU Special Mixed Use District
Special Exceptions
Clinic
Club
Community center
Continuing care facility
Dance studio
Gasoline station
Lumber/building material yard
Manufacturing
Manufacturing (light)
Massage therapy business
Movie theater
Public utility service facility
Warehouse
Wholesale establishment
Winery
C. The development of any parcel of ground in this zoning district shall conform to the
requirements established in this chapter and any other adopted policies or ordinances
related to land development in the municipality.
§ 205-30. Industrial district.
In addition to the goals set forth in § 205-4, General purposes, the district established in these
regulations is intended to achieve the following:
§ 205-30 ZONING § 205-31
205:69 02 - 15 - 2006
25. Editor’s Note: Appendix 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
A. To provide sufficient space for the development of activities to support the economy of
the municipalities through the creation of employment opportunities, the processing,
manufacturing, distribution, storage, and trade of goods and services.
B. To minimize the impacts to surrounding districts and to the municipal infrastructure
system.
C. To ensure that public improvements are consistent with the anticipated developments in
these districts.
D. To promote high standards for landscaping and design of buildings and structures.
E. To provide a mix of uses within these districts to ensure future sustainability of the
municipal tax base.
§ 205-31. M-1 Industrial District.
A. It is the intent of the M-1 Industrial District to provide a flexible zoning district in
specific areas to allow for a variety of planned industrial and commercial uses, as well as
industrial activities of an intrusive nature which are normally not compatible with, or
which detract from the viability of, other uses due to high levels of traffic generation,
noise, vibrations, odor, aesthetic and/or related considerations; provide areas within the
municipality where earth extraction shall be a permitted use; and reduce conflict in
residential, commercial and agricultural areas, and provide for design to enhance public
safety by preventing excessive curb cuts, regulating the location and spacing of ingress
and egress points, and establishing appropriate sight distances along intersecting
roadways serving the highways.
B. Authorized uses by right, special exception and/or conditional use are listed in Table 4-7.
Area and bulk regulations are listed in Appendix 1.25 Parking and other regulations shall
conform to the requirements established in Article VI of this chapter.
Table 4-7
Permitted Uses, Special Exceptions and Conditional Uses
M-1 Industrial District
Permitted Uses
Accessory uses
Automobile car wash
Boat and marine sales/service
Bus and other transit terminal, depot and passenger station
Bus and other transit vehicle maintenance/storage
Bus station
Coal mining activities
Communications antenna
§ 205-31 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-31
205:70 02 - 15 - 2006
Table 4-7
Permitted Uses, Special Exceptions and Conditional Uses
M-1 Industrial District
Permitted Uses
Communications equipment building
Communications tower
Convenience store
Correctional facility
Distribution plant/parcel delivery facility
Domiciliary care home
Electric sales and contracting
Equipment rental/repair
Essential communications antenna
Essential communications tower
Essential services
Extractive industry
Greenhouse
Greenhouse (commercial)
Group care facility
Group home
Halfway house
Hardware/home improvement store
Incinerator
Junkyard
Lumber/building material yard
Manufacturing
Meat packing house
Methadone treatment facility
Mining/mineral extraction
Municipal facilities
Parking facilities (commercial)
Public utility service facility
Public utility service structure
Quarry, sand pit, gravel pit
Railroad yard/terminal facility
Recycling facility
Resource recovery facility
Salvage yard
Sewage treatment facility
§ 205-31 ZONING § 205-32
205:71 02 - 15 - 2006
Table 4-7
Permitted Uses, Special Exceptions and Conditional Uses
M-1 Industrial District
Special Exceptions
Adult uses
Airport
Amusement and recreation service
Automobile repair/service
Automobile sales
Concrete/aggregate manufacturing
Heliport
Industrial park
Kennel
Salvage yard
Sexually oriented business
Slaughterhouse
Transfer facility
Truck terminal
Warehouse
Wholesale establishment
Table 4-7
Permitted Uses, Special Exceptions and Conditional Uses
M-1 Industrial District
Conditional Uses
Solid waste disposal area
C. The development of any parcel of ground in this zoning district shall conform to the
requirements established in this chapter and any other adopted policies or ordinances
related to land development in the municipality.
§ 205-32. I Institutional District.
A. It is the intent of the Institutional District to provide zoning regulations and to authorize
land use on property owned by and/or comprising California University of Pennsylvania,
including the property commonly referred to as the University Main Campus and the
Roadman Park College Farm. Institutional District regulations are intended to
complement the necessary functions of the University community by providing for
necessary land uses within the district, while preventing land use in conflict within the
remainder of the community or which would permit land use not otherwise compatible
with the community zoning scheme.
§ 205-32 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-32
205:72 02 - 15 - 2006
26. Editor’s Note: Appendix 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
B. Authorized uses by right, special exception and/or conditional uses are as provided herein
in Table 4-8. Area and bulk regulations are listed in Appendix 1.26 Parking and other
regulations shall conform to the requirements of Article VI of this chapter.
Table 4-8
Permitted Uses, Special Exceptions and Conditional Uses
I Institutional District
Permitted Uses
Apartment building
Arena
Broadcasting studio
Bus and other transit terminal, depot and passenger station
Bus stop
Clinic
Convenience store
Copying/printing service
Dormitory
Educational institution
Essential services
Municipal facilities
Office
Office building
Parking facilities (commercial)
Places of public assembly
Public parks/grounds
Public utility structure
Recreation (public)
Retail stores less than 5,000 square feet
Student food service
Swimming pool (private)
Swimming pool (public)
Theater
C. The development of any parcel of ground in this zoning district shall conform to The
requirements established in this chapter and any other adopted policies or ordinances
related to land development in the municipalities.
§ 205-33 ZONING § 205-36
205:73 02 - 15 - 2006
27. Editor’s Note: Said maps are on file in the Borough offices.
ARTICLE V
Overlay District Regulations
§ 205-33. Establishment of overlay districts.
In addition to the zoning districts established and delineated on the zoning district map, all
areas containing or characterized by the features listed hereunder are established as overlay
districts in accordance with the Municipalities Planning Code.
§ 205-34. Overlay zoning maps.
Location of each overlay district is delineated on a map depicting that overlay feature. These
maps are adopted as a part of the zoning district map.27
A. Accuracy of overlay districts. Overlay districts may not include all land or sites subject
to the special features of the overlay district; and not all land within the overlay district
may actually contain the special or limiting feature.
B. Areas not included in overlay districts. It is the intent of this chapter that the limitations
on development, which are imposed by the overlay district regulations, shall apply to all
parcels, which include the regulated feature, whether or not the land is shown in the
overlay districts. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to establish the presence or
absence on the proposed site of all features subject to regulation in this article.
§ 205-35. Interpretation of overlay districts.
If the zoning district map or list is questioned, the burden of proof shall be upon the
developer, who shall submit information from a qualified professional or other expert
acceptable to the municipality to demonstrate that the site in question can be used in the
manner proposed without violation of this chapter.
§ 205-36. Application of overlay district regulations.
A. The regulations contained in this article shall apply to the use of parcels and structures in
each overlay district and the restrictions shall be in addition to the regulations provided
in this chapter.
B. The amount of site area used or occupied by development is restricted as specified and as
further restricted by the overlay district regulations in this article.
C. Limitations on authorized uses in overlay districts. Uses in overlay district may be
authorized by right, by conditional use, regulations, and as previously stated in the
overlay district.
D. All uses by right in any zoning district which are prohibited because of the regulations of
any overlay district may be permitted by conditional use in any overlay district; and uses
§ 205-36 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-37
205:74 02 - 15 - 2006
permitted by conditional use may be permitted by conditional use in any overlay district
provided the use complies with the regulations of the particular overlay district.
E. All uses by special exception in any zoning district which are prohibited because of the
regulations of any overlay district may be permitted by special exception in any overlay
district; and uses permitted by special exception may be permitted by special exception
in any overlay district provided the use complies with the regulations of the particular
overlay district.
F. All uses by planned residential development in any zoning district which are prohibited
because of the regulations of any overlay district may be permitted by planned residential
development in any overlay district provided the use complies with the specific
regulations of any overlay district; and uses permitted by planned residential
development may be permitted by planned residential development in any overlay district
provided the use complies with the regulations of the particular overlay district.
§ 205-37. F-P Floodplain Overlay District.
A. It is the intent of the F-P Floodplain Overlay District to protect environmentally sensitive
areas such as stream valleys, riparian buffers, and/or wetlands; allow uses which will not
suffer from areas that carry and discharge the peak flood flow; eliminate loss of life,
health hazards and property damage which may be caused by floods; and encourage the
use of flood-prone land for open space uses.
B. Authorized uses by right, special exception and/or conditional use are listed in Table 5-1.
Parking and other regulations shall conform to the requirements established in this
chapter.
Table 5-1
Permitted Uses, Special Exceptions and Conditional Uses
F-P Floodplain Area Overlay District
Permitted Uses
Agriculture
Forestry
Horticulture
Parking areas
Public parks/grounds
Table 5-1
Permitted Uses, Special Exceptions and Conditional Uses
F-P Floodplain Area Overlay District
Special Exceptions
Essential communications antenna
§ 205-37 ZONING § 205-37
205:75 02 - 15 - 2006
Table 5-1
Permitted Uses, Special Exceptions and Conditional Uses
F-P Floodplain Area Overlay District
Special Exceptions
Essential communications tower
Essential services
Extraction of minerals
Marinas
C. The development of any parcel of ground in this zoning district shall conform to the
requirements established in this chapter and any other adopted policies or ordinances
related to land development in the Borough.
D. The identified floodplain area shall be those areas of the Borough that are subject to the
one-hundred-year flood, as identified in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS), or most recent
revision thereof.
E. The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
(1) FW (Floodway Area): The areas identified as "Floodway" in the AE Zone in the
FIS. The term shall also include floodway areas that have been identified in other
available studies or sources of information for those floodplain areas where no
floodway has been identified in the FIS.
(2) FF (Flood-Fringe Area): The remaining portions of the one-hundred-year
floodplain in those areas identified as an AE Zone in the FIS, where a floodway
has been delineated. The basis for the outermost boundary of this area shall be the
one-hundred-year flood elevations as shown in the flood profiles contained in the
FIS.
(3) FA (General Floodplain Area): The areas identified as Zone A in the FIS for which
no one-hundred-year flood elevations have been provided.
F. When available, information from other federal, state, and other acceptable sources shall
be used to determine the one-hundred-year elevation, as well as a floodway area, if
possible.
G. When no other information is available, the municipality shall require the applicant to
determine the one-hundred-year flood elevation and to delineate a floodway area using
hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques. Only professional engineers shall
undertake hydrologic and hydraulic analyses or others of demonstrated qualifications,
who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted
technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient
detail to allow a thorough technical review by the municipality.
H. The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Borough where studies
or information provided by a qualified agency or person documents the need for such
§ 205-37 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-37
205:76 02 - 15 - 2006
revision. However, prior to any such change, approval must be obtained from the Federal
Insurance Administration.
I. Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an initial
determination shall be made by the Zoning Officer and any party aggrieved by this
decision may appeal to the Board. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
J. Any use authorized in any zoning district may be authorized by the appropriate
procedure provided the use is in compliance with this chapter except for the following:
(1) The following uses shall be prohibited within any identified floodplain area:
(a) Mobile buildings and mobile homes.
(b) Hospitals.
(c) Intermediate-care facility, personal-care home, and skilled nursing facility.
(d) Jails, prisons, and detention centers.
(e) Mobile home parks and campgrounds having spaces for recreation vehicles.
(f) Maintenance of a supply of any amount of Class A or B poison,
water-reactive liquid or solid, etiologic agents or radioactive material, as
defined by the United States Department of Transportation Hazardous
Materials Tariff.
(g) Production, storage of use of any hazardous materials identified by the
United States Department of Transportation Hazardous Materials Tariff.
(2) The following uses shall be restricted within certain quantity limits within any
identified floodplain area:
(a) Maintenance of a supply of any hazardous materials identified by the United
States Department of Transportation Hazardous Materials Tariff.
K. Standards for development in floodplain overlay districts.
(1) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be made to any
watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which may be affected by such action
have been notified by the municipality, and until all required permits or approvals
have been first obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection. In
addition, the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the Pennsylvania
Department of Community and Economic Development shall be notified prior to
any alteration or relocation of any watercourse.
(2) Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within any
identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance with the
provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable codes, ordinances and
regulations. No approval shall be issued until this determination has been made. It
shall be the responsibility of the applicant to obtain all such necessary other
governmental permits.
§ 205-37 ZONING § 205-38
205:77 02 - 15 - 2006
L. Within any FW (Floodway Area), the following provisions apply:
(1) Any new construction, development, use, activity, or encroachment that would
cause any increase in flood heights shall be prohibited.
(2) No new construction or development shall be allowed, unless a permit is obtained
from the Department of Environmental Protection, Bureau of Dams, Waterways,
and Wetlands.
M. Within any FA (General Floodplain Area), the following provisions apply:
(1) No new construction or development shall be permitted within the area measured
50 feet landward from the top bank of any watercourse unless obtaining all
required federal and state permits.
(2) Any new construction or development, which would cause any increase in flood
heights, shall be prohibited within any floodway area.
(3) Within any identified floodplain area, all buildings and structures shall be
designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the
flow and height of floodwater.
(4) Within any identified floodplain area, all materials that are buoyant, flammable,
explosive or, in times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal, or plant
life, shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation and shall be
floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
(5) No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within any identified
floodplain area except in strict compliance with all state and local regulations for
such systems. If any such system is permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid
impairment to it, or contamination from it, during a flood.
N. Structures and uses existing in any identified floodplain area prior to the enactment of
this chapter may continue subject to the following provisions:
(1) No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure or use shall be allowed
within any identified floodway that would cause any increase in the elevation of
the one-hundred-year flood.
(2) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement, of any kind to an
existing structure, to an extent or amount of 50% or more of its market value, shall
constitute a substantial improvement and shall be undertaken only in full
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 205-38. H Historic Preservation Overlay District.
A. It is the intent of the Historic Preservation Overlay District to provide for the ongoing
preservation of structures located within the Borough, which possess such historic,
architectural, or intrinsic significance as to render the structures of continued value to the
history of the municipality.
§ 205-38 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-38
205:78 02 - 15 - 2006
B. The Zoning Officer shall maintain a Register of Historic Properties, and shall include in
such register any property or structure identified by the Zoning Officer as possessing
such traits as identified in Subsection A of this section. The Zoning Officer shall note in
the Register such information as required to identify the date of construction of the
structure and its architectural or historical significance. Upon designation of such a
property as historic, the Zoning Officer shall serve notice, as provided hereunder, to the
property owner that the property has been included by the Borough in the Register, and
shall provide the property owner with a copy of these regulations.
C. In addition to the foregoing, any property owner may make application to the Zoning
Officer for registration of a property or structure in the Register of Historic Properties.
Upon finding by the Zoning Officer that such proposed entrant meets the criteria required
under this chapter, the Zoning Officer shall register such property or structure in the
Register.
D. Once a property or structure has been registered under these regulations, no modification
to the land, property or structure may be undertaken which would change or alter the
essential character of the property or which would modify greater than 10% of the
aggregate area of the property or structure. Historic properties may not be modified under
these regulations so as to alter the existing use of the land or structure.
E. No building permit or zoning permit may issue by the Zoning Officer for any property
registered under this section, unless the applicant has provided a certification by an
appropriate architect or engineer that the work proposed under the permit will not violate
the provisions of this chapter, and that the property or structure will retain its existing
features and historic qualities after completion of the proposed construction. Such
certification shall be required in all instances where a permit may issue, including
restoration and renovations, as well as structural modification.
F. Any property registered under this section shall remain in the Register of Historic
Properties and shall not be removed upon transfer of the property or otherwise. Any
property substantially destroyed by fire, flood, disaster or other act of God, as determined
by the Zoning Officer, may be removed from the Register upon request of the property
owner.
G. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have jurisdiction to hear applications by any property
owner seeking removal of a property or structure from the Register. No such property
shall be removed absent a showing of competent evidence that the property possesses no
historic significance to the community or that the inclusion of the property in the
Register shall work undue hardship upon the property owner.
H. The Zoning Officer shall caused to be issued a plaque or certificate to each property
entered in the Register, indicating that the property has been included in the California
Borough Register of Historic Properties, and denoting the date such property was entered
in the Register. Such plaque or certificate shall be openly displayed at the property.
§ 205-39 ZONING § 205-41
205:79 02 - 15 - 2006
ARTICLE VI
Supplementary Regulations
§ 205-39. Application of yard requirements.
A. Corner lots: For corner lots, the required front yard setback will be required for the short
side which fronts upon a street; the yard requirements on the long side shall be reduced
by 30%.
B. Where a structure exists on an adjacent lot and is within 150 feet of the proposed
structure, and the existing structure has a front yard less than the minimum depth
required, the minimum front yard shall be the average depth of the front yard of the
existing structure on the adjacent lot and the minimum depth required for the district;
where structures exist on both adjacent lots, the minimum depth of the front yard shall be
the average depth of the front yards of the existing adjacent structures.
C. All structures, whether attached to the principal structure or not, and whether open or
enclosed, including porches, carports or platforms above normal grade level, shall not
project into any minimum front, side or rear yards except as noted in this section.
Cornices, eaves, gutters, balconies, steps, stoops, bay windows or chimneys may project
into required space provided such projection is not more than 24 inches.
D. A retaining wall or fence up to six feet in height and paved terraces without walls, roofs
or other enclosures may be erected within the limits of any yard. Only decorative fencing
may be erected in the front yard of any property.
E. In any residential district, no building to the rear of, and on the same lot, with a principal
building shall be erected and used for residence purposes.
F. Location of any accessory building shall adhere to the side yard requirements and shall
be no less than five feet from any rear lot line.
§ 205-40. Temporary structures.
Temporary structures in conjunction with construction work shall be permitted only during the
period that the construction work is in progress. Permits for temporary structures shall be
issued for a six-month period.
§ 205-41. Height limitations.
When the following conditions are met, height limits may be increased:
A. Structure height, in excess of the height permitted above the average ground level
allowed in any district may be increased, provided all minimum front, side and rear yard
depths are increased by one foot for each additional foot of height; however, such
increase shall be limited to no more than 10 additional feet.
B. The following structures are exempt from height regulations, provided they do not
constitute a hazard: communications towers, church spires, chimneys, elevator bulk
§ 205-41 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-44
205:80 02 - 15 - 2006
heads, smoke stacks, conveyors, flag poles, standpipes, elevated water tanks, derricks and
similar structures.
C. However, for the above structures, all yard and setback requirements must be met; in
addition, any structure with a height in excess of 50 feet will first be referred to the
Municipal Engineer relative to public safety considerations.
D. For all residential uses, accessory buildings shall not exceed 24 feet in height.
§ 205-42. Basement structures.
Residing in basements or foundation structures before any structure is complete shall not be
permitted.
§ 205-43. Lot area measurements.
The measurement of lot area shall conform to the definition of "lot area" found in Article II of
this chapter.
§ 205-44. Performance standards.
No use of land or structure in any district shall involve any element, or cause any condition,
that may be dangerous, injurious, or noxious to any other property or person in the
municipality. Furthermore, every use of land or structure in any district must observe the
following performance requirements:
A. Fire protection. Fire-protection and -fighting equipment acceptable to the Board of Fire
Underwriters shall be readily available when any activity involving the handling or
storage of flammable or explosive material is carried on.
B. Electric disturbance. No activity shall cause electrical disturbances adversely affecting
radio, television or other communication equipment in the neighboring area.
C. Noise. Noise, which is determined to be objectionable because of volume or frequency,
shall be muffled or otherwise controlled. In no event shall any steady-state noise be
permitted in excess of 70 decibels, as measured at the property line. In residential
districts, no such noise shall be permitted in excess of 65 decibels, as measured at the
property line. These regulations shall not apply to fire sirens and related apparatus used
solely for public safety purposes.
D. Smoke. To be governed by the standards of the Department of Environmental Protection.
E. Odors. To be governed by the standards of the Department of Environmental Protection.
F. Glare. Lighting devices which produce objectionable direct or reflected glare on
adjoining properties or thoroughfares shall not be permitted.
G. Erosion. No erosion by wind or water shall be permitted which carries objectionable
substances onto neighboring properties.
§ 205-44 ZONING § 205-46
205:81 02 - 15 - 2006
H. Water pollution. The discharge of all wastewater shall be in accordance with the
standards of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and/or the
municipality, and comply with any and all applicable regulations of the United States.
Wastewater discharge shall be acceptable under the provisions of the United States.
Wastewater discharge shall be acceptable under the provisions of Pennsylvania Act 537,
and other state and municipal regulations as the same may be amended from time to
time.
§ 205-45. Swimming pools.
Swimming pools are permitted in accordance with the following requirements:
A. A swimming pool, which is owned and operated by private persons, firms, corporations,
associations, charity, or other entity other than a municipality, department, authority or
subdivision thereof, which persons, firms, corporations, associations, charity, or other
entity is not organized for profit and for the enjoyment of which no individual admission
charge is made, shall be subject to the terms and conditions of this chapter.
B. No swimming pool may be located within 10 feet of any property line, nor shall any
swimming pool be located in any front yard on any property within the Borough.
C. The swimming pool shall be walled or fenced so as to prevent uncontrolled access from
the street or from an adjacent property and said fence shall not be less than four feet in
height and shall be maintained in good condition. An aboveground pool that has a top
edge four feet above the ground completely around the perimeter of the pool will not
require an additional fence. Access to an aboveground swimming pool is to be removed
or locked when the swimming pool is unattended.
D. Each swimming pool must provide minimum lighting of at least 400 watts.
E. Swimming pools shall be equipped with an adequate filtration system.
F. Adequate screening shall be provided as required by the Zoning Officer.
§ 205-46. Camping or recreational vehicle storage.
Trailers, including travel trailers, pick-up coaches, motorized homes and boat trailers, may be
parked or stored subject to the following requirements:
A. At no time shall such parked or stored camping and recreation equipment be occupied or
used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes.
B. This equipment shall be limited to a maximum of one consecutive two-week period in
any one calendar year.
C. Parking and storing of camping and recreational equipment shall be limited to the interior
of automobile garages, other available on-lot accessory building or to that portion of the
lot to the rear of the principal building.
§ 205-46 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-50
205:82 02 - 15 - 2006
D. All recreational vehicles parked on a residential lot shall have current registration and
state inspection.
E. Recreational vehicles shall only be parked on property owned by the registered owner of
the vehicle. No recreational vehicle may be parked on a public street or alley within the
Borough.
§ 205-47. Exotic animals.
Exotic animals are prohibited within the municipality; because of the imminent threat to the
health, safety and welfare of the public, the keeping or harboring of any animals defined as an
exotic animal within the municipality.
§ 205-48. Oversized equipment storage.
Commercial equipment, including trucks, one-ton capacity or larger, tandems, tractor-trailers,
tractors, buses, recreational vehicles in excess of 25 feet, or other commercial or construction
and cargo moving vehicles or equipment, shall not under any conditions be stored or parked
overnight in any residential district.
§ 205-49. Gasoline service stations and other drive-in uses.
A. Equipment above surface or ground for the service of motor vehicles shall be no closer
than 15 feet to any property line.
B. The width of any entrance driveway leading from the public street to such service station
or other drive-in use shall not exceed 30 feet at its intersection with the curbline or edge
of pavement.
C. No two driveways leading from a public street to such service station or other drive-in
use shall be within 15 feet of each other at their intersection with the curb or street line.
D. Parking and vehicle access shall be so arranged that there will be no need for the
motorist to back over sidewalks or onto streets.
§ 205-50. Motor vehicle repair garage.
A. All repairs must be conducted entirely within a building.
B. The exterior walls of the building must not be less than 100 feet from a residential
district.
C. There shall be no dismantling or repairing outside of the building.
D. All discarded parts must be stored at the rear of the building and barricaded from sight
by such fencing and/or shrubbery approved by the Zoning Officer.
E. All discarded parts must be removed from the premises within 30 days.
§ 205-50 ZONING § 205-52
205:83 02 - 15 - 2006
F. Salvage parts must be stored inside the building.
§ 205-51. Individual mobile homes/manufactured homes.
A. A manufactured home shall be placed on a permanent foundation within 30 days of
arrival on its lot. This period may be extended an additional 30 days by the Zoning
Officer upon good cause shown for the need for additional time to permit the placement
of the home on a foundation. The foundation shall be at least four masonry piers set on a
concrete footer, with a continuous masonry peripheral wall. The bottom of the mobile
home shall be securely tied to its foundation by over-the-top or built in steel straps or
cables sufficient to hold the mobile home to its foundation under high wind conditions.
The spacing between the home’s floor and the ground below shall be well ventilated and
the continuous masonry wall maintained in good condition.
B. Before a mobile home can be occupied, the Zoning Officer shall inspect the premises and
shall determine that the sewage disposal and water supply systems have been installed
and are in working order before issuing an occupancy permit.
C. Before a mobile home is removed from its lot, the occupant shall present to the Zoning
Officer receipts showing that all local, county, state and school district taxes have been
paid in full. When a mobile home has been removed, and a second mobile home shall
not immediately replace it on the same foundation, the lot owner shall backfill the site to
the original grade within 60 days after removal of the home.
D. Any mobile home brought into the municipality after the effective date of this chapter
shall display evidence that it complies with the National Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Act, and amendments thereto.
E. A solid weatherproof material shall continuously skirt any mobile home lawfully
preexisting this chapter with appropriate cross ventilation and maintained in good
condition.
§ 205-52. Communications towers and antennas.
A. The height regulations of this chapter may be increased provided that every yard is
increased by one foot for each one foot of height above the maximum height. The
communications towers shall not at any time exceed 200 feet. Equipment that is mounted
or attached to the communications tower shall not exceed this two-hundred-foot
maximum height.
B. Communications towers shall be erected within the minimum yard and building setback
requirements of the districts in which they are to be built. Any guide anchor must meet
the minimum yard and building setback requirements of the zoning district in which it is
located.
C. Any applicant proposing construction of a new communications tower shall demonstrate
that a good faith effort has been made to obtain permission to mount the communications
antennas on an existing building, structure, or communications tower. A good faith effort
shall require that all owners of potentially suitable structures within a 1/4 mile radius of
§ 205-52 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-52
205:84 02 - 15 - 2006
the proposed tower site be contacted and that one or more of the following reasons for
not selecting such structure apply:
(1) The proposed antennas and related equipment would exceed the structural capacity
of the existing structure and its reinforcement cannot be accomplished at a
reasonable cost.
(2) The proposed antennas and related equipment would cause radio frequency
interference with other existing equipment for that existing structure and the
interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
(3) Such existing structures do not have adequate location, space, access or height to
accommodate the proposed equipment or to allow it to perform its intended
function.
(4) Addition of the proposed antennas and related equipment would result in
electromagnetic radiation from such structure exceeding applicable standards
established by the Federal Communications Commission governing human
exposure to electromagnetic radiation.
(5) A commercially reasonable agreement could not be reached with the owners of
such structures.
D. Communications towers shall be securely anchored in a fixed location on the ground, and
plans submitted showing a cross section of the proposed structure, structural compliance
with building codes documenting that the proposed structure meets or exceeds those
standards, and documentary evidence from a professional engineer shall be provided that
the proposed structure will withstand wind, storm, ice, lightning, and other natural forces.
Additionally, documentation shall be provided by a professional engineer demonstrating
that the communications tower is structurally capable of handling antennas, dishes and
other equipment mounted or attached to the communications tower and what the
maximum load limits are for the structure.
E. An annual inspection performed by a professional engineer and paid for by the owner of
the communications tower shall be required for all communications towers. An annual
inspection report shall be submitted to the municipality by June 1 of each calendar year.
F. All communications towers shall have a finish that reduces the visibility of the structure.
Communications towers shall not have strobe lights or any illumination unless required
by the Federal Aviation Administration.
G. The communications tower and all equipment shall be enclosed by a chain link fence 10
feet high with three strands of barb wire constructed on the top of the chain link fence.
The communications tower shall be shielded or guarded against climbing of unauthorized
personnel. Access to the site shall be restricted and remain locked. The base of a
communications tower shall be landscaped so as to screen the foundation and base and
communications equipment building from abutting properties with a natural screening no
higher than six feet. Structures related to the communications tower shall be equipped
with a twenty-four-hour security system.
§ 205-52 ZONING § 205-52
205:85 02 - 15 - 2006
28. Editor’s Note: See Ch. 89, Construction Codes, Uniform.
H. The communications tower and related equipment shall be promptly removed if the
communications tower is not used for communication purposes for any continuous
one-year period.
I. The communications tower may be located on a lot occupied by other principal structures
and may occupy a leased parcel within a lot meeting the minimum lot size requirements
for the zoning district.
J. Recording of a plat of subdivision shall not be required for a lease parcel on which a
communications tower is proposed to be constructed, provided the communications
equipment building is unmanned.
K. The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed height of the communications tower is
the minimum height necessary to perform its function.
L. The foundation and base of any communications tower shall be set back from any
adjacent property line (not lease line) in any district at least 100 feet.
M. The base of a communications tower shall be landscaped so as to screen the foundation,
base and communications equipment building from abutting properties.
N. The communications equipment building shall comply with the required yards and height
requirements of the industrial zone for an accessory structure.
O. The applicant shall submit certification from a registered Pennsylvania structural
engineer that a proposed communications tower will be designed and constructed in
accordance with the current Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna
Supporting Structures, published by the Electrical Industrial
Association/Telecommunications Industry Association, and applicable requirements of
the municipality's building code.28
P. The applicant shall demonstrate that the location of the proposed communications tower
is safe and that tower structure failure, falling ice or other debris will not adversely affect
surrounding areas.
Q. All guide wires associated with guided communications towers shall be clearly marked
so as to be visible at all times and shall be located within a fenced enclosure.
R. No signs or lights shall be mounted on a communications tower, except as may be
required by the Federal Communications Commission, Federal Aviation Administration
or other governmental agency that has jurisdiction.
S. Communications towers shall be protected and maintained in accordance with the
requirements of the municipal building code.
T. One off-street parking space shall be provided within the fenced area.
U. In January of each year, the owner or operator of a communications tower shall submit
written verification to the municipality that there have been no changes in the operating
§ 205-52 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-54
205:86 02 - 15 - 2006
characteristics of the communications tower as approved at the time of approval of the
use by special exception, including, at a minimum:
(1) Copy of the current Federal Communications Commission license.
(2) Name, address and emergency telephone number for the operator of the
communications tower.
(3) Copy of certificate of insurance evidencing general liability coverage in the
minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence covering the communications
tower and communications antennas.
(4) At any time during the calendar year, if an amendment to the Federal
Communications Commission license is issued, a copy of the amended license
shall be submitted to the municipality.
§ 205-53. Kennels.
A. No additional residential use may be established on land designated for operation as a
kennel.
B. The operator or owner of a kennel shall hold all current state and local licenses and
permits for the location, activity and number of animals so specified.
C. Any exterior fenced area wherein animals exercise or are otherwise exposed must be
located a minimum of 150 feet from any principal structure on adjacent lots.
D. The perimeter of the exterior exercise area must be fenced with a weatherproof material,
a minimum of five feet in height, accessible only through a self-latching gate.
E. Any structure used to house animals shall be equipped with code-approved nontoxic
noise-dampening material or acoustic tile.
F. No kennel may be established within 1/2 of a mile of an existing kennel.
§ 205-54. Off-street parking.
A. All building and structures erected and all uses of land established after the adoption of
this section shall be provided with off-street parking spaces as set forth in this section.
B. The provisions of this section, except where there is a change of use, shall not apply to
any existing building or structure.
C. Whenever a building or structure constructed before the effective date of this section is
changed or enlarged, in floor area, number of employees, number of housing units,
seating capacity or otherwise to create a need for an increase in the number of parking
spaces, additional parking spaces shall be provided on the basis of the enlargement or
change. If a building or structure existing prior to the effective date of this section is
enlarged to the extent of 50% or more in floor area or number of housing units it shall
then and thereafter comply with the full parking requirements set forth herein.
§ 205-54 ZONING § 205-54
205:87 02 - 15 - 2006
D. Off-street parking facilities in existence on the effective date of this chapter and located
on the same lot as the building or use served shall not hereafter be reduced below the
requirements for a similar new building or use under the provisions of this section.
E. The following regulations shall govern the location of off-street parking spaces and areas:
(1) Parking spaces for all detached residential uses shall be located on the same lot as
the use that they are intended to serve. Each required off-street parking space shall
have direct access to a public right-of-way.
(2) Parking spaces for apartments, dormitories or similar residential uses shall be
located not more than 300 feet from the principal use.
(3) Nonresidential off-street parking shall not be located within the first 40 feet from
the right-of-way adjoining such lot or site. No portion of said 40 feet shall be
paved for any reason except for access drives to the site and pedestrian walkways.
F. A parking space shall have minimum rectangular dimensions of not less than nine feet in
width and 18 feet in length, exclusive of driveways, aisles and other circulation areas.
Parallel parking spaces shall have a dimension of eight feet in width and 23 feet in
length.
G. Driveways and traffic aisles serving individual parking spaces shall not be less than 25
feet wide for ninety-degree parking, 12 feet wide for parallel parking, 17 1/2 feet for
sixty-degree parking and 13 feet for forty-five-degree parking. If lines indicate parking
spaces with angles other than 90°, then traffic lanes shall be restricted to one-way,
permitting head-in parking. No driveway or street used for interior circulation shall have
traffic lanes less than 12 feet in width.
H. Pedestrian walkways. In parking lots over 10 parking spaces, separate pedestrian
walkways shall provide safe access from buildings to parking lots, adjacent properties
and sidewalks. These walkways shall be generally oriented perpendicular to and between
parking bays. The following guidelines apply to the development of walkways:
(1) One walkway can serve as a collector for up to four parking bays of parked cars.
(2) Walkways shall be constructed in accordance with the standards established by the
municipality.
(3) Walkways shall be integrated with existing sidewalks and pedestrian ways.
I. Common shared parking lots:
(1) Common shared parking lots are preferred and encouraged. The required off-street
parking spaces for two or more uses may be provided collectively on one lot if the
total number of spaces is not less than the sum of the spaces required for each use
individually.
(2) The developer shall provide a reciprocal parking and access easement agreement
between owners and operators of the facilities generating the need for common
shared parking lots.
§ 205-54 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-54
205:88 02 - 15 - 2006
(3) Any modification to the required number of parking spaces shall be supported by a
parking needs analysis documenting anticipated parking needs based on the
combined utilization of all facilities on site simultaneously or demonstrating the
hours or days of peak parking needed for the uses are so different that a lower total
will adequately provide for all uses served by the facility. The parking needs
analysis shall be prepared by a person or firm trained or certified to perform such
duties. The modification shall be granted by the Zoning Hearing Board.
J. The required off-street parking spaces for any number of separate buildings, structures or
uses may be provided collectively on one lot, provided that the total number of such
spaces shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the various individual
buildings, structures, or uses computed separately in accordance with this section.
K. On development sites where a combination of large scale assembly uses requiring
parking for 2,000 vehicles or more, including at least one commercial recreation use, are
permitted, parking requirements may be met for each use through a reciprocal parking
and access easement agreement between the owners and operators of the facilities
generating the need for such parking. In such cases, at the governing body's discretion,
each facility shall provide on site a minimum of 50% of the required number of off-street
parking spaces determined at peak utilization for each use.
L. A parking needs analysis shall be submitted to the municipality which documents
anticipated parking needs based on the combined utilization of all facilities on site
simultaneously. Said analysis shall be prepared by a person or firm trained or certified to
perform such studies.
M. When two or more uses are located within the same building or structure, off-street
parking spaces equal in number to the sum of the separate requirements for each use
shall be provided.
N. All off-street parking lots required by this section shall be used only for the parking of
vehicles of occupants, patrons, visitors or employees and shall not be used for any kind
of loading, sales, servicing or continuous storage of a vehicle for more than 48 hours.
O. Every parcel of land hereafter used as a public or private off-street parking lot capable of
accommodating five or more vehicles shall be developed and maintained in accordance
with the following requirements:
(1) Each off-street parking space shall have direct access to an aisle or driveway, and
all required off-street parking lots shall have vehicular access to a street so
designed to minimize interference with pedestrian and traffic movement.
(2) All off-street parking lots including loading areas and service areas shall be paved
with asphalt or concrete and shall be provided with bumper guards or barrier curbs
where needed.
(3) The number of off-street parking spaces required is set forth in Table 6-1 of this
section. In the case of any building, structure, or premises which is not specifically
mentioned herein, the Zoning Hearing Board shall determine the amount of
off-street parking required.
§ 205-54 ZONING § 205-54
205:89 02 - 15 - 2006
Table 6-1
Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use
Minimum Required Off-Street Parking
Spaces
Banks 1 space for each 300 square feet of floor
Beauty parlors and barbershops 1 space for each chair
Bowling lanes 5 spaces for each lane
Churches, synagogues and religious
use
1 space for each 5 seats except as noted in
Subsection E
Community buildings, country
clubs, social halls, lodges, fraternal
organizations and similar uses
1 space for each 500 square feet of floor
area occupied by all principal and accessory
structures
Day-care centers 1 space for every 2 teachers and employees
Doctors and dentists in other than
office buildings
3 spaces for patients' use for each doctor's
office
Dormitory (rooming house) 1 space for each resident
Funeral homes and mortuaries 5 spaces for each parlor
High schools, colleges universities
or other institutions of higher
learning
1 space for every 2 teachers, employees or
administrators, 1 space for each 10 students
Home occupation uses other than
those listed
1 space per employee in addition to 1 space
for each 300 square feet of home occupation
use
Hospitals 1 space for every 2 beds, 1 space for every
3 employees, plus 1 space per doctor
Laundromats 1 space for each 2 washing machines
Manufacturing, industrial, and
general commercial uses not
otherwise specified herein
1 space for each 2 employees in the
maximum working shift
Motels and hotels 1 space for each unit
Multifamily dwellings 2 spaces for each dwelling unit
Nursing, convalescing, old age and
rest homes
1 space for each 3 beds
Offices 1 space for every 500 square feet of floor
area
Restaurants, bars and cafes 1 space for each 3 seats
Retail stores, store groups, shops,
etc.
1 space for each 300 square feet of floor
area where the floor area exceeds 1,000
square feet
Schools, elementary, public and
private
2 spaces for every 3 teachers, employees or
administrators, 1 additional space for every
6 seats in assembly hall
§ 205-54 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-56
205:90 02 - 15 - 2006
Table 6-1
Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use
Minimum Required Off-Street Parking
Spaces
Single-family/two-family residences 1 space per dwelling unit
Wholesale establishments or
warehouses
1 space for each 2 employees on maximum
shift
§ 205-55. Off-street loading and unloading.
In any district, in connection with every building, or building group or part thereof hereafter
erected, which is to be occupied by manufacturing or commercial uses for distribution by
vehicles of material or merchandise, where required, there shall be provided and maintained,
on the same lot with such building, off-street loading berths in accordance with the
requirements of Table 6-2. Each loading space shall be not less than 10 feet in width, 45 feet
in length, exclusive of access or turning lanes, and have a minimum clearance of 14 feet and
may occupy all or any part of any required yard.
Table 6-2
Off-Street Loading and Unloading Requirements
Uses Square Feet of Total Floor Area
Required Off-Street
Loading Berths
Hospitals (in addition to
space for ambulances)
From 10,000 to 30,000
For each additional 30,000 or major
fraction thereof
1
1 additional
Offices; hotels; retail,
commercial, wholesale,
manufacturing, storage,
and miscellaneous uses
From 10,000 to 25,000
From 25,000 to 40,000
From 40,000 to 60,000
From 60,000 to 100,000
For each additional 50,000 or major
fraction thereof
1
2
3
4
1 additional
Schools 15,000 or more 1
Undertakers and funeral
parlors
5,000
For each additional 5,000 or major
fraction thereof
1
1 additional
§ 205-56. Joint facilities for parking or loading.
Off-street parking and loading facilities for separate uses may be provided jointly if the total
number of spaces so provided is not less than the sum of the separate requirements for each
use, and provided that all regulations governing the location of accessory spaces in relation to
the use served are adhered to. Further, no accessory space or portion thereof shall serve as a
required space for more than one use unless otherwise approved by the Zoning Hearing Board
in accordance with the purposes and procedures set forth herein.
§ 205-57 ZONING § 205-57
205:91 02 - 15 - 2006
§ 205-57. Developments and maintenance of parking areas, structures and loading areas.
Every parcel of land hereafter used as a public or private parking area for five or more cars,
or structure used as a parking garage or loading area, including a commercial parking lot,
shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the requirements of this article. Plans
for such areas shall be reviewed by the Zoning Officer to ensure compliance with the
following regulations:
A. Off-street parking areas and structures for five or more vehicles and off-street loading
areas shall be effectively screened by a fence or hedge. The screening shall be on the
sides that adjoin, abut, are adjacent to or face premises situated in any residential zones
or institutional buildings.
B. No off-street loading area or parking area or part thereof for five or more vehicles shall
be closer than 10 feet to any dwelling, school, hospital or institution for human care
located on an adjoining or adjacent lot.
C. Any off-street parking or off-street loading area shall be surfaced with an asphalt or
portland cement, concrete, pavement or similar durable and dustless surface. All areas
shall be marked so as to provide for the orderly and safe loading, parking and storage of
automobiles or trucks.
D. Any lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking or loading area shall be so
arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining premises. Off-street parking facilities
for multifamily structures containing three or more families shall be adequately lighted.
E. Any off-street parking area and off-street loading area shall be graded and drained so as
to dispose of all surface water without detriment to surrounding uses.
F. Parking shall be permitted on the roof of any structure, provided that a four-foot
reinforced masonry wall is constructed around the perimeter of the roof.
G. Maximum grade of parking floors shall be 6%.
H. Maximum grade of ramps shall be:
(1) Covered ramps shall have a maximum grade of 15%.
(2) Uncovered ramps shall have a maximum grade of 12%.
I. Minimum number of elevators on multilevel facilities shall be one for each 250 parking
spaces.
J. Number and location of ingress/egress shall be determined by municipality governing
body based upon a traffic analysis.
K. Minimum ramp and aisle width and other design requirements shall be the same as for
other parking lots.
§ 205-58 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-58
205:92 02 - 15 - 2006
§ 205-58. Accessible parking requirements.
Accessible parking spaces for the physically challenged shall be provided for multiple-family
and nonresidential uses as follows:
A. Minimum number of spaces. The minimum number of required accessible parking spaces
shall be as outlined in Table 6-3.
Table 6-3
Required Accessible Parking Spaces
Total Parking Spaces in Lot Minimum Accessible Spaces
1 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 2% of total
Over 1,000 20, plus 1 per 100 over 1,000
B. A minimum of 25% of the required accessible parking spaces shall be van accessible.
C. The minimum number of van accessible parking spaces shall be one.
D. Design of accessible spaces shall be completed in accordance with the Americans with
Disabilities Act Architectural Guidelines and include the following:
(1) Accessible parking spaces serving a particular building shall be located on the
shortest accessible route of travel from adjacent parking to an accessible structure.
In parking facilities not serving a particular structure, accessible parking shall be
located on the shortest accessible route of travel to an accessible pedestrian
entrance of the parking facility.
(2) Accessible parking spaces shall be at least eight feet wide.
(3) One parking access aisle of no less than five feet in width shall be provided for
each accessible parking space and shall be a part of the accessible route of no less
than three feet in width to the building or facility entrance. A parking access aisle
may be shared between two accessible parking spaces. Access aisles shall be
clearly designated and identifiable by line painting, curbing, and other similar
means.
§ 205-58 ZONING § 205-59
205:93 02 - 15 - 2006
(4) Van accessible parking spaces shall be at least eight feet wide with an access aisle
of no less than eight feet in width.
(5) Parking spaces and access aisles shall be level with surface slopes not exceeding
2% in all directions.
(6) Accessible parking spaces shall be designated as reserved by a sign showing the
symbol of accessibility. Such signs shall be located so as not to be obscured by a
vehicle in the space.
§ 205-59. Sexually oriented business permit applications.
A. No sexually oriented business shall be in operation without an approved permit.
(1) An application for a permit to operate a sexually oriented business must be made
on a form provided by the Zoning Officer of the municipality. The application
must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the floor plan and plot plan
configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied
by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but
must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn marked with dimensions of the
interior of the premises to any accuracy of plus or minus six inches.
(2) The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter and the
premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with the law by the
Zoning Officer and the Fire Chief.
(3) A person, who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business as an individual,
must sign the application for a permit as the applicant. If a person who wishes to
operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each individual
who has 10% or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a
permit as an applicant. If a corporation is listed as owner of a sexually oriented
business or as the entity which wishes to operate such a business, each individual
having a direct or indirect interest of 10% or greater in the corporation must sign
the application for a permit as applicant.
(4) The fact that a person possesses another type of municipal permit does not exempt
the person from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented business permit.
B. Issuance of permit.
(1) The municipal Zoning Officer shall approve the issuance of a permit to an
applicant within 30 days after receipt of an application unless he finds one or more
of the following to be true:
(a) An applicant is overdue in his/her payment to the municipality of taxes, fees,
fines, or penalties assessed against him/her or imposed upon him/her in
relation to a sexually oriented business.
§ 205-59 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-59
205:94 02 - 15 - 2006
(b) An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for
issuance of the permit or has falsely answered a question or request for
information on the application form.
(c) The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have been
reviewed and have been disapproved by either the Zoning Officer or Fire
Chief as not being in compliance with the applicable laws and ordinances.
(d) The permit fee required by this chapter has not been paid.
(e) An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in
compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter.
(f) An individual applicant or any individual holding a direct or indirect interest
or more than 10% of a corporate applicant, or any of the officers and
directors of the corporate applicant, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of
the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, or
the manager or other person in charge of the operation of the applicant's
business, has or have been convicted of an offense in any jurisdiction other
than the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania that would have constituted an
offense involving sexual misconduct if committed within the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania. In order for approval to be denied pursuant to this
subsection, the person's or persons' convictions or release in connection with
the sexual misconduct offense must have occurred within two years of the
date of application in the event of a misdemeanor and within five years of the
date of application in the event of a felony.
(2) The permit, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to
whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented
business. The permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance
to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time.
(3) The Zoning Officer and Fire Chief shall complete their certification that the
premises are in compliance or not in compliance within 20 days of receipt of the
application by the Zoning Officer. The certification shall be promptly presented to
the Zoning Officer.
C. The annual fee for a sexually oriented business permit will be set by resolution of the
governing body.
D. Inspection.
(1) An applicant, or permittee, shall permit representatives of the Police Department,
Fire Department, Zoning Officer, or other municipal departments or agencies to
inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of insuring
compliance with the law, at any time that the sexually oriented business is
occupied or open for business.
(2) If the municipal Zoning Officer denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not
be issued a permit for one year from the date of denial, except that, after 90 days
have elapsed since the date of denial, the applicant may be granted a permit if the
§ 205-59 ZONING § 205-59
205:95 02 - 15 - 2006
Zoning Officer finds that the basis for denial of the renewal permit has been
corrected or abated.
E. Suspension of permit.
(1) The Zoning Officer shall suspend a permit for a period not to exceed 30 days if
he/she determines that a permittee or employee of a permittee has:
(a) Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter.
(b) Engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on the sexually
oriented business premises.
(c) Refused to allow inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as
authorized by this chapter.
(d) Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented
business premises.
F. Revocation of permit.
(1) The Zoning Officer shall revoke a permit if a cause of suspension set forth in this
chapter occurs and the permit has been suspended within the preceding 12 months.
(2) The Zoning Officer shall revoke a permit if he/she determined that:
(a) A permittee, or any persons specified in this chapter, is or has been convicted
of the offenses specified.
(b) A permittee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to
the municipality during the application process.
(c) A permittee or an employee of a permittee has knowingly allowed
possession, use, or sale of a controlled substance on the premises.
(d) A permittee or an employee of a permittee has knowingly allowed
prostitution on the premises.
(e) A permittee or an employee of the permittee knowingly operated the sexually
oriented business during a period of time when the permittee's permit was
suspended.
(f) A permittee is delinquent in payment to the municipality or state of any taxes
or fees related to the sexually oriented businesses.
(3) When the Zoning Officer revokes a permit, the revocation shall continue for one
year, and the premises shall not be issued a sexually oriented business permit for
one year from the date the revocation became effective, except that if the
revocation is pursuant to any provisions of the chapter otherwise specified, the
revocation shall be effective for two years in the event of a misdemeanor or five
years in the case of a felony.
§ 205-59 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-59
205:96 02 - 15 - 2006
(4) After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an application, or
suspension or revocation of a permit, the applicant or licensee or permittee shall
have the right to appeal said action and to seek prompt judicial review of such
administrative action in any court of competent jurisdiction.
G. A permittee shall not transfer his permit to another person. A permittee shall not operate
a sexually oriented business under the authority of a permit at any place other than the
address designated in the application.
H. Exemptions.
(1) It is a defense to prosecution under this chapter that a person appearing in a state
of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
(a) By a proprietary school licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or a
college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
(b) By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational
programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or
university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
(c) In a structure which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and
no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and
(d) Where, in order to participate in class a student must enroll at least three days
in advance of the class; and
(e) Where not more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time.
I. Minimum spacing and proximity requirements.
(1) No sexually oriented business shall be located within 1,000 feet of any other
sexually oriented business.
(2) No sexually oriented business shall be located within specified distances of certain
land uses as set forth below:
(a) No such establishment shall be located within 1,000 feet of a dwelling.
(b) No such establishment shall be located within 1,000 feet of any parcel of
land which contains any one or more of the following specified land uses:
amusement park, camps (for minors' activities), child care facilities, church,
library, community center, museum, park, playground, school and school bus
stops, and other lands where minors congregate.
(3) The distance between any two sexually oriented businesses shall be in a straight
line, without regard to intervening structures, from the closest point on the exterior
parcel line of each establishment and any land use specified in this chapter; shall
be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the
closest point on the exterior parcel line of the sexually oriented business to the
closest on the property line of said land use.
§ 205-60 ZONING § 205-60
205:97 02 - 15 - 2006
29. Editor’s Note: See Ch. 89, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 205-60. Signs.
A. The following regulations shall apply to all permitted signs in all zoning districts:
(1) No sign hereafter shall be erected, moved, enlarged, replaced, illuminated or
altered except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and any other
ordinances and/or regulations enacted by the municipality. The completion of an
application and the subsequent issuance of a permit by the Zoning Officer are
required.
(2) General repair and maintenance of any sign shall not, in and of itself, be
considered an alteration.
(3) All such applications must be accompanied by the appropriate fee, plans in
duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the exact size, shape and dimensions of such
signs and their proposed location or placement upon any land, building, structure
or premises.
(4) Any application for a permit for the erection of a sign or other advertising structure
in which electrical wiring and connections are to be used shall be submitted to the
Codes Enforcement Officer. All specifications for each sign and all parts thereof
(including framework, supports, background, anchors, and wiring systems) must
meet, at a minimum, the requirements as set forth in the building (BOCA),
electrical, and fire prevention codes adopted by the municipality, as they now exist
or as they may hereafter exist. In the absence of an electrical ordinance, the
National Electrical Code shall be used as the standard for all wiring systems.29
(5) A person shall not erect, install, remove or replace any sign for which a permit is
required under the provisions of this chapter until proof of liability insurance
coverage in an amount not less than $50,000 for injury to one person and $100,000
for injury to two or more persons caused by or resulting from said sign has been
filed. A person shall not maintain any sign for which a permit is required under the
provisions of this chapter until there has been filed with coverage naming the
municipality as additional insured, in an amount of not less than $100,000 for
injury to two or more persons caused by or resulting from said sign.
(6) All signs shall conform to the minimum yard requirements of the zone in which
they are permitted.
(7) No signs except those deemed as official traffic signs by the municipality, county
or state, on streets within their respective jurisdiction, shall be erected within two
feet of any street, or within any public right-of-way. All signs located on properties
adjacent to the legal right-of-way shall allow adequate clearance for motor vehicles
and pedestrians. Signs, architectural projections, or sign structures projecting over
vehicular access areas must be, at a minimum, 17 feet six inches above the
finished grade, which conforms to the minimum height clearance limitations, set
forth in PennDOT regulations. Any signs over pedestrian access areas must be at
least seven feet above the finished grade.
§ 205-60 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-60
205:98 02 - 15 - 2006
(8) Signs as referred to in this section or elsewhere in this chapter shall be constructed
of durable materials and shall be kept in good condition and repair. Permitted signs
shall be adequately maintained so as to not show evidence of deterioration, which
includes, but is not limited to, peeling, rust, dirt, fading, discoloration or holes.
Signs requiring illumination will be illuminated as specified in the chapter. All
signs located in a commercial district may be illuminated internally or by directed
or reflected light, provided that the source of light is not visible and does not
directly illuminate the adjoining premises, and provided that such illumination
shall not be so placed as to cause confusion or a hazard to traffic or conflict with
traffic control signs or lights. The lighting shall not be directed towards a
residential zoning district or residential building or be located less than 100 feet
from the boundary line of the residential zoning district.
(9) All signs shall be located on the property containing the land use identified by the
sign.
(10) No sign shall have flashing or intermittent illumination, change colors, vary in
intensity or hue or emit any sound. Signs shall be nonmoving stationary structures
and shall have nonmoving components. Signs which contain sound, audible
messages and music are also prohibited.
(11) No sign shall be erected containing information that states or implies that a
property may be used for any purpose not permitted under the provision of this
chapter.
(12) Nonconforming signs. Any sign which was lawfully in existence prior to the
effective date of this chapter, or of any amendment to such chapter heretofore or
hereafter enacted; or prior to the application of such chapter or amendment thereto
to its location by reason of annexation, and which did not conform or comply with
the provisions of the said chapter or amendment at the time of their enactment,
shall be considered a legal nonconforming sign and may continue in such status
until such time as it is either abandoned or removed by its owner, subject to the
following limitations:
(a) Alteration or moving. A nonconforming sign of any type shall not be moved
to another position or location upon the building, structure or lot on which it
is located, nor shall the size or area of such nonconforming sign be altered or
increased or its structure or construction be altered or changed.
(b) Damage, destruction or replacement. Whenever any nonconforming sign has
been damaged or destroyed by any means to the extent of 50% of its market
value at the time of destruction or damage, such sign shall not be restored or
replaced, unless it conforms to all provisions of this chapter.
(c) Discontinuance. Whenever a nonconforming sign is discontinued for a
continuous period of more than six months, then such nonconforming sign,
together with its panel cabinet, supports, braces, anchors, and electrical
equipment, shall be removed within 14 days from the end of the aforesaid
six-month period and the use of the signs upon such building, structure or
§ 205-60 ZONING § 205-60
205:99 02 - 15 - 2006
land shall not be resumed except in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
(13) No permit for any advertising sign, light string, exterior portable sign or an
exterior wind or power device of display or flags or pennants used for gaining
attention shall be issued.
(14) A temporary interior sign shall cover a maximum of 25% of the window area on
which the sign is affixed.
(15) A business or identification sign mounted to the face of a building shall conform to
the following standards:
(a) A minimum letter, number or symbol area of 50% of the sign area.
(b) The maximum height of a letter, number or symbols shall be 10% of the
height of the first story or 2 12 feet, whichever is less.
(c) The sides of individual back-lighted letters, numbers or symbols shall be
constructed of an opaque material that is different from the material used for
the front of the letter, number or symbol.
(16) Real estate signs related to prospective sale, rent or lease of the land or building in
any zoning district within the municipality, provided that the sign area on one side
of a single face sign not to exceed six square feet, or one double-face sign not to
exceed a total of 12 square feet. Such signs shall be removed within 15 days
following the sale of the building or property.
(17) All political signs must be removed within seven days after the date of either the
primary or general election.
B. Sign area.
(1) The area of a sign shall include all lettering, wording and accompanying designs
and symbols, together with the background, whether open or enclosed, on which
they are displayed, together with any material or color forming an integral part of
the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop
or structure against which it is placed. This will not include any supporting
framework and bracing that are incidental to the display itself. The computation of
the sign area will be the smallest rectilinear, circular, or triangular shape, or the
sum of the combination of regular geometric figures, which comprise the sign face.
(2) Where the sign consists of individual letters, numerals or symbols attached to or
painted on a surface, building, wall or window, the sign area shall be that of the
smallest rectangle or other regular geometric shape that can enclose such letters or
symbols.
(3) In computing the area of a double-face sign, the requirements found in the
definition of gross surface area of a sign shall be used.
C. Prohibited signs.
§ 205-60 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-60
205:100 02 - 15 - 2006
(1) The following devices and locations are prohibited in all districts:
(a) Signs located in such a manner as to obstruct or otherwise interfere with an
official traffic sign, signal or device or obstruct or interfere with a driver's
view of approaching, merging or intersecting traffic. Also, signs that make
use of words such as "Stop," "One Way," "Danger," "Yield" or similar
words, phrases or symbols, lights or characters, in such a manner as to
interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic.
(b) Except as provided for elsewhere in this Code, signs encroaching upon or
overhanging public right-of-way. No sign shall be attached to any utility
pole, light standard, street tree or any other public facility located within the
public right-of way.
(c) Portable signs except as permitted as temporary signs.
(d) Any sign attached to, or placed on, a vehicle or trailer parked on public or
private property, except for signs meeting the following conditions:
[1] The primary purpose of such vehicle or trailer is not the display of
signs.
[2] The signs are magnetic, decals, or painted upon an integral part of the
vehicle or equipment as originally designed by the manufacturer, and do
not break the silhouette of the vehicle.
[3] The vehicle or trailer is in operating condition, currently registered and
licensed to operate on public streets and actively used or available for
use in the daily function of the business to which such signs relate.
[4] Vehicles and trailers shall not be used primarily as static displays,
advertising a product or service, nor utilized as storage, shelter or
distribution points for commercial products or services for the general
public.
D. Signs in residential districts. Signs as hereafter provided are permitted in residential
districts:
(1) Identification signs for public, charitable, educational and religious uses: one sign
not over 20 feet in area.
(2) Signs directing and guiding traffic and parking on private property, but bearing no
advertising matter.
(3) House numbers: minimum three inches, maximum six inches in letter height.
(4) Nameplates not exceeding two square feet in area, bearing only the resident's
name.
(5) Nameplates of multifamily dwelling complexes, either illuminated or
nonilluminated, not exceeding six square feet in area, bearing only the complex
name and no advertising matter.
§ 205-60 ZONING § 205-60
205:101 02 - 15 - 2006
(6) Nonconforming signs. No sign may be enlarged or altered in a way that increases
its nonconformity.
E. Signs in the commercial districts. Signs as hereafter provided are permitted in the
Commercial or Mixed Use Districts:
(1) One nonilluminated, nonflashing business sign, directly relating to a use conducted
on the premises and mounted on the wall of the building, may be permitted on
each business, provided that the total area in square feet of such sign shall not
exceed two times the linear feet of street frontage, or one nonilluminated,
nonflashing and one illuminated, nonflashing business sign, directly related to a
use conducted on the premises and mounted on the wall of the building, may be
permitted on each business establishment, provided that the total area in square
feet of such sign shall not exceed two times the linear feet of street frontage and
shall not extend more than 12 inches therefrom.
(2) No sign shall project over a public right-of-way. Projecting of freestanding signs
on private property shall be permitted within the total sign area permitted in this
chapter, provided that the maximum area of the sign does not exceed 32 square
feet.
(3) No sign shall exceed 28 feet in height.
F. Signs in the Industrial District. Signs as hereafter provided are permitted in the Industrial
Districts:
(1) One nonilluminated, nonflashing business sign, directly relating to a use conducted
on the premises and mounted on the wall of the building, may be permitted on
each business, provided that the total area in square feet of such sign shall not
exceed two times the linear feet of street frontage, or one nonilluminated,
nonflashing and one illuminated, nonflashing business sign, directly related to a
use conducted on the premises and mounted on the wall of the building, may be
permitted on each business establishment, provided that the total area in square
feet of such sign shall not exceed two times the linear feet of street frontage and
shall not extend more than 12 inches therefrom.
(2) No sign shall project over a public right-of-way. Projecting of freestanding signs
on private property shall be permitted within the total sign area permitted in
Subsection B, provided that the maximum area of the sign does not exceed 32
square feet.
(3) No sign shall exceed 28 feet in height.
G. Signs exempt from regulation under this chapter.
(1) Any public notice or warning required by a valid and applicable federal, state, or
local law, regulation or ordinance.
(2) Any sign inside a building, not attached to a window or door, that is not legible
from a distance of more than three feet beyond the lot line of the zone lot or parcel
on which such sign is located.
§ 205-60 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-62
205:102 02 - 15 - 2006
(3) Works of art that do not include a commercial message.
(4) Holiday lights and decorations with no commercial message, but only between
October 31 and January 31.
(5) Traffic control or incidental signs on private property, such as "Stop," "Yield," and
similar signs, the face of which meet Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
standards and which contain no commercial message of any sort.
(6) Emergency warning signs erected by governmental agency, a public utility
company, or a contractor doing authorized or permitted work within the public
right-of-way.
(7) Memorial signs or tablets denoting the date of erection of a building.
(8) Signs and banners erected by a governmental body or under the direction of the
governing body.
(9) Flags in residential districts, provided that they do not exceed 15 square feet, do
not promote or advertise the sale of products or merchandise, and do not contain
pornographic, obscene or offensive language or symbols.
(10) Signs located in the Institutional District.
§ 205-61. Sign permits.
A. One permit is good for the life of the sign.
B. Any changes made to an existing sign, even if already permitted, require a new sign
permit.
C. All signs currently in use are permitted under this chapter; however, any modifications to
the signs require the filing of a sign permit and must be in conformance with this
chapter.
D. Each application for a sign permit shall be accompanied by a drawing showing the
design proposed and the size, character, and color of letters, lines, and symbols and the
method of illumination and the exact location of the sign in relation to the building and
property, and details and specifications for construction. The appropriate fee shall
accompany each application for a sign permit.
§ 205-62. Illumination.
The following requirements shall apply to the illumination of signs, advertising structures and
premises:
A. Area lighting used in parking areas and yard areas shall be designed and used to
eliminate glare on public streets and ways and/or other private property.
B. All signs and advertising structures, except hereinafter modified, may be illuminated
internally or by reflected light, provided the source of light is not directly visible and is
§ 205-62 ZONING § 205-64
205:103 02 - 15 - 2006
so arranged as to reflect away from the adjoining premises and provided that such
illumination shall not be placed as to cause confusion or a hazard to traffic or conflict
with traffic control signs or lights.
C. No illumination involving movement or causing the illusion of movements by reason of
the lighting arrangement or other devices shall be permitted.
§ 205-63. Methadone treatment facilities.
A. A methadone treatment facility shall not be established or operated within 500 feet of an
existing school, public playground, public park, residential housing area, child-care
facility, church, meetinghouse or other actual place of regularly stated religious worship
prior to the proposed methadone treatment facility.
B. The provisions established in Subsection A shall apply whether or not an occupancy
permit or certificate of use has been issued to the owner or operator of a methadone
treatment facility for a location that is within 500 feet of an existing school, public
playground, public park, residential housing area, child-care facility, church, meeting
house or other actual place of regularly stated religious worship established prior to the
proposed methadone treatment facility.
C. Notwithstanding Subsection A, a methadone treatment facility may be established and
operated closer than 500 feet of an existing school, public playground, public park,
residential housing area, child-care facility, church, meeting house or other actual place
of regularly stated religious worship established prior to the proposed methadone
treatment facility if, by majority vote, the governing body votes in favor of the issuance
of an occupancy permit or certificate.
D. Prior to the governing body voting on whether to approve the issuance of an occupancy
permit or certificate of use for a methadone treatment facility at a location that is closer
than 500 feet of an existing school, public playground, public park, residential housing
area, child-care facility, church, meeting house or other actual place of regularly stated
religious worship established prior to the proposed methadone treatment facility, one or
more hearings regarding the proposed methadone treatment facility location shall be held
within the municipality following public notice.
E. All owners of property located within 500 feet of the proposed location shall be provided
written notice of said public hearings at least 30 days prior to the public hearings
occurring.
F. The provisions above shall not apply to a methadone treatment facility that is licensed by
the Department of Health prior to May 15, 1999.
§ 205-64. Grading.
A. No earthmoving shall be permitted in the Borough without a permit for such work having
been issued by the Zoning Officer.
§ 205-64 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-64
205:104 02 - 15 - 2006
30. Editor’s Note: See Ch. 181, Stormwater Management.
B. A grading permit shall be issued only where such grading will be done as part of the
preparation of a property to receive new or additional improvements for which a building
permit has been issued or will be issued concurrently with a grading permit, or where
such grading is necessary to place public facilities, such as streets or utility lines, or to
prepare lots in an approved subdivision plan for sale for development.
C. All applications for grading permit must include a scaled drawing of the property to be
graded, indicating the exact location and extent of the area to be affected and the
proposed maximum grades at completion of the work, together with the location of
surface drainage systems and proposed treatment of graded surfaces where not paved or
otherwise occupied by structures. Whenever applicable, the application must demonstrate
compliance with all Borough stormwater management ordinances and/or regulations,30 be
accompanied by an approved stormwater management plan, and demonstrate approval by
any relevant county or state environmental regulatory agency.
D. Graded slopes shall not exceed the following maximums:
(1) Where earth materials are excavated from areas where the surface has not been
altered for at least two years, the maximum grade shall not exceed one foot vertical
rise to each 1 1/2 feet of horizontal run (1:1.5).
(2) Where earth materials are placed upon previously undisturbed soil or grading is
carried out in areas where previous earthmoving has occurred less than two years
before, the maximum grade shall not exceed one foot vertical rise to each two feet
of horizontal run (1:2).
(3) Where soil conditions apparently will tolerate steeper grades without risk to the
stability of the graded slope and the areas the slope supports, the developer shall
provide a report by a registered professional engineer, bearing his Pennsylvania
seal, attesting that the soil conditions in the area to be disturbed will tolerate
grades up to a maximum slope established by the engineer, and which may exceed
the limits provided hereunder.
E. Areas to be built up through grading shall be keyed in to preexisting undisturbed earth
and well compacted in layers not to exceed eight inches in thickness. The toe of a slope
shall be either graded to a natural existing drainageway or storm drain system. Where a
slope continues upward beyond the limits of grading, the top of the graded area shall be
protected from the accumulation of stormwater by a bench sloped to a storm drain
system.
F. Slope areas not to be paved or built upon shall be planted with erosion-resisting plant
materials immediately upon completion of grading work. Areas of the property not to be
occupied by buildings or paved surfaces shall be landscaped and maintained upon
completion of development.
§ 205-65 ZONING § 205-66
205:105 02 - 15 - 2006
ARTICLE VII
Nonconforming Lots, Structures and Uses
§ 205-65. Intent and purpose.
A. If there exist lots, structures, or uses that were lawful prior to the enactment of this
chapter, that would be prohibited or restricted under the requirements established by this
chapter, it is the intention of the Borough to permit these lots, structures or uses to
continue as they existed prior to the enactment, or any subsequent amendments, of this
chapter. However, all changes in such lots, structures, or uses shall only be as allowed in
this article.
B. Whenever a nonconforming use, in or on the land, or within a building or structure or
portion thereof, has been discontinued for a continuous period of more than 12 months,
such discontinuance shall be deemed to be an abandonment of such nonconforming use.
Any subsequent use thereof shall conform to the applicable provisions of this chapter or
any amendments and the prior nonconforming use shall not thereafter be resumed, unless
it is in accordance with the applicable provision of this chapter or any amendments.
C. Whenever any nonconforming use shall have been changed or altered so as to conform to
the provisions of this chapter or its amendments, then such nonconforming use shall no
longer be nonconforming to the extent to which it then conforms to this chapter or its
amendments, and the prior nonconforming use shall not thereafter be resumed; provided,
however, that if any subsequent amendments to this chapter should make the use as so
changed or altered nonconforming with its provisions then such use as changed or altered
shall become a new nonconforming use to the extent of such nonconformance or
noncompliance.
D. Any use for which a conditional use or special exception is approved in accordance with
the applicable requirements found in this chapter shall not be deemed a nonconforming
use but shall, without further action, be deemed a conforming use in such zoning district.
E. One-family dwellings existing at the effective date of this chapter are not to be
considered as nonconforming uses, but may not be enlarged to decrease yard areas below
the minimum authorized by this chapter or to increase height above the maximum
authorized by this chapter.
§ 205-66. Nonconforming lots.
A. Any existing lots in any district where single-family dwellings are permitted may be used
for the erection of a single-family dwelling, residential garages, additions and accessory
buildings, even though its area and width is less than the minimum requirements. Front,
rear and side yards for existing lots of record shall not be less than three feet or rear
yards less than five feet.
B. Where two or more adjacent lots of record with less than the required area and width are
held by one owner, on or before the date of enactment of this chapter, the request for a
permit shall be referred to the Zoning Hearing Board which shall require replotting to
fewer lots, which would comply with the minimum requirements of this chapter.
§ 205-67 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-68
205:106 02 - 15 - 2006
§ 205-67. Nonconforming structures.
A. Any nonconforming building which has been damaged or destroyed by fire or any other
means may be reconstructed and used as before, if such reconstruction is performed
within 12 months of discontinuance of use and if the restored building covers no greater
area and contains no greater cubic content. If approved by the Zoning Hearing Board, a
reconstructed structure may exceed its original lot coverage and cubic content but must
meet the minimum yard requirements of the district in which the structure is located, and
in such cases it must meet the off-street loading and parking requirements of this chapter.
B. In the event that any nonconforming use, conducted in a structure or otherwise, ceases,
for whatever reasons, and the landowner has shown intent to abandon the use, such
nonconforming use shall not be resumed and any further use shall be in conformity with
the provisions of this chapter.
C. The nonconforming use of a building may be extended throughout those parts there of
which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption of this
chapter. A nonconforming building or structure may, with the approval of the Zoning
Hearing Board, be extended, enlarged or replaced if such structures meet the minimum
yard coverage regulations and height restrictions of the district in which the structure is
located. The use must meet all off-street parking and loading requirements of this
chapter.
D. Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the overall layout, plans,
construction, size or designated use of any development, building, structure or part
thereof for which official approval and required permits have been granted prior to the
effective date of this chapter and where construction is complete within six months from
the date of issuance of the permit.
E. Whenever the boundaries of a district shall be changed so as to transfer an area from one
district to another of a different classification, this article shall also apply to any uses that
thereby become nonconforming.
§ 205-68. Nonconforming uses.
A. A nonconforming use, which occupies a portion of a structure or premises, may be
extended within such structure or premises as they existed when the provision to prohibit
the use took effect, but not in violation of the area and yard requirements of the district
in which structure or premises is located.
B. The Zoning Hearing Board may approve an enlargement or expansion of the use if it is
deemed to be necessary as part of the natural expansion and growth of trade of the
nonconforming use.
C. The Zoning Hearing Board may impose such conditions as deemed necessary for the
protection of adjacent property and public interest. No changes of a nonconforming use
shall entail structural alterations beyond those required by law for the purpose of safety
and health.
§ 205-68 ZONING § 205-71
205:107 02 - 15 - 2006
D. Any use for which a special exception is permitted as provided in this chapter shall not
be deemed a nonconforming use, but shall without further action be deemed a
conforming use in such district.
§ 205-69. Repairs and maintenance.
A. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a
safe condition of any structure or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official
charged with protecting the safety of the municipality.
B. Any modification, alteration, structural alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure located within a one-hundred-year floodplain, to an extent or
amount of less than 50% of its market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the
greatest extent possible.
ARTICLE VIII
Administrative Provisions
§ 205-70. Appointment of Zoning Officer.
The municipality shall appoint the Zoning Officer who shall administer and enforce the
provisions of this chapter, and shall do so in accordance with the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (MPC). No zoning permit of any kind shall be
granted by the Zoning Officer except in compliance with the literal provisions of this chapter.
The Zoning Officer may be authorized to institute civil enforcement proceedings as a means
of enforcement when acting within the scope of employment granted by the municipality.
§ 205-71. Duties of Zoning Officer.
The Zoning Officer shall have such duties and powers as are conferred on him by this chapter
and are reasonably implied for that purpose. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to:
A. Receive, examine and process all applications for building, occupancy and zoning
permits for all uses including signs.
B. Issue permits only where there is compliance with the provisions of this chapter, with
other municipal ordinances, and with the laws of the commonwealth and the federal
government. Permits for construction or uses requiring a special exception or variance
shall be issued only upon order of the Zoning Hearing Board. Permits for conditional
uses requiring approval by the municipality shall be issued only after receipt of approval
from the governing body.
C. Receive applications for conditional uses, curative amendments and zoning changes,
forwarding such requests to the governing body, or other appropriate agencies.
D. Receive applications for special exceptions and variances and forward these applications
to the Zoning Hearing Board for actions thereupon.
§ 205-71 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-72
205:108 02 - 15 - 2006
E. Examine, or cause to be examined, all structures and/or land for which an application has
been filed for a zoning permit, and he may conduct such inspections from time to time,
during and at completion of the work for which a zoning permit has been issued.
F. Conduct inspections and surveys to determine compliance or noncompliance with the
terms of this chapter.
G. Issue stop, cease and desist orders, and order, in writing, correction of all conditions
found to be in violation of the provisions of all applicable regulations. Such written
orders shall be served personally or by certified mail upon persons, firms or corporations
deemed by the Zoning Officer to be violating the terms of this chapter. It shall be
unlawful for any person to violate any such order issued lawfully by the Zoning Officer,
and any person violating any such order shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter.
H. With the approval of the governing body or when directed by them, institute in the name
of the municipality any appropriate actions or proceedings to:
(1) Prevent unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair,
conversion maintenance or use of a building, structure or property;
(2) Restrain, correct or abate any such violation so as to prevent the occupancy or use
of any such building, structure or land; and/or
(3) Prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises.
I. Revoke any order or zoning permit issued under mistake of fact, or contrary to the law,
of the provisions of this chapter.
J. Record and file all applications for zoning permits with accompanying plans and
documents.
K. Maintain a map or maps showing the current zoning classification of all land in the
municipality.
L. Keep an up-to-date list of all nonconforming uses in accordance with Article VII of this
chapter.
M. Keep and maintain an up-to-date Register of Historic Properties within the Borough.
§ 205-72. Zoning permits.
A. Until the Zoning Officer has issued a zoning permit applicable thereto, no person shall:
(1) Occupy or use any vacant land.
(2) Occupy or use any structure hereafter constructed, reconstructed, moved, altered or
enlarged.
(3) Change the use of a structure or land to a different use.
(4) Change or alter a nonconforming use.
§ 205-72 ZONING § 205-73
205:109 02 - 15 - 2006
B. The zoning approval shall state that the proposed use of the structure or lot conforms to
the requirements of this chapter. In accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
owners of nonconforming uses, structures, or lots or their agents, may apply for zoning
approval. Issuance of such zoning approval by the Zoning Officer shall constitute
registration of the nonconforming use, structure, and/or lot.
C. Application fees. Each applicant for a zoning permit shall present, with the application, a
plan of the property showing clearly and completely the location, dimensions and nature
of any structure involved and any other information the Zoning Officer may require so as
to comply with this chapter, together with a filing fee in accordance with the schedule of
the same.
D. Records. The Zoning Officer shall maintain a permanent file of all zoning permits and
applications as public record.
E. A zoning permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance; provided, however, that
the same might be extended for a period not to exceed an additional one year.
F. All zoning permits shall be prominently displayed on the subject property during
construction, renovation, reconstruction, repair, remodeling, or the conduct of other site
improvements. Such permit display shall occur within five days of permit issuance or
prior to the commencement of actual work on the site, whichever comes first. The zoning
permit shall be displayed continuously until a certificate of occupancy is issued for the
subject property.
§ 205-73. Certificates of occupancy.
A. No use of vacant land shall be made, nor shall any building or structure hereafter
constructed, erected, or structurally altered be occupied or used, nor shall any existing
use of a building, structure, or land be changed until a certificate of occupancy shall have
been issued by the Zoning Officer.
B. In the event that a building permit is required for the construction, erection or structural
alteration of any building or structure, an application for a certificate of occupancy shall
be made simultaneously with the application for the building permit. The applicant shall
notify the Zoning Officer of the date on which such construction, erection, or structural
alteration shall have been completed in conformity with the provisions of this chapter
and the Zoning Officer shall examine the building or structure involved within 10 days of
the completion. If the Zoning Officer finds that the construction, erection, or structural
alteration has been completed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, a
certificate of occupancy shall be issued.
C. Temporary certificate of occupancy. The Zoning Officer may issue a temporary
certificate of occupancy which may permit the use or occupancy of a building or
structure during structural alteration thereof or may permit the partial use or occupancy
of a building or structure during its construction or erection. The temporary certificate
shall be valid for a period of six months from its issuance and shall be subject to such
restrictions and provisions that may be deemed necessary by the Zoning Officer to
§ 205-73 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-74
205:110 02 - 15 - 2006
adequately insure the safety of persons using or occupying the structure, building, or land
involved.
D. All applications for certificates of occupancy shall be made on forms provided by the
Zoning Officer and the municipality and shall contain accurate information as to the size
of and location of the lot, the locations of the buildings and structures on the lot, the
dimensions of all yards and open spaces, and such other information that is required by
the Zoning Officer as necessary to provide for the enforcement of this chapter.
E. No building permit or other permit for excavation or for the erection, construction, repair
or alteration of a building or structure shall be issued before application has been made
for a certificate of occupancy.
F. The Zoning Officer shall act on applications for certificate of occupancy in a manner
established by requirements of the state or the municipality.
G. No certificate shall be issued until the premises in question has been inspected and found
by the Zoning Officer to be in compliance with this chapter.
H. The issuance of a certificate of occupancy in no way absolves the owner or authorized
agent from compliance with the intent of this chapter.
§ 205-74. Building permits.
A. Until the Zoning Officer has issued a building permit applicable thereto, no person shall:
(1) Build, construct, or otherwise modify any structure or accessory structure.
(2) Build, construct or otherwise modify any driveway, sidewalk or patio.
(3) Renovate, remodel, or perform any construction activity, as defined under the
Uniform Construction Code, at any location within the Borough.
B. The building permit shall state that the proposed structure or modification conforms to
the requirements of this chapter, and to any other requirements provided under federal or
state law. No permit may issue until the applicant has submitted a complete application,
as provided by the Borough, including all such accompanying material as deemed
necessary and appropriate by the Zoning Officer.
C. Application fees. Each applicant for a building permit shall present with the application a
filing fee, as may be required, in accordance with the schedule of the same.
D. Records. The Zoning Officer shall maintain a permanent file of all building permits and
applications as public record.
E. A building permit shall expire six months from the date of issuance; provided, however,
that the same might be extended for a period not to exceed an additional six months.
F. All building permits shall be prominently displayed on the subject property during
construction, renovation, reconstruction, repair, remodeling, or the conduct of other site
improvements. Such permit display shall occur within five days of permit issuance or
§ 205-74 ZONING § 205-75
205:111 02 - 15 - 2006
prior to the commencement of actual work on the site, whichever comes first. The permit
shall be displayed continuously until a certificate of occupancy is issued for the subject
property.
§ 205-75. Enforcement procedures; violations and penalties.
A. When it appears to the municipalities or the Zoning Officer that a violation has occurred,
the Zoning Officer shall send an enforcement notice. The enforcement notice shall be
sent to the owner of record of the parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any
person who has filed a written request to receive enforcement notices regarding the
parcel, and to any other person requested in writing by the owner of record. The
enforcement notice shall state the following:
(1) The name of the owner of record and any other person against whom the
municipality intends to take action.
(2) The location of the property in violation.
(3) The specific violation with a description of the requirements that have not been
met, citing, in each instance, the applicable provisions of the chapter.
(4) The date before which the steps for compliance must be commenced and the date
before which the steps must be completed.
(5) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board
within a prescribed period of time in accordance with procedures set forth in this
chapter.
(6) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified, unless extended
by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board, constitutes a violation.
B. In any appeal of an enforcement notice to the Zoning Hearing Board, the municipality
shall have the responsibility of presenting its evidence first.
C. Any filing fees paid by a party to appeal an enforcement notice to the Zoning Hearing
Board shall be returned to the appealing party by the municipality if the Zoning Hearing
Board, or any court in a subsequent appeal, rules in the appealing party’s favor.
D. In case any building, structure, landscaping or land is, or is proposed to be, erected,
constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained or used in violation of this
chapter, the municipality, the Zoning Officer, or any aggrieved owner or tenant of real
property who shows that his/her property or person will be substantially affected by the
alleged violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or
proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such building, structure, landscaping or
land violation. When a landowner or tenant institutes any such action, notice of that
action shall be served upon the municipality at least 30 days prior to the time the action
is begun by serving a copy of the complaint on the governing body. No such action may
be maintained until such notice has been given.
§ 205-75 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-76
205:112 02 - 15 - 2006
E. Magisterial District Judges shall have initial jurisdiction over proceedings brought under
this section.
F. Any persons, or the partners, owners, managers or members of any partnership or
corporation, who or which have violated or permitted violation of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the municipality, pay a judgment of not more than $500, plus all court
costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the municipality as a result thereof.
No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of the
determination of a violation by the Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither
pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the municipality may enforce the judgment
pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate violation, unless the Magisterial District Judge determining
that there has been a violation further determines that there was a good faith basis for the
person, partnership, or corporation violating the chapter to have believed that there was
no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have been only one such
violation until the fifth day following the date of the determination of a violation by the
Magisterial District Judge and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation. All judgments, costs and reasonable attorney fees
collected for the violation of this chapter shall be paid over to the municipality.
G. Fines levied for violation of this chapter shall be paid over to the Borough of California.
H. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to grant any person or
entity other than the municipality, its Solicitor, its Code Enforcement Officer or its
Zoning Officer the right to initiate or prosecute any action for enforcement pursuant to
this section.
§ 205-76. Appeals.
A. The procedure and time limitations for appeal from any ordinance, decision,
determination or order of the governing body, Zoning Officer, Zoning Hearing Board, or
other applicable agency or officer of the municipality, in the enactment of administration
of this chapter, shall be in conformance with the provisions of the MPC.
B. Any person or municipal official aggrieved or affected by any provision of this chapter
or by any determination of the Zoning Officer may appeal to the Board within 30 days,
as provided by the rules of the Zoning Hearing Board, by filing a notice of appeal
specifying the grounds thereof. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have the power to hear
and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision, grant or refusal made by the
Zoning Officer in the administration of this chapter.
C. Where the Zoning Hearing Board has jurisdiction over a matter, it shall also hear appeals
that an applicant may elect to bring before it with respect to any municipal ordinance or
requirement pertaining to the same development plan or development. In any such case,
the Zoning Hearing Board shall have no power to pass upon the nonzoning issues, but
shall take evidence and make a record thereon, as provided in Section 908 of the
§ 205-76 ZONING § 205-79
205:113 02 - 15 - 2006
31. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10908.
32. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10901 et seq.
MPC.31 At the conclusion of the hearing, the Zoning Hearing Board shall make findings
on all relevant issues of fact that shall become part of record on appeal to court.
§ 205-77. Fees.
A. The Borough shall determine a schedule of fees, to be adopted by resolution, as well as a
collection procedure for permits and applications for variances, special exceptions,
amendments and other matters pertaining to this chapter.
B. The Borough shall reevaluate the fee schedule from time to time and make the necessary
changes to it. These changes shall not be considered an amendment to this chapter and
may be adopted at a public meeting by resolution.
C. All fees shall be paid to the treasury of the Borough of California. Special exceptions,
variances and amendments shall be acted upon only after the required fees have been
paid in full and the Zoning Hearing Board shall not take any action on appeals until the
necessary charges have been paid in full.
§ 205-78. Zoning Hearing Board established.
A. In accordance with Article IX of the MPC,32 a Zoning Hearing Board shall be appointed
and organized. This Zoning Hearing Board shall hold meetings, keep minutes, and,
pursuant to public notice, conduct hearings, compel the attendance of witnesses, take
testimony under oath and render decisions, all as required by law. For filing of any
appeal or proceeding with the Zoning Hearing Board, a fee shall be charged in
accordance with the schedule.
B. Except as provided in the MPC, the Zoning Hearing Board shall have no power to pass
upon the validity of any provisions of an ordinance or a map.
§ 205-79. Zoning Hearing Board administration and procedures.
A. Membership and organization. The membership and organization of the Board and the
appointment of alternate members to the Board shall be as follows:
(1) The membership of the Board shall be three persons, who are residents of the
Borough of California and who may hold no other elected or appointed Borough
office. Members of the Board shall be appointed to staggered three-year terms, so
that the term of one member expires the first Monday of January each year.
Members may be reappointed at the discretion of the Borough Council, and
Council may make appointments to fill the unexpired term of any member upon
the occasion of a vacancy.
§ 205-79 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-80
205:114 02 - 15 - 2006
33. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10908.
(2) Members of the Zoning Hearing Board shall organize and shall elect from their
members a Chairman and Vice Chairman, and may appoint a Secretary, who may
be a member of the Board or a clerical employee.
(3) The Borough Council may appoint one alternate member, who shall meet the
qualifications required for Board membership, and who may, at the call of the
Chairman, replace a regular member who is unable to participate in the disposition
of a matter pending before the Board. During such proceedings, the alternate
member shall function with the full authority of a regular member of the Board.
B. Rules and regulations. The Board may make, alter and rescind rules, regulations, and
forms for its procedures such as are consistent with the Borough Code and the laws of
the commonwealth. Copies of rules, regulations and forms adopted by the Board shall be
prepared and shall be made available for inspection by any interested persons in the
offices of the Board and the municipalities.
C. Notice hearing and decisions. The Board shall conduct hearings and render decision, after
giving such notice as required by law, in the manner prescribed by the MPC, as now
established or hereafter amended.
D. Jurisdiction of the Zoning Hearing Board. The jurisdiction of the Zoning Hearing Board
shall be as set forth in the MPC, as amended, and other applicable law.
E. All appeals and applications made to the Zoning Hearing Board shall be in writing on
forms prescribed by the governing body.
F. Every appeal or application shall refer to the specific provision of the chapter involved,
and shall set forth exactly the interpretation that is claimed, the use for which the special
permit is sought or the details of the variance should be granted.
G. The hearings shall be conducted in accordance with Section 908 of the MPC.33 The
Zoning Hearing Board may appoint any member or an independent attorney as a hearing
officer. The decision, or, where no decision is called for, the findings, shall be made by
the Zoning Hearing Board and accept the decision of the hearing officer as final.
H. The Borough Council shall appropriate such funds to the Board as necessary to provide
secretarial, stenographic, legal, technical, or other consulting services incident to the
business of the Board.
I. No attorney retained as Municipal Solicitor to the Borough may provide legal services to
the Zoning Hearing Board.
§ 205-80. Special exceptions.
In any instance where the Board is required to consider a special exception in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter, the Board shall apply the following standards:
§ 205-80 ZONING § 205-81
205:115 02 - 15 - 2006
34. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10910.2.
A. The Board shall determine if the applicant has shown that the proposed special exception
will not substantially injure or detract from the use of the neighboring property or from
the character of the neighborhood, and that the use of property adjacent to the area
included in the proposed change or plan is adequately safeguarded.
B. The Board shall determine if the applicant has shown that the proposed special exception
will serve the best interests of the Borough, the convenience of the community and the
public welfare.
C. The Board shall determine if the applicant has shown that the effect of the proposed
special exception will facilitate the logical, efficient and economical extension of public
services and facilities, such as public water, sewers, police and fire protection, and public
schools.
D. In granting a special exception, the Board may attach such reasonable conditions and
safeguards, which conditions may include, but are not limited to, harmonious design of
buildings, plantings and its maintenance as a sight or sound screen, the minimizing of
noxious, offensive or hazardous elements, adequate standards of parking, and sanitation,
as it may deem necessary to implement the purpose of this chapter.
§ 205-81. Variances.
In accordance with Section 910.2 of the MPC,34 the Zoning Hearing Board, upon appeal, shall
have power to authorize variances from the provisions of this chapter. The applicant must
provide evidence to the Zoning Hearing Board of the need for the variance based upon all the
following criteria and the Zoning Hearing Board may grant a variance provided that all of the
findings are made where relevant in a given case:
A. That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including irregularity,
narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or shape, or exceptional topographical or other
physical conditions peculiar to the particular property, and that the unnecessary hardship
is due to such conditions, and not the circumstances or conditions generally created by
the provisions of this chapter in the neighborhood or district in which the property is
located.
B. That, because of such physical circumstances or condition, there is no possibility that the
property can be developed in strict conformity with the provisions of this chapter and
that the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of
the property.
C. That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the appellant.
D. That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood
or district in which the property is located, nor substantially or permanently impair the
appropriate use or development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the public
welfare.
§ 205-81 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-84
205:116 02 - 15 - 2006
35. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10908.1.
E. That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum variance that will afford
relief and will represent the least modification possible of the regulation in issue.
§ 205-82. Nonconforming uses.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall have the power to authorize changes in lawful
nonconforming uses as follows in accordance with this chapter:
A. A nonconforming use, which occupies a portion of a structure or premises, may be
extended within such structure or premises as they existed when the provision to prohibit
the use took effect, but not in violation of the area and yard requirements of the district
in which structure or premises is located.
B. The Zoning Hearing Board may impose conditions deemed necessary for the protection
of adjacent property and public interest. No changes of a nonconforming use shall entail
structural alterations beyond those required by law for the purpose of safety and health.
§ 205-83. Mediation option.
In accordance with Section 908.1, Mediation option, of the MPC,35 authorized parties may
utilize mediation as a method to facilitate such proceedings.
§ 205-84. Conditional uses.
A. Within this chapter it is provided that certain uses may be permitted as conditional uses
and must be approved by the governing body of the municipality. These conditional uses
may be allowed or denied by the governing body pursuant to the standards, criteria and
conditions set forth in this chapter or incorporated herein by reference.
B. In addition to the information required on the zoning permit application, the conditional
use application must show ground floor plans and elevations of proposed structures,
names and addresses of adjoining property owners including those directly across a
public right-of-way, a scaled drawing (site plan) of the site with sufficient detail and
accuracy to demonstrate compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter, and a
written description of the proposed use in sufficient detail and accuracy to demonstrate
compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter.
C. No conditional use shall be approved except pursuant to public notice and hearing held
on the application for any such use by the governing body.
D. The applicant shall provide photographs of the present site and the surrounding
contiguous area of up to 200 feet from the property line.
E. The applicant must demonstrate compliance with the following:
(1) The proposed use shall be consistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter as
well as the Comprehensive Plan.
§ 205-84 ZONING § 205-84
205:117 02 - 15 - 2006
(2) The proposed use will not impact or change the character of the surrounding
neighborhood.
(3) Adequate public facilities are available to serve the proposed use.
(4) If the development is in a designated floodplain, it complies with all necessary
requirements.
(5) The proposed use will not be detrimental to the community.
F. The governing body may attach reasonable conditions and safeguards that are considered
necessary to protect the public welfare, that may be more restrictive than those
established for uses in the same zoning district. The governing body may require that
such conditions be incorporated into a plan of lots or other appropriate recordable form
and filed in the Washington County Recorder of Deeds' office. These conditions shall be
enforceable by the Zoning Officer and failure to comply with such conditions shall
constitute a violation of this chapter and be subject to the penalties described in this
chapter. Each situation shall be deemed to be separate and individual, and the disposition
made by the governing body shall apply only to that particular application and in no way
be construed to establish precedent.
G. During the evaluation of the conditional use application, the governing body shall
consider the effect and overall compatibility of the proposed use based on:
(1) Density of population.
(2) Height, shape, size, and location of proposed buildings/structures.
(3) Adequacy and location of off-street parking facilities.
(4) Potential for increased traffic.
(5) Existence and location of natural and artificial buffering.
(6) Lighting.
(7) Odors and noise.
(8) Signs and other display devices.
H. Unless otherwise specified by the governing body, or by law, a conditional use permit
shall expire if the applicant fails to obtain a zoning permit within 12 months from the
date of authorization thereof by the governing body or by the court if such conditional
use approval has been granted after an appeal, or fails to complete any erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, or change in use authorized by the conditional use
approval within 18 months from the date of authorization thereof by the governing body
or by the court if such conditional use approval has been granted after an appeal. The
Zoning Officer may extend the approval for an additional period of up to one year in the
event that the applicant has shown good cause for the delay.
§ 205-85 CALIFORNIA CODE § 205-87
205:118 02 - 15 - 2006
36. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10609 and 10610, respectively.
37. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10609.1, 10610 and 10916.1.
38. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10609.2.
§ 205-85. Amendments to chapter.
A. The municipality may introduce and/or consider amendments to this chapter and to the
Zoning Map, as proposed by a member of the Borough Council, or by a petition of a
person residing or owning property within the Borough.
B. All amendments shall conform to Section 609, Enactment of zoning ordinance
amendments, and Section 610, Publication, advertisement and availability of
ordinance,36 of the MPC and all subsequent amendments to the MPC (including Acts 67
and 68). The notification of proposed amendments shall be in accordance with (Act 2 of
2002) of the MPC.
C. Petitions for amendments shall be filed with the Zoning Officer and the petitioners, upon
such filing, shall pay an advertising deposit and a filing fee, in accordance with the fee
schedule. The Zoning Officer, Borough Engineer, Borough Solicitor, and the Washington
County Planning Commission shall review the proposed amendment and report their
findings and recommendations in writing to the Borough Council.
D. Before acting upon a proposed amendment, the Borough Council shall hold a public
hearing thereon. Notice of such public hearing, containing a brief summary of the
proposed amendment and reference to the place where copies of the same may be
examined, shall be published once a week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of
general circulation in the municipality. The first publication shall be not more than 30
days and the second publication not less than seven days from the date of the hearing.
§ 205-86. Landowner curative amendments.
A landowner who desires to challenge on substantive grounds the validity of this chapter or
map, or any provision thereof, which prohibits or restricts the use of development of land in
which he/she has an interest, may substitute a curative amendment to the Borough Council
with a written request that his/her challenge and proposed amendment be heard and decided as
provided in Section 609.1, Procedure for landowner curative amendments, and Sections 916.1
and 610 of the MPC.37 As with other proposed amendments, the curative amendment shall be
referred to the Zoning Officer, Borough Engineer, Borough Solicitor and the Washington
County Planning Commission at least 30 days before the hearing is conducted.
§ 205-87. Municipal curative amendments.
In the instance that municipalities would determine that this chapter or the Zoning Map, or
any provision thereof, is substantially invalid, the municipality can take action as provided for
in Section 609.2, Procedure for municipal curative amendments, of the MPC.38
ZONING
205 Attachment 1:1 02 - 15 - 2006
205 Attachment 1
Borough of California
Appendix 1
Lot Dimensional Requirements
A-1 R-1 R-2 C-1 C-2 MU M-1 I
Minimum lot area 1 acre 10,000
sq. ft.
7,500
sq. ft.
8,000
sq. ft.
N/A 5,000
sq. ft.
N/A N/A
Minimum lot width 200 100 65 50 25 50 100 100
Minimum front yard setback 75 30 25 N/A N/A 25 25 25
Minimum side yard setback 40 15 10 N/A N/A 10 10 10
Minimum rear yard setback 50 30 25 N/A 25 25 25 25
Maximum structure height 45 30 30 50 50 30 50 N/A
Maximum lot cover (as % of
total area)
40 40 40 50 50 40 50 N/A
NOTES:
“N/A” means not applicable or no requirement.
Any building in excess of the height standards set forth herein must be approved by a variance by the
Zoning Hearing Board. In no event shall a variance be approved to permit a building in excess of 75
feet in any district for any reason.
The side-yard setback requirements shall not apply to townhouses, row houses, cluster houses, or
any other such connected housing in any district.
All of the dimensional requirements of the MU Special Mixed Use District may be adjusted to
accommodate innovative development in the district, upon proper approval of a land development
plan by the Zoning Hearing Board.

APPENDIX

A208:1 02 - 15 - 2006
Chapter A208
FIRE DEPARTMENT, RECOGNITION OF
§ A208-1. Authorized duties and
activities.
§ A208-2. Ancillary duties and activities.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of California 8-11-2005 by
Res. No. 05-104. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ A208-1. Authorized duties and activities.
The purpose and objective of this resolution is to recognize California Volunteer Fire
Department as the duly recognized volunteer fire department for California Borough and to
designate those duties and activities which the municipality shall authorize either by approval
under formal governing procedures or by approval following application by the Fire
Department to the municipality for written approval, in accordance with terms hereof, of the
ancillary activities and duties which the fire company desires to perform. These duties and
activities are as follows:
A. The Volunteer Fire Department recognized by the municipality is authorized to actively
engage in fire fighting within the boundaries of the municipality and to respond to
out-of-jurisdiction calls only pursuant to the authorization of a written mutual aid
agreement or a written agreement for first call service approved by the municipality.
B. A volunteer fire fighter may engage only in those acts which are recognized as
fire-fighting activities. Such acts are limited to the following activities of a fire fighter
while actually engaged as a fire fighter:
(1) The fire fighter’s act of going to or returning from any fire which the fire company
of which they are a member shall have attended;
(2) The fire fighter’s participation in fire-fighting instruction and fire drills which the
fire company of which they are a member shall have attended;
(3) The fire fighter’s participation in repair and/or other work on fire apparatus,
buildings and grounds of the fire company or fire department, which work is
specifically authorized by the chief of the fire company or fire department; and
(4) The fire fighter’s performance in responding to any emergency call for any
purpose, or while riding upon the fire apparatus owned or used by the fire
company of which they are a member.
§ A208-2. Ancillary duties and activities.
A duly authorized volunteer fire company may only participate in certain ancillary activities
or duties after obtaining the separate written approval of the municipality following official
action by the governing body granting such approval.

A209:1 02 - 15 - 2006
Chapter A209
POLICE DEPARTMENT POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
§ A209-1. Adoption of regulations.
§ A209-2. Repeal of prior inconsistent
policies and procedures.
§ A209-3. Savings clause.
§ A209-4. When effective.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of California 5-13-2003 by
Res. No. 03-103. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel policies— See Ch. 39. Police Department— See Ch. 43.
1. Editor's Note: Exhibits 1 through 13 are on file in the Borough offices.
§ A209-1. Adoption of regulations.
A. The Borough Council hereby promulgates regulations governing the Borough Police
Department, and particularly the following general areas of police procedure:
(1) Standards of conduct.
(2) Off-duty conduct and powers of arrest.
(3) Use of force.
(4) Firearms.
(5) Pepper-aerosol restraint spray.
(6) High-speed pursuit driving policy/vehicular pursuit.
(7) Transportation of prisoners.
(8) Holding/detainment facilities.
(9) Juvenile enforcement and custody.
(10) Motor vehicle searches.
(11) Strip and body cavity searches.
(12) Investigating sexual assault.
(13) Investigating child abuse.
B. The foregoing policies are set forth in their entirety and attached hereto as Exhibits 1
through 13 of this resolution.1 The terms, conditions and contents of Exhibits 1 through
§ A209-1 CALIFORNIA CODE § A209-4
A209:2 02 - 15 - 2006
13 are incorporated herein as if set forth at length, and it is the express intent of the
Borough Council that the language of Exhibits 1 through 13 be adopted as a part of this
resolution.
§ A209-2. Repeal of prior inconsistent policies and procedures.
Any and all policies previously adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of California,
which same conflict with the policies and procedures adopted hereunder, are hereby repealed
and declared to be null and void and of no force or effect insofar as they conflict with the
policies and procedures adopted hereunder. In addition, any and all policies promulgated by
the Police Department and implemented without approval by the Borough Council of the
Borough of California are hereby repealed in their entirety, and shall be of no further force or
effect.
§ A209-3. Savings clause.
If any provision or part of this resolution is adjudged to be invalid or unconstitutional, such
adjudication shall not affect the validity of this resolution as a whole or any part or provision
not adjudged to be invalid or unconstitutional.
§ A209-4. When effective.
The policies and procedures adopted hereunder are hereby effective immediately. The
Borough Police Department and its officers are hereby directed to implement the policies
adopted hereunder effective with the date of adoption.
A210:1 02 - 15 - 2006
Chapter A210
RECORDS, ACCESS TO
§ A210-1. Methods of requesting access.
§ A210-2. Designated officials to manage
requests.
§ A210-3. Decision to grant or deny
request.
§ A210-4. Conditions for special review.
§ A210-5. Notice of denial.
§ A210-6. Fees.
§ A210-7. Prepayment for certain
requests.
§ A210-8. Request form.
§ A210-9. Repealer.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of California 7-14-2003 by
Res. No. 03-109. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ A210-1. Methods of requesting access.
All requests for access to public records of the Borough of California shall be made in
writing, verbally (in person or telephonically), or by facsimile.
§ A210-2. Designated officials to manage requests.
A. All requests for access to public records of the Borough of California shall be directed to
the Borough Secretary/Treasurer, Borough of California Municipal Building, 225 Third
Street, California, Washington County, Pennsylvania 15419; telephone: 724-938-8878;
facsimile: 724-938-8881.
B. All requests for access to public records of the Police Department of the Borough of
California shall be directed to the Police Secretary, Borough of California Municipal
Building, 225 Third Street, California, Washington County, Pennsylvania 15419;
telephone: 724-938-3233; facsimile: 724-938-0703.
C. The Secretary/Treasurer or Secretary shall have the authority to review and respond to
requests for public records, as contemplated hereunder, and may, in his/her discretion,
consult with such other Borough officials as required to adequately respond to such
requests.
§ A210-3. Decision to grant or deny request.
When a request is received for access to public records, the Borough shall make a
determination, within five business days of receipt of the request, to grant or deny the request.
The person or entity requesting the information shall be promptly notified of the Borough’s
decision.
§ A210-4 CALIFORNIA CODE § A210-6
A210:2 02 - 15 - 2006
§ A210-4. Conditions for special review.
A. If, after receiving a request for access to public records, the Borough determines any of
the following circumstances exist, the person or entity requesting access to the records
shall be issued a notice that the request is being reviewed:
(1) The request for access requires redaction of a public record;
(2) The request for access requires retrieval of a record stored in a remote location;
(3) A timely response to the request for access cannot be accomplished due to bona
fide and specified staff limitations;
(4) A legal review of the request is necessary to determine whether the record is a
public record subject to access under the Act;
(5) The person or entity requesting access to the public record has not complied with
the Borough’s policies regarding access to public records; or
(6) The person requesting access to the record refuses to pay applicable fees as
contained herein.
B. The person or entity requesting access to the record shall be informed in writing as to the
specific reason that their request is being reviewed. Requests subject to review under this
section shall, in any event, be approved or denied, as provided hereunder, within 90 days
of receipt by the Borough.
§ A210-5. Notice of denial.
If a request for access to public records is denied, the person or entity requesting the records
shall be informed of the reason that the request has been denied and shall be given the
authority relied upon by the Borough for denying access. The notice of denial shall contain
the name of the person making the decision to deny access to the public record, the date of
the denial, and shall include the signature of the person denying access, along with an
explanation of the procedures for appealing the Borough’s denial of access to the record in
question.
§ A210-6. Fees.
The following fees shall be applicable to requests for access to public records:
A. Photocopying fees: $0.50 per page;
B. Certification of a public record: $4.75 for the first page per record certified and $1.75 for
each additional page;
C. Copying records onto electronic media: $20 plus actual cost of materials and media used
for copying; and
D. Copying off-site of subdivision, land development or other plans: $50 plus actual cost
incurred.
§ A210-7 RECORDS, ACCESS TO § A210-9
A210:3 02 - 15 - 2006
1. Editor’s Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ A210-7. Prepayment for certain requests.
If the estimated costs of duplication of a public record is expected to exceed $100, the
Borough may require the person or entity requesting the record to prepay the estimated fees
authorized by this policy, prior to providing access to the public record. Access to the records
requested shall be postponed until prepayment is received.
§ A210-8. Request form.
The Borough shall utilize the form attached hereto as Exhibit A1 to process all requests for
access to the Borough’s public records. When completed, a copy of the form shall be given to
the person requesting the information and a copy shall be retained by the Borough.
§ A210-9. Repealer.
Any resolutions or parts of resolutions inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed.

DISPOSITION
LIST

DL:1 02 - 15 - 2006
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
The following is a chronological listing of legislation of the Borough of California
adopted since the publication of the Code, indicating its inclusion in the Code or the
reason for its exclusion. [Enabling legislation which is not general and permanent in
nature is considered to be non-Code material (NCM).] The last legislation reviewed for
the original publication of the Code was Ord. No. 496, adopted 12-8-2005.
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition

INDEX

CALIFORNIA INDEX
1 02 - 15 - 2006
DEFINITIONS NOTE: For the
convenience of the Code user, all
terms defined in this Code are included
in the Index under the
heading “Definitions and Abbreviations.”
– A –
ABANDONMENT
Insurance, 122-11
Sewers and sewage disposal,
168-20
Stormwater management, 181-21
Zoning, 205-12, 205-60, 205-65,
205-67
ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND
STRUCTURES
Zoning, 205-12, 205-39, 205-41,
205-46, 205-52, 205-54,
205-66, 205-74
ACCESSORY USES
Zoning, 205-12, 205-22, 205-24,
205-28, 205-29, 205-31
ADVERTISING
Peace and good order, 147-1
Subdivision and land development,
187-9
Zoning, 205-12, 205-59, 205-60,
205-62, 205-85
AIR POLLUTION
Solid waste and recycling, 175-3
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Peace and good order, 147-2
Zoning, 205-59
AMUSEMENTS
Mechanical and Electronic Devices,
67-1 – 67-9
Batteries, 67-1
Display of certificate or tag,
67-5
Fees, 67-4
Gambling devices prohibited,
67-6
Inspection of premises, 67-7
Investigation, 67-2
License, 67-1 – 67-6, 67-8
Lighting, 67-1
Nuisance, 67-7, 67-8
Permit, 67-3, 67-6
Violations and penalties, 67-9
ANCHORING
Zoning, 205-12, 205-52
ANIMALS
Control of Animals, 70-1 – 70-6
Authority to remedy noncompliance,
70-4
Cat, 70-3
Costs and penalty, 70-4
Definitions, 70-2
Designation of authorized officer,
70-1
Dogs, 70-3, 70-5
Feces, 70-3
Fees, 70-5
Fence, 70-3
Kennel, 70-3, 70-5
Leash, 70-3
Liable, 70-5
License, 70-5
Lien, 70-4
Noise, 70-3
Notice, 70-4 – 70-6
Nuisances, 70-3 – 70-5
Odors, 70-3
Offense, 70-6
Penalty, 70-4, 70-5
Permit, 70-3, 70-5
Playground, 70-3
Rabies, 70-3
Redemption and disposal, 70-5
Responsibilities of owners,
70-3
Safety, 70-3
Sale, 70-5
Seizure, 70-5
Trees, 70-3
Vaccination, 70-2, 70-3
Vermin, 70-3
Violations and penalties, 70-6
Fees, special, 105-9
Peace and good order, 147-2
Taxation, 192-43
Zoning, 205-12, 205-22, 205-37,
205-47, 205-53
ANTENNAS
Zoning, 205-12, 205-22, 205-27,
205-31, 205-52, 205-5277
APARTMENTS
Rental housing, 160-3
Solid waste and recycling, 175-5
Zoning, 205-12, 205-25, 205-28,
205-29, 205-32, 205-54
APPEALS
Construction codes, uniform, 89-4
Personnel policies, 39-12
Property maintenance, 156-3
Solid waste and recycling,
175-34, 175-35
Stormwater management, 181-35,
181-36
Subdivision and land development,
187-41
Taxation, 192-28, 192-60
Zoning, 205-1, 205-37, 205-59,
205-75 – 205-79, 205-81,
205-84
ASSESSMENTS
Fees, special, 105-2 – 105-5
Insurance, 122-4
Sewers and sewage disposal,
168-6
Taxation, 192-60, 192-61
Zoning, 205-12
AUDITOR
Appointment of independent
auditor, 5-2
Definitions, 5-1
Office of elected auditor abolished,
5-3
Records, 5-2
AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL
Recreation Authority, 8-1 – 8-3
Articles of Incorporation, 8-2
Implementation and filing, 8-3
Intent and authority, 8-1
Notice, 8-3
– B –
BACKFILLING
Streets and sidewalks, 184-3
Subdivision and land development,
187-22
BARRICADES
Streets and sidewalks, 184-3
BATTERIES
Amusements, 67-1
BATTERY
Personnel policies, 39-10
BICYCLES AND PEDALCYCLES
Applicability of Vehicle Code,
76-1
Definitions, 76-2
License, 76-3 – 76-5
Licenses, 76-3
Nonapplicability to other vehicles,
76-6
Record, 76-3
Registration, 76-3, 76-4
Registration and licensing requirements,
76-3
Rental agencies and dealers, 76-5
Report, 76-3, 76-5
Short title, 76-1
Streets and sidewalks, 184-20 –
184-24, 184-26
Tires, 76-3
Vehicles, 76-1, 76-6
Violations and penalties, 76-4
BLASTING
Peace and good order, 147-2
BLOCK
Stormwater management, 181-8
Streets and sidewalks, 184-15
Subdivision and land development,
187-11, 187-16,
187-17, 187-30
Zoning, 205-12
BOND
Fees, special, 105-4
Sewers and sewage disposal,
168-8, 168-27
Stormwater management, 181-27,
181-28
Streets and sidewalks, 184-2,
184-4, 184-5
Subdivision and land development,
187-24
Taxation, 192-8
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
Streets and sidewalks, 184-16
BUFFERS
Zoning, 205-12, 205-37
BUILDING PERMITS
Zoning, 205-12, 205-38, 205-64,
205-73 – 205-74
CALIFORNIA INDEX
2 02 - 15 - 2006
BULK REGULATIONS
Zoning, 205-22, 205-24, 205-25,
205-27 – 205-29, 205-31,
205-32
BUS STOPS
Zoning, 205-24, 205-25, 205-27 –
205-29, 205-32, 205-59
– C –
CABLE TELEVISION
Authorization to grant franchises,
83-2
Certificates of approval, 83-6
Definitions and word usage, 83-1
Easements, 83-6
Fees, 83-5
Grant of rights and privileges,
83-3
Heat, 83-2
Incorporation of Cable Communications
Act of 1984, 83-9
Indemnification of Borough, 83-7
Insurance, 83-7
Investigation, 83-7
Length of franchise, 83-8
Liability, 83-7
License, 83-2, 83-7
Manholes, 83-3
Nonexclusive grant, 83-4
Notice, 83-7
Permits, 83-6
Sale, 83-2
Towers, 83-3
Utility, 83-3, 83-6
Violations and penalties, 83-10
CATS
Animals, 70-3
Taxation, 192-43
Zoning, 205-12
CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS
Zoning, 205-71
CEMETERY
Zoning, 205-12, 205-22, 205-24
CERTIFICATES OF APPROVAL
Cable television, 83-6
CERTIFICATES OF INSURANCE
Zoning, 205-52
CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY
Zoning, 205-72 – 205-74
CERTIFICATES OF USE
Zoning, 205-63
CESSPOOL
Sewers and sewage disposal,
168-20
CHURCH
Zoning, 205-12, 205-41, 205-59,
205-63
CHURCHES
Zoning, 205-54
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT
Zoning, 205-12, 205-29
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Subdivision and land development,
187-3, 187-29
Zoning, 205-3, 205-4, 205-12,
205-23, 205-84
CONDITIONAL USES
Subdivision and land development,
187-11
Zoning, 205-12, 205-18, 205-20,
205-22, 205-24 – 205-25,
205-27 – 205-29, 205-31,
205-32, 205-36 – 205-37,
205-65, 205-71, 205-84
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
UCC Administration and Enforcement,
89-1 – 89-6
Adoption of standards, 89-2
Appeals, 89-4
Board of Appeals, 89-4
Effect on prior provisions,
89-5
Election to administer and enforce,
89-1
Fees, 89-6
Inspections, 89-3
Methods of administration and
enforcement, 89-3
Utility, 89-3
UCC Appeals Board, 89-7 –
89-11
Composition, 89-7
Effect on prior provisions,
89-9
Establishment, 89-7
Fees, 89-7, 89-10
Jurisdiction, 89-8
Powers and duties, 89-7
Proceedings, 89-7
Savings clause, 89-11
CROSSWALK
Subdivision and land development,
187-11
CURB
Solid waste and recycling, 175-6
Streets and sidewalks, 184-3,
184-5, 184-14 – 184-17,
184-24
Subdivision and land development,
187-29, 187-35,
187-37
Zoning, 205-27, 205-31, 205-49,
205-54
– D –
DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS
Abandoned vehicle, 205-12
Abandonment, 205-12
Accelerated erosion, 181-7
Access channels, 83-1
Accessory building, 205-12
Accessory structure, 205-12
Accessory use, 205-12
Act 97, 175-15, 175-24
Act 98 of 1992, 122-1
Act 101, 175-15, 175-24
Active recreation areas, 205-12
Actor, 105-6
Adt (average daily traffic),
187-11
Adult bookstore/video store,
205-12
Adult cabaret, 205-12
Adult day-care facility, 205-12
Adult entertainment, 205-12
Adult live theater, 205-12
Adult motion-picture theater,
205-12
Adult-oriented establishment,
205-12
Adult retail establishment, 205-12
Agricultural building, 205-12
Agricultural operation, 205-12
Airport, 205-12
Air rights, 205-12
Alley, lane or way, 205-12
Alteration, structural, 205-12
Aluminum, 175-3
Amusement park, 205-12
Amusement/recreation center,
205-12
Animal equivalent unit, 205-12
Animal feeding operation (afo),
205-12
Animal husbandry, 205-12
(Animal) owner, 70-2
Animals, 70-2
Apartment, 205-12
Apartment building, 205-12
Applicant, 187-11, 205-12
Application, 83-1
Application for development,
187-11, 205-12
Arcade sign, 205-12
Architect, 187-11, 205-12
Arena, 205-12
Art, craft or antique shop, 205-12
Arterial street, 187-11
Art gallery/museum, 205-12
Assisted living facility, 205-12
Association, 192-3, 192-43
Automobile car wash, 205-12
Automobile repair/service,
205-12
Automobile sales, 205-12
Awning sign, 205-12
Bakery, 205-12
Bank/financial institution, 205-12
Banner, 205-12
Barbershop/beauty salon, 205-12
Basement, 205-12
Basic catv service, 83-1
Basic subscriber revenues, 83-1
Beacon, 205-12
Bed-and-breakfast inn, 205-12
Bicycle or pedalcycle, 76-2,
184-19
Billboard, 205-12
Bimetal containers, 175-3
Block, 187-11
Boat and marine sales/service,
205-12
Bore holes, 205-12
Borough, 83-1, 122-1, 128-2,
160-2, 168-2, 168-14, 187-11
Borough engineer, 187-11
CALIFORNIA INDEX
3 02 - 15 - 2006
Borough sewage enforcement officer,
187-11
Bottle club, 205-12
Brewery pub, 205-12
Broadcasting studio (radio and
television), 205-12
Buffer area, 205-12
Building, 187-11, 205-12
Building codes, 122-1, 160-2
Building height, 205-12
Building line, 187-11
Building material facility, 205-12
Building permit, 205-12
Building setback line, 187-11,
205-12
Building sewer, 168-14
Building sign, 205-12
Bulky waste, 175-24
Bulletin board sign, 205-12
Business, 192-3
Business district identification
sign, 205-12
Business school, 205-12
Bus/other transit shelter, 205-12
Bus/other transit stop, 205-12
Bus/other transit terminal, depot
and passenger station,
205-12
Bus/other transit vehicle maintenance/
storage, 205-12
Cable channel, 83-1
Cable operator, 83-1
Cable television service, 83-1
Cable television system, 83-1
California borough, 192-19
Campground, 205-12
Canopy, 205-12
Capacity-related facilities, 168-14
Capital reserve charge, 168-14
Carry out, 205-12
Cartway or roadway, 187-11
Catering business, 205-12
Catv, 83-1
Cemetery/mausoleum, 205-12
Chairman, 187-11
Chemical toilet, 168-2
Child day-care center, 205-12
Child day-care facility, 205-12
Cistern, 181-7
Clean recyclables, 175-3
Clear-cutting, 205-12
Clear-sight triangle, 187-11
Clinic, 205-12
Clothing/wearing apparel sales
and service, 205-12
Club, 205-12
Cluster development, 205-12
Coal mining activities, 205-12
Coal preparation activity, 205-12
Coal processing waste, 205-12
Coal refuse disposal, 205-12
Coal refuse disposal activities,
205-12
Coal tipple (and cleaning plant),
205-12
Collection facilities, 168-14
Collector, 175-3, 192-33
Collector or waste hauler, 175-15,
175-24
Collector street, 187-11
Commercial boarding stable,
205-12
Commercial establishments,
175-3, 175-15, 175-24
Commercial greenhouse, 205-12
Commercial parking facility,
205-12
Commercial swimming pool,
205-12
Commercial user, 168-14
Common open space, 187-11,
205-12
Communications antenna, 205-12
Communications co-location,
205-12
Communications equipment
building, 205-12
Communications tower, 205-12
Communications tower height,
205-12
Community center, 205-12
Comprehensive plan, 205-12
Concentrated animal feeding operation
(cafo), 205-12
Concentrated animal operation
(cao), 205-12
Conditional use, 205-12
Condominium, 205-12
Connection fee, 168-14
Conservation district, 181-7
Conservation easement, 205-12
Container, 175-24
Continuing care facility, 205-12
Convenience store, 205-12
Convenience store selling gasoline,
205-12
Conversion apartment, 205-12
Copying and printing service,
205-12
Cornice sign, 205-12
Corporation, 192-3, 192-43
Correctional facility, 205-12
Corrugated paper, 175-3
Council, 83-1, 128-2
Country inn, 205-12
County, 175-24, 187-11, 205-12
County planning commission,
205-12
Courtyard, 205-12
Cropland, 205-12
Crosswalk, 187-11
Cul-de-sac, 187-11
Culvert, 181-7
Current year, 192-3
Customer facilities fee, 168-14
Cut, 187-11
Dance studio, 205-12
Debt service charge, 168-14
Decibel, 205-12
Department, 187-11
Department or dep, 175-15,
175-24
Dependent unit, 205-12
Designated floodplain districts,
187-11
Design storm, 181-7
Detention basin, 181-7
Developable land, 205-12
Developer, 181-7, 187-11, 205-12
Development, 187-11
Development plan, 187-11,
205-12
Directional sign, 205-12
Disposal, 175-24
Distribution facility, 205-12
Diversion terrace, 181-7
Document, 192-43
Domestic waste or household
waste, 175-24
Domicile, 192-3
Domiciliary care home, 205-12
Dormitory/residence hall, 205-12
Double-faced sign, 205-12
Double house, 205-12
Drainage easement, 181-7
Drive through, 205-12
Driveway, 205-12
Dry cleaner, 205-12
Duplex, 205-12
Dwelling, 187-11, 205-12
Dwelling, multifamily, 187-11
Dwelling, single-family attached
(row) (townhouse), 187-11
Dwelling, single-family detached,
187-11
Dwelling, single-family semidetached,
187-11
Dwelling, two-family detached,
187-11
Dwelling, two-family semidetached,
187-11
Dwelling unit, 187-11, 205-12
Earned income, 192-3
Earned income and net profits tax
officer or officer, 192-3
Easement, 205-12
Easement, utility, 187-11
Educational institution, 205-12
Employer, 192-3, 192-19
Engineer, 187-11, 205-12
Engineering specifications,
187-11
EPA, 168-14
Equestrian facility, 205-12
Equipment rental/repair, 205-12
Erosion, 181-7, 187-11
Escort, 205-12
Escort agency/service, 205-12
Essential communications antenna,
205-12
Essential communications tower,
205-12
Essential services, 205-12
Excavation, 187-11
Existing customer, 168-14
Existing facilities, 168-14
Extractive industry, 205-12
Fair housing act, 205-12
Family, 205-12
Family care facility, 205-12
Family day-care home, 205-12
Family farm corporation, 192-43
Family farm partnership, 192-43
CALIFORNIA INDEX
4 02 - 15 - 2006
Farm, 187-11, 205-12
Farmers' market, 205-12
Fast food, 205-12
Federal communications commission
or FCC, 83-1
Fence, 205-12
Ferrous containers, 175-3
Fill, 187-11, 205-12
Finished grade, 205-12
Fiscal year, 192-19
Flag, 205-12
Flea market, 205-12
Flood, 205-12
Flood insurance rate map (firm),
205-12
Floodplain, 187-11, 205-12
Flood-prone area, 205-12
Floodway, 205-12
Floor area, 205-12
Floor area, building, 205-12
Floor area, gross, 205-12
Floor area, habitable, 205-12
Floor area, net usable, 205-12
Floor area ratio (far), 205-12
Floor area, retail net, 205-12
Florist shop, 205-12
Forest management operations,
181-7, 205-12
Forestry, 205-12
Fortune teller; psychic; astrologer,
205-12
Foundation, permanent, 205-12
Franchise, 83-1
Franchise area, 83-1
Franchising authority, 83-1
Freestanding sign, 205-12
Freight terminal, 205-12
Front building line, 205-12
Front lot line, 205-12
Front yard, 205-12
Fruit and vegetable stand, 205-12
Fueling position, 205-12
Fuel island, 205-12
Funeral home (including mortuaries),
205-12
Garage, 205-12
Garage, community, 205-12
Garage, private, 205-12
Garage, public, 205-12
Garbage, 168-14, 175-24, 205-12
Garden apartment, 205-12
Garden center, 205-12
Gasoline service station, 205-12
Gas substation, 205-12
Glass containers, 175-3
Governing body, 205-12
Government, public schools and
university, 168-14
Grade, 205-12
Grade, new or finished, 205-12
Grading, 205-12
Grantee, 83-1
Greenhouse, 205-12
Gross annual subscriber revenue,
83-1
Groundwater recharge, 181-7
Group care facility, 205-12
Group child day-care facility,
205-12
Group home, 205-12
Habitable areas, basement,
205-12
Habitable areas, floor, 205-12
Habitable areas, room or space,
205-12
Halfway house, 205-12
Handicapped individual, 205-12
Hardware/home improvement
store, 205-12
Health club, 205-12
Heavy manufacturing, 205-12
Heliport, 205-12
High-grade office paper, 175-3
Historical cost, 168-14
Holding tank, 168-2
Home and community based services
facility, 205-12
Horticulture, 205-12
Hospital, 205-12
Hotel, 160-2
Hotel/motel, 205-12
Housing for the elderly, 205-12
Impervious coverage, 205-12
Impervious surface, 181-7,
205-12
Impervious surface ratio, 205-12
Improved property, 168-2
Improvements, 187-11
Incidental signs, 205-12
Incinerator, 205-12
Independent auditor, 5-1
Independent living facility,
205-12
Independent unit, 205-12
Individual, 192-19
Indoor amusement center, 205-12
Industrial establishment, 175-15,
175-24
Industrial park, 205-12
Industrial user, 168-14
Industry, 205-12
Infiltration structures, 181-7
Institution, 205-12
Institutional establishment, 175-3,
175-15, 175-24
Institutional home, 205-12
Institutional user, 168-14
Insuring agent, 122-1
Interference, 168-14
Intoxicants, 39-1
Junk, 128-2, 205-12
Junk dealer or salvage yard dealer
or secondhand dealer, 128-2
Junkyard, 205-12
Junkyard, salvage yard or other
places used and maintained
for the collection, 128-2
Kennel, 205-12
Laboratory, 205-12
Land development, 181-7,
187-11, 205-12
Land development, minor, 187-11
Land disturbance, 181-7
Landfill, 205-12
Landowner, 187-11, 205-12
Landscape architect, 187-11,
205-12
Laundromat, 205-12
Leaf waste, 175-3, 175-15
Library, 205-12
License, 128-2
Licensed collector or licensed
waste hauler, 175-15, 175-24
Light manufacturing, 205-12
Limited access highway, 187-11
Livestock intensive operation
(lio), 205-12
Living trust, 192-43
Loading space, 205-12
Local street, 187-11
Lot, 187-11, 205-12
Lot area, 187-11, 205-12
Lot, corner, 205-12
Lot coverage, 205-12
Lot depth, 205-12
Lot, double frontage, 205-12
Lot, flag, 205-12
Lot frontage, 205-12
Lot, interior, 205-12
Lot line, 205-12
Lot measurements, 205-12
Lot, minimum width, 205-12
Lot of record, 205-12
Lot, reverse frontage, 187-11
Lot, through, 205-12
Lot, through or double frontage,
187-11
Lot width, 205-12
Lumberyard, 205-12
Magazines and periodicals, 175-3
Maintenance and operation expenses,
168-14
Major drainage, 187-11
Manufactured home, 205-12
Manufacturing, 205-12
Marquee sign, 205-12
Medical center, 205-12
Medical clinic, 205-12
Members of the same family,
192-43
Methadone treatment facility,
205-12
Mine, 205-12
Mineral, 205-12
Mineral extraction, 205-12
Mining accessory structure,
205-12
Mining, open pit, 205-12
Mining portal, 205-12
Minor drainage, 187-11
Mixed use structure, 205-12
Mobile home, 187-11, 205-12
Mobile home lot, 187-11, 205-12
Mobile home park, 187-11,
205-12
Motel, 160-2
Movie theater, 205-12
Mpc, 205-12
Multifamily dwelling, 205-12
Multifamily dwelling/multiunit
dwelling, 168-14
Multifamily housing properties,
175-3
CALIFORNIA INDEX
5 02 - 15 - 2006
Municipal establishment, 175-3
Municipal facilities, 205-12
Municipality, 83-1, 168-2, 181-7,
187-11
Municipal waste, 175-3, 175-15,
175-24
Municipal waste landfill, 175-15
Museum, 205-12
Natural outlet, 168-14
Natural state, 205-12
Net profits, 192-3
Newspapers, 175-3
Nightclub, 205-12
No-impact home-based business,
205-12
Nonconforming building or structure,
205-12
Nonconforming lot, 205-12
Nonconforming use, 205-12
Nonresident, 192-3
Nonresidential use, 168-14
Normal domestic wastewater,
168-14
Normal service interval, 83-1
NPDES, 168-14
Nudity/state of nudity, 205-12
Nursery, 181-7, 205-12
Nursery school, 205-12
Nursing home, 205-12
Occupancy permit, 205-12
Occupation, 192-19
Office, 205-12
Office building, 205-12
Official map, 205-12
One-hundred-year flood, 187-11,
205-12
Open porch, 205-12
Open space, 205-12
Ordinary trust, 192-43
Outdoor advertising sign, 205-12
Outdoor amusement center,
205-12
Owner, 160-2, 168-2, 168-14
Parapet sign, 205-12
Parcel delivery facility, 205-12
Park, 205-12
Parking facility, 205-12
Parking space, 205-12
Passenger terminal, 205-12
Passive recreation areas, 205-12
Patio, 205-12
Peak discharge, 181-7
Pennant, 205-12
Permit, 205-12
Person, 83-1, 128-2, 160-2,
168-2, 168-14, 175-3,
175-15, 175-24, 181-7,
187-11, 192-33, 192-43
Personal care facility, 205-12
Personal service establishment,
205-12
Personal support services for a
continuing care facility,
205-12
Person or individual, 192-3
Pet shop, 205-12
pH, 168-14
Pharmacy, 205-12
Photographic studio, 205-12
Place of public assembly, 205-12
Place of worship/religious institution,
205-12
Plan adjustment, 187-11
Planned residential development,
187-11
Planning commission, 187-11
Plan, sketch, 187-11
Plaque sign, 205-12
Plastic containers, 175-3
Plat, 187-11
Pole sign, 205-12
Porch, 205-12
Portable sign, 205-12
Post and panel sign, 205-12
Preceding year, 192-3
Preservation or protection, 205-12
Pretreatment, 168-14
Principal building, 205-12
Principal structure, 205-12
Privacy fence, 205-12
Private airport, 205-12
Private improvements, 187-11
Private open space, 205-12
Private park for public use,
205-12
Private stable, 205-12
Private swimming pool, 205-12
Processing, 175-15
Professional office, 205-12
Projecting sign, 205-12
Property of grantee, 83-1
Public airport, 205-12
Public grounds, 187-11, 205-12
Public hearing, 187-11, 205-12
Public improvements, 187-11
Public meeting, 187-11, 205-12
Public notice, 187-11, 205-12
Public open space, 205-12
Public swimming pool, 205-12
Public utility, 205-12
Public utility facility/structure,
205-12
Public utility transmission tower,
205-12
Pylon sign, 205-12
Quarry; sand pit; gravel pit; borrow
pit, 205-12
Race track, 205-12
Random selection process, 39-1
Real estate, 192-43
Real estate company, 192-43
Rear lot line, 205-12
Rear yard, 205-12
Reasonable cause, 39-1
Recreational vehicle, 205-12
Recreational vehicle park, 205-12
Recreation, private, 205-12
Recreation, public, 205-12
Recreation space, 205-12
Recyclable materials, 175-3
Recycling, 175-3, 175-15
Recycling facility, 205-12
Regulatory flood elevation,
187-11
Reimbursement component or reimbursement
part, 168-14
Renewable energy source,
187-11, 205-12
Rental unit, 160-2
Replacement, 168-14
Request for response, 105-6
Requestor, 105-6
Research and development facility,
205-12
Residences, 175-3
Resident, 192-3, 192-33
Residential parking facility,
205-12
Resource recovery facility,
205-12
Response, 105-6
Restaurant, 205-12
Retail store/shop, 205-12
Retention tank, 168-2
Riding/rental stable, 205-12
Right-of-way, 205-12
Right-of-way, private, 187-11
Right-of way, public, 187-11
Riparian buffer, 205-12
Roof sign, 205-12
Row house, 205-12
Rubbish, 175-24
Runoff, 181-7, 187-11
Salvage yard, 205-12
Salvaging, 175-24
Sandwich sign, 205-12
Sanitary wastewater, 168-14
Scavenging, 175-15, 175-24
School, primary or secondary,
205-12
School, trade, 205-12
Screening, 205-12
Scs, 181-7
Security fence, 205-12
Security, maintenance, 187-11
Security, performance, 187-11
Sediment, 181-7
Sedimentation, 187-11
Sediment basin, 181-7
Seepage pit/seepage trench, 181-7
Self-propelled, 184-19
Self-service laundry, 205-12
Self-storage facility, 205-12
Seminude, 205-12
Semipervious surface, 181-7
Semipublic swimming pool,
205-12
Sewage, 168-2
Sewage treatment facility, 205-12
Sewer service extension line or
extension line or lateral,
168-14
Sexually oriented business,
205-12
Shopping center, 205-12
Side lot line, 205-12
Side yard, 205-12
Sight distance, 187-11
Sign, 205-12
Sign face, 205-12
Sign, gross surface area of,
205-12
Sign height, 205-12
Single-family dwelling, 205-12
CALIFORNIA INDEX
6 02 - 15 - 2006
Single-family residential use,
168-14
Sit down, low turnover, 205-12
Skateboard or scooter, 184-19
Skilled nursing facility, 205-12
Slaughterhouse, 205-12
Slope, 187-11, 205-12
Snip sign, 205-12
Soil cover complex method,
181-7
Soil stabilization, 187-11
Solid waste, 175-24
Solid waste disposal area, 205-12
Source-separated recyclable materials,
175-3, 175-15
Special exception, 205-12
Special flood hazard area (sfha),
205-12
Specified anatomical areas,
205-12
Specified sexual activities,
205-12
Stable, 205-12
State, 168-14
Storage, 175-24
Storm sewer, 168-14, 181-7
Story, 205-12
Story, half, 205-12
Street, 83-1, 187-11, 205-12
Street, major, 187-11
Street, marginal access, 187-11
Street, private, 187-11
Street, public, 187-11
Structural alterations, 205-12
Structure, 187-11, 205-12
Studio, dancing or music, 205-12
Subdivision, 181-7, 187-11
Subdivision, minor, 187-11
Substantially completed, 187-11
Substantial uniformity, 83-1
Succeeding year, 192-3
Surface drainage plan, 187-11
Surface water, 168-14
Surveyor, 187-11
Swale, 181-7, 187-11
Swimming pool, 205-12
Tap permit, 168-14
Tapping fee, 168-14
Tavern/drinking establishment,
205-12
Tax, 192-19
Taxpayer, 192-3, 192-33
Tax receiver, 192-19
Telephone exchange building,
205-12
Temporary exterior sign, 205-12
Temporary interior sign, 205-12
Temporary shelter, 205-12
Temporary sign, 205-12
Temporary structure, 205-12
Tenant, 160-2
Theater, 205-12
Theater, drive-in, 205-12
Title to real estate, 192-43
Topsoil, 187-11
Townhouse, 205-12
Transaction, 192-43
Transfer facility, 205-12
Transportation, 175-15, 175-24
Transportation services, 205-12
Travel plaza, 205-12
Travel trailer, 205-12
Truck terminal, 205-12
Two family dwelling, 205-12
Undeveloped land, 187-11
Usable open space, 205-12
Use, 205-12
User charge, 168-14
Utility easement, 205-12
Vaccination, 70-2
Value, 192-43
Variance, 205-12
Vault pit privy, 168-2
Vehicle, 205-12
Vehicle-mounted sign, 205-12
Vehicle sales, rental and service,
205-12
Veterinary office/animal hospital,
205-12
Vicious propensity, 70-2
Viewing booths, 205-12
Wall sign, 205-12
Warehouse, 205-12
Waste, 175-3
Wastewater, 168-14
Wastewater facility, 168-14
Wastewater (sanitary sewerage)
system, 168-14
Wastewater treatment system,
168-14
Watercourse, 187-11
Wetlands, 205-12
Wholesale establishment, 205-12
Wild or exotic animal, 205-12
Window sign, 205-12
Winery, 205-12
Yard, 205-12
Yard sale, 205-12
Zoning approval, 205-12
Zoning hearing board, 205-12
Zoning map, 205-12
Zoning officer, 205-12
Zoning permit, 205-12
DEMOLITION
Property maintenance, 156-1
Zoning, 205-1
DESIGN STANDARDS
Subdivision and land development,
187-26, 187-29,
187-31
Zoning, 205-7
DIRT
Peace and good order, 147-2
Streets and sidewalks, 184-3,
184-10 – 184-12
Zoning, 205-60
DISABILITIES
Streets and sidewalks, 184-17
Zoning, 205-58
DISABLED
Zoning, 205-12
DISCRIMINATION
Personnel policies, 39-9 – 39-10,
39-12
DISORDERLY CONDUCT
Peace and good order, 147-2
DOGS
Animals, 70-3, 70-5
Taxation, 192-43
Zoning, 205-12
DRAINAGE
Junkyards and junk dealers,
128-12
Sewers and sewage disposal,
168-19, 168-21, 168-23
Stormwater management, 181-2,
181-7, 181-8, 181-11, 181-23
Streets and sidewalks, 184-16
Subdivision and land development,
187-11, 187-22,
187-27, 187-29, 187-32,
187-35, 187-36
Zoning, 205-64
DRIVEWAYS
Stormwater management, 181-4,
181-11
Streets and sidewalks, 184-14
Zoning, 205-12, 205-49, 205-54,
205-74
DRUG
Personnel policies, 39-2, 39-6,
39-7
DUMP
Peace and good order, 147-2
– E –
EASEMENTS
Cable television, 83-6
Stormwater management, 181-7
Subdivision and land development,
187-11, 187-25 –
187-27, 187-32
Taxation, 192-43, 192-46
Zoning, 205-12, 205-54
ELECTRICAL DISTURBANCES
Zoning, 205-44
ELEVATORS
Zoning, 205-12, 205-41, 205-57
EMERGENCY
Fire department, recognition of,
A208-1
Subdivision and land development,
187-16, 187-17
Zoning, 205-37, 205-52, 205-60
EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION
Stormwater management, 181-1,
181-2, 181-5, 181-10,
181-11, 181-16
Subdivision and land development,
187-27, 187-33,
187-36
Zoning, 205-12
EXCAVATIONS
Peace and good order, 147-2
Streets and sidewalks, 184-1 –
184-5, 184-16
Subdivision and land development,
187-11, 187-22
Zoning, 205-73
CALIFORNIA INDEX
7 02 - 15 - 2006
EXPLOSION HAZARD
Sewers and sewage disposal,
168-21
EXPLOSIVES
Peace and good order, 147-2
Sewers and sewage disposal,
168-21
Zoning, 205-37, 205-44
– F –
FECAL MATTER
Animals, 70-3
FEES
Animals, 70-5
Construction codes, uniform,
89-6, 89-7
Junkyards and junk dealers, 128-4
Records, access to, A210-6
Streets and sidewalks, 184-1,
184-14
Subdivision and land development,
187-7
Zoning, 205-77
FEES, SPECIAL
Attorney Fees for Municipal
Claims, 105-1 – 105-5
Addition of interest, 105-4
Applicability of article, 105-1
Assessment, 105-2 – 105-5
Assessment of penalty, 105-5
Bonds, 105-4
Improvements, 105-1
Liens, 105-1, 105-4, 105-5
Lighting, 105-1, 105-4
Notice, 105-3 – 105-5
Notice of fee assessment,
105-3
Nuisances, 105-1
Penalty, 105-5
Schedule of attorney fees,
105-2
Water, 105-1, 105-4
Reimbursement for Borough Response
Services, 105-6 –
105-9
Animal, 105-9
Collection of charges, 105-9
Definitions, 105-6
Establishment of charges,
105-8
Hearing, 105-7
Imposition of charges, 105-7
Lien, 105-9
Minor, 105-7
FENCES
Animals, 70-3
Junkyards and junk dealers,
128-12
Peace and good order, 147-2
Subdivision and land development,
187-29
Zoning, 205-12, 205-39, 205-45,
205-50, 205-52, 205-57
FILL
Construction codes, uniform, 89-7
Subdivision and land development,
187-11, 187-22
Zoning, 205-12, 205-79
FINAL PLANS
Subdivision and land development,
187-6, 187-17,
187-19 – 187-22, 187-24,
187-27
FINAL PLATS
Subdivision and land development,
187-6, 187-22
FIREARMS
Police department policies and
procedures, A209-1
FIRE DEPARTMENT, RECOGNITION
OF
Ancillary duties and activities,
A208-2
Authorized duties and activities,
A208-1
Emergency, A208-1
FIRE HYDRANTS
Streets and sidewalks, 184-15
Subdivision and land development,
187-25, 187-27
FIREWORKS
Fireworks, 110-1, 110-2
Inspection, 110-2
Parks, 110-2
Peace and good order, 147-2
Permit, 110-2
Sales, 110-1, 110-2
Supervised public displays permitted,
110-2
Violations and penalties, 110-3
FLAMMABLE
Sewers and sewage disposal,
168-21
Zoning, 205-37, 205-44
FLOOD HAZARD AREA
Zoning, 205-12
FLOODWAY
Zoning, 205-12, 205-37
FUEL
Sewers and sewage disposal,
168-21
Zoning, 205-12
– G –
GARAGES
Zoning, 205-12, 205-28, 205-46,
205-50, 205-57, 205-66
GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE
Junkyards and junk dealers,
128-12
Peace and good order, 147-2
Sewers and sewage disposal,
168-14, 168-21
Solid waste and recycling,
175-24, 175-25
Zoning, 205-12
GAS
Sewers and sewage disposal,
168-21
Taxation, 192-43, 192-46
Zoning, 205-12
GENERAL PROVISIONS, Ch. 1
GLARE
Zoning, 205-23, 205-44, 205-62
GRADE
Solid waste and recycling, 175-3,
175-5
Stormwater management, 181-23
Streets and sidewalks, 184-3,
184-16
Subdivision and land development,
187-22, 187-25 –
187-27, 187-29, 187-33,
187-35
Zoning, 205-12, 205-39, 205-51,
205-57, 205-60, 205-64
GRASS
Peace and good order, 147-2
Stormwater management, 181-8,
181-11
See also BRUSH, GRASS AND
WEEDS
GUARANTEES
Stormwater management, 181-27,
181-28
Subdivision and land development,
187-17
GUN
Peace and good order, 147-2
See also FIREARMS
– H –
HARASSMENT
Personnel policies, 39-9 – 39-13
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Zoning, 205-37
HAZARDOUS WASTE
Solid waste and recycling, 175-3
HEARINGS
Fees, special, 105-7
Personnel policies, 39-4, 39-12
Solid waste and recycling,
175-33, 175-34
Subdivision and land development,
187-9, 187-11, 187-21
Taxation, 192-8, 192-61, 192-63
Zoning, 205-8, 205-12, 205-15,
205-16, 205-18, 205-20,
205-38, 205-54, 205-56,
205-63, 205-66 – 205-68,
205-71, 205-75 – 205-79,
205-81, 205-82, 205-84 –
205-86
HEAT
Cable television, 83-2
Sewers and sewage disposal,
168-21
HEIGHT
Solid waste and recycling, 175-17
Subdivision and land development,
187-29
Zoning, 205-1, 205-12, 205-21,
205-23, 205-37, 205-39,
205-41, 205-45, 205-52,
205-53, 205-60, 205-65,
205-67, 205-84
CALIFORNIA INDEX
8 02 - 15 - 2006
HOME OCCUPATIONS`
Zoning, 205-22, 205-24, 205-28,
205-29, 205-54
HOSPITALS
Zoning, 205-12, 205-27, 205-37,
205-54, 205-55, 205-57
HOTELS
Rental housing, 160-2
Zoning, 205-12, 205-27 – 205-29,
205-54, 205-55
HUNTING
Peace and good order, 147-2
Taxation, 192-43
– I –
ILLUMINATION, see LIGHTING
IMPOUNDMENT
Streets and sidewalks, 184-26
IMPROVEMENTS
Fees, special, 105-1
Peace and good order, 147-1
Stormwater management, 181-7,
181-23, 181-26
Subdivision and land development,
187-3, 187-4, 187-6,
187-7, 187-11, 187-12,
187-17, 187-21 – 187-25,
187-35, 187-40
Taxation, 192-43
Zoning, 205-12, 205-27, 205-28,
205-30, 205-31, 205-37,
205-64, 205-69, 205-72,
205-74
INDECENT LANGUAGE
Peace and good order, 147-2
INSECTS
Solid waste and recycling, 175-26
INSPECTIONS
Amusements, 67-7
Construction codes, uniform, 89-3
Fireworks, 110-2
Insurance, 122-5, 122-6
Junkyards and junk dealers,
128-10
Rental housing, 160-3, 160-7,
160-11 – 160-13
Sewers and sewage disposal,
168-3, 168-14, 168-18,
168-19, 168-24, 168-26 –
168-28
Solid waste and recycling,
175-17, 175-19
Stormwater management, 181-23,
181-24, 181-26, 181-29
Streets and sidewalks, 184-4
Subdivision and land development,
187-7, 187-12, 187-22,
187-27
Taxation, 192-8, 192-30
Zoning, 205-46, 205-52, 205-59,
205-71, 205-79
INSURANCE
Cable television, 83-7
Fire Insurance Claims, 122-1 –
122-12
Abandonment, 122-11
Applicability, 122-12
Assessments, 122-4
Certificates by Tax Collector,
122-4
Definitions, 122-1
Designated official, 122-2
Effective date, 122-12
Filing with Department of
Community and Economic
Development,
122-8
Inspections, 122-5, 122-6
Insurance, 122-4, 122-5, 122-7
Joint and several responsibility,
122-10
Liability, 122-4, 122-5, 122-7,
122-10
Liberal construction, 122-11
Liens, 122-4, 122-7
Limitation on payment to insurer,
122-3
No assumption of liability,
122-7
Notification, 122-4
Payment of delinquencies and
costs, 122-4
Penalty, 122-4
Permits, 122-5
Procedures, regulations and
fees, 122-6
Recycling, 122-1
Report, 122-4, 122-5
Safety, 122-11
Security for costs, 122-5
Violations and penalties, 122-9
Insurance, 122-4, 122-5, 122-7
Pensions and retirement, 36-17
Solid waste and recycling,
175-18 – 175-20
Taxation, 192-18, 192-20, 192-40
Zoning, 205-12, 205-37, 205-52,
205-60
INVESTIGATIONS
Amusements, 67-2
Cable television, 83-7
Personnel policies, 39-12
Taxation, 192-8, 192-11
– J –
JUNKYARDS AND JUNK
DEALERS
Abatement of nuisances, 128-14
Definitions, 128-2
Delay in disposal, 128-11
Drainage, 128-12
Establishment of new junkyards
prohibited, 128-3
Fee, 128-4
Fees, 128-9
Fence, 128-12
Garbage, 128-12
Inspection, 128-10
Junk dealer, 128-2, 128-4, 128-7
License, 128-2, 128-4 – 128-9,
128-12
Limitation on licensees, 128-7
Notification, 128-8
Nuisances, 128-12, 128-14
Offense, 128-13
Records, 128-10
Regulations for operation, 128-12
Rodents, 128-12
Screen, 128-12
Setbacks, 128-12
Short title, 128-1
Storage, 128-2, 128-12
Transfer of licenses, 128-8
Vehicle, 128-12
Vermin, 128-12
Violations and penalties, 128-13
Water, 128-12
Yard, 128-1, 128-2
Zoning, 205-12, 205-31
– K –
KENNELS
Animals, 70-3, 70-5
Zoning, 205-12, 205-22, 205-31,
205-53
– L –
LANDSCAPING
Subdivision and land development,
187-22, 187-29
Zoning, 205-30, 205-75
LEAF WASTE
Solid waste and recycling,
175-3 – 175-5, 175-10,
175-15
Zoning, 205-12
LEASHING REQUIREMENTS
Animals, 70-3
LIABILITY
Animals, 70-5
Cable television, 83-7
Insurance, 122-4, 122-5, 122-7,
122-10
Pensions and retirement, 36-5,
36-13
Personnel policies, 39-8, 39-9
Property maintenance, 156-4
Rental housing, 160-16, 160-18
Sewers and sewage disposal,
168-28
Solid waste and recycling, 175-18
Streets and sidewalks, 184-13
Subdivision and land development,
187-41, 187-43
Taxation, 192-7, 192-10, 192-11,
192-16, 192-23, 192-29,
192-35, 192-39, 192-45,
192-51
Zoning, 205-52, 205-60, 205-75
LICENSE
Amusements, 67-1 – 67-6, 67-8
Animals, 70-5
Bicycles and pedalcycles, 76-3 –
76-5
Cable television, 83-2, 83-7
Fireworks, 110-2
CALIFORNIA INDEX
9 02 - 15 - 2006
Junkyards and junk dealers,
128-2, 128-4 – 128-9, 128-12
Rental housing, 160-4 – 160-12,
160-14 – 160-16
Solid waste and recycling,
175-11, 175-16, 175-18 –
175-20, 175-25, 175-28
Zoning, 205-52, 205-53, 205-59
LIENS
Animals, 70-4
Fees, special, 105-1, 105-4,
105-5, 105-9
Insurance, 122-4, 122-7
Rental housing, 160-16
Sewers and sewage disposal,
168-28
Stormwater management, 181-30
Taxation, 192-43, 192-51, 192-55
LIGHTING
Amusements, 67-1
Fees, special, 105-1, 105-4
Zoning, 205-44, 205-45, 205-52,
205-57, 205-60 – 205-62,
205-84
LITTERING
Solid waste and recycling, 175-17
Streets and sidewalks, 184-10 –
184-12
LIVESTOCK
Taxation, 192-3
Zoning, 205-12, 205-22
LOITERING
Peace and good order, 147-2
LOTS
Stormwater management, 181-4,
181-7
Subdivision and land development,
187-11, 187-25 –
187-27, 187-29 – 187-31
Zoning, 205-5, 205-12, 205-16,
205-17, 205-39, 205-53,
205-54, 205-57, 205-64 –
205-66, 205-72, 205-84
– M –
MANHOLES
Cable television, 83-3
Subdivision and land development,
187-36
MANUFACTURED HOMES
Zoning, 205-12, 205-22, 205-51
MEETINGS
Rental housing, 160-10
Risk management, 48-1
Sewers and sewage disposal,
168-21
Streets and sidewalks, 184-18
Subdivision and land development,
187-9, 187-11,
187-14 – 187-17, 187-20,
187-23
Zoning, 205-12, 205-52, 205-60,
205-63, 205-77, 205-78
METERS
Sewers and sewage disposal,
168-22
MINORS
Zoning, 205-59
MINOR SUBDIVISIONS
Subdivision and land development,
187-14, 187-16 –
187-18
MOBILE HOMES
Subdivision and land development,
187-11
Zoning, 205-2, 205-12, 205-22,
205-37, 205-51
MONUMENTS
Peace and good order, 147-1,
147-2
Subdivision and land development,
187-27, 187-34
MOTELS
Rental housing, 160-2
Zoning, 205-12, 205-27 – 205-29,
205-54
MULTIFAMILY DWELLINGS
Sewers and sewage disposal,
168-14, 168-19, 168-21,
168-22
Zoning, 205-2, 205-12, 205-25,
205-28, 205-54, 205-60
– N –
NATURAL FEATURES
Zoning, 205-4, 205-12, 205-22
NEWSPAPER
Solid waste and recycling, 175-3
Subdivision and land development,
187-9
Zoning, 205-85
NOISE
Animals, 70-3
Zoning, 205-23, 205-31, 205-44,
205-53, 205-84
NONCONFORMING SIGNS
Zoning, 205-60
NONCONFORMING USES
Zoning, 205-12, 205-65, 205-67 –
205-68, 205-71 – 205-72,
205-82
NOTICE OF VIOLATION
Rental housing, 160-10
Stormwater management, 181-33
NOTICES
Animals, 70-4 – 70-6
Authorities, municipal, 8-3
Cable television, 83-7
Fees, special, 105-3 – 105-5
Insurance, 122-4
Junkyards and junk dealers, 128-8
Peace and good order, 147-1,
147-2
Personnel policies, 39-4, 39-5
Property maintenance, 156-2
Records, access to, A210-4,
A210-5
Rental housing, 160-3, 160-10
Sewers and sewage disposal,
168-17 – 168-19, 168-27,
168-28
Solid waste and recycling, 175-4,
175-17, 175-33
Stormwater management, 181-33
Streets and sidewalks, 184-4,
184-14
Subdivision and land development,
187-9, 187-11,
187-16 – 187-17, 187-22,
187-23, 187-27
Taxation, 192-35, 192-36
Zoning, 205-12, 205-38, 205-60,
205-63, 205-75, 205-76,
205-78, 205-79, 205-84 –
205-85
NUISANCES
Amusements, 67-7, 67-8
Animals, 70-3 – 70-5
Fees, special, 105-1
Junkyards and junk dealers,
128-12, 128-14
Sewers and sewage disposal,
168-12, 168-20, 168-21,
168-24
Solid waste and recycling,
175-17, 175-26
Stormwater management, 181-22
Streets and sidewalks, 184-14
– O –
OBSTRUCTIONS
Peace and good order, 147-1
Sewers and sewage disposal,
168-21, 168-23
Stormwater management, 181-8
Zoning, 205-37
ODORS
Animals, 70-3
Sewers and sewage disposal,
168-21
Solid waste and recycling,
175-17, 175-26
Zoning, 205-23, 205-31, 205-44,
205-84
OFFICIAL MAP
Subdivision and land development,
187-21, 187-29
Zoning, 205-12
OFF-STREET LOADING
Zoning, 205-55, 205-57, 205-67
OFF-STREET PARKING
Zoning, 205-12, 205-26, 205-52,
205-54, 205-56, 205-57,
205-67, 205-84
ONE-FAMILY DWELLINGS
Stormwater management, 181-10,
181-16
Zoning, 205-65
See also SINGLE-FAMILY
DWELLINGS
OPEN SPACE
Subdivision and land development,
187-11, 187-25,
187-26
Taxation, 192-46
Zoning, 205-4, 205-12, 205-19,
205-22, 205-37
CALIFORNIA INDEX
10 02 - 15 - 2006
– P –
PARKING
Personnel policies, 39-2
Sewers and sewage disposal,
168-26
Stormwater management, 181-4,
181-8, 181-11
Streets and sidewalks, 184-14,
184-25
Subdivision and land development,
187-22, 187-25,
187-26
Zoning, 205-2, 205-12, 205-22,
205-24 – 205-29, 205-31,
205-32, 205-37, 205-46,
205-49, 205-52, 205-54,
205-56 – 205-58, 205-60,
205-62, 205-67, 205-80,
205-84
PARKS
Fireworks, 110-2
Peace and good order, 147-2
Subdivision and land development,
187-11, 187-26
Zoning, 205-2, 205-12, 205-22,
205-25, 205-27 – 205-29,
205-32, 205-37
PARKS AND RECREATION
AREAS
Subdivision and land development,
187-38
Zoning, 205-12
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER,
147-2
Advertising, 147-1
Alcoholic beverages, 147-2
Animals, 147-2
Ashes, 147-2
Blasting, 147-2
Conduct in parks, 147-2
Dirt, 147-2
Disorderly conduct, 147-2
Dump, 147-2
Excavation, 147-2
Explosives, 147-2
Fences, 147-2
Fine, 147-3
Fireworks, 147-2
Garbage, 147-2
Grass, 147-2
Gun, 147-2
Hunt, 147-2
Hunting, 147-2
Improvements, 147-1
Indecent language, 147-2
Intoxicating, 147-2
Loitering, 147-2
Monuments, 147-1, 147-2
Notices, 147-1, 147-2
Obstruction, 147-1
Offenses against public and private
property, 147-1
Parks, 147-2
Permit, 147-1, 147-2
Playground, 147-2
Pollution, 147-2
Safety, 147-2
Sanitation, 147-2
Signs, 147-1, 147-2
Tobacco, 147-2
Trees, 147-2
Utilities, 147-2
Violations and penalties, 147-3
Water, 147-2
Wild animal, 147-2
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING,
Ch. 151
PENSIONS AND RETIREMENT
457 Deferred Compensation Plan,
36-16, 36-17
Contributions, 36-16
Establishment of plan, 36-16
Insurance, 36-17
Payments to plan by Borough,
36-17
Municipal Employees Pension
Benefits, 36-9 – 36-15
Credit for prior service, 36-11
Effective date, 36-15
Election to change benefits,
36-9
Filing, 36-15
Liability, 36-13
Membership requirements,
36-10
Payment for obligations, 36-12
Pension, 36-12
Plan authorization, 36-14
Provision of benefits, 36-13
Repealer, 36-14
Retirement, 36-9, 36-10,
36-12, 36-14, 36-15
Police Pension Benefits, 36-1 –
36-8
Affirmative vote of plan members,
36-6
Credit for prior service, 36-3
Effective date, 36-8
Election to change benefits,
36-1
Filing, 36-8
Liability for unfundedness,
36-5
Membership requirements,
36-2
Payment for obligations, 36-4
Pension, 36-1, 36-4, 36-7, 36-8
Plan authorization, 36-7
Provision of benefits, 36-5
Repealer, 36-7
Retirement, 36-1, 36-2, 36-4,
36-6, 36-8
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Stormwater management, 181-6
Subdivision and land development,
187-36
Zoning, 205-1, 205-44
PERMIT
Amusements, 67-3, 67-6
Animals, 70-3, 70-5
Cable television, 83-6
Fireworks, 110-2
Insurance, 122-5
Peace and good order, 147-1,
147-2
Personnel policies, 39-4
Property maintenance, 156-1
Rental housing, 160-4, 160-7
Sewers and sewage disposal,
168-8, 168-14, 168-16,
168-19, 168-21, 168-22,
168-24
Solid waste and recycling, 175-25
Stormwater management, 181-5,
181-9, 181-15 – 181-26,
181-33
Streets and sidewalks, 184-1 –
184-5, 184-14, 184-16
Subdivision and land development,
187-8, 187-33, 187-35,
187-42
Taxation, 192-12
Zoning, 205-6 – 205-8, 205-12,
205-29, 205-32, 205-37,
205-38, 205-40, 205-51,
205-53, 205-59 – 205-61,
205-63 – 205-67, 205-70 –
205-74, 205-77, 205-79,
205-84
PERMITTED USES
Zoning, 205-8
PERSONNEL POLICIES
Drug and Alcohol Testing, 39-1 –
39-8
Definitions, 39-1
Effect on other provisions,
39-8
Establishment of policy, 39-2
Hearing, 39-4
Liability, 39-8
Notice, 39-4, 39-5
Notification of results, 39-4
Parking, 39-2
Penalties for positive result,
39-6
Permit, 39-4
Procedures following reasonable
cause, 39-5
Record, 39-4
Record keeping, 39-4
Refusal to cooperate, 39-7
Report, 39-4
Sale, 39-2
Scheduling of intoxicant testing,
39-3
Storage, 39-4
Testing procedures, 39-4
Sexual Harassment, 39-9 – 39-13
Appeal, 39-12
Battery, 39-10
Discrimination, 39-9, 39-10,
39-12
Discriminatory, 39-10
False allegations, 39-13
Findings, 39-9
Harassment, 39-9 – 39-13
Hearing, 39-12
Investigations, 39-12
Liability, 39-9
Offense, 39-12
Penalties for misconduct,
39-11
CALIFORNIA INDEX
11 02 - 15 - 2006
Procedure for reporting, investigating
and resolving
sexual harassment and retaliation
complaints,
39-12
Record, 39-11
Report, 39-12
Sexual harassment, 39-9 –
39-13
Signs, 39-10
Statement of policy, 39-9
Statement of prohibited conduct,
39-10
PLACES OF WORSHIP
Zoning, 205-12, 205-22, 205-24,
205-25, 205-27 – 205-29
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
Subdivision and land development,
187-11
Zoning, 205-24, 205-36
PLAYGROUNDS
Animals, 70-3
Peace and good order, 147-2
Subdivision and land development,
187-11, 187-25,
187-26
Zoning, 205-12, 205-59, 205-63
PLUMBING
Zoning, 205-28
POLICE DEPARTMENT
Establishment, 43-1
Police force established, 43-1
Superintendent of Police, 43-2 –
43-6
Fill, 43-5
Modification of article, 43-6
Position created, 43-2
Powers and duties, 43-3
Terms of employment, 43-4
Vacancies, 43-5
POLICE DEPARTMENT POLICIES
AND PROCEDURES
Adoption of regulations, A209-1
Firearms, A209-1
Repeal of prior inconsistent policies
and procedures, A209-2
Savings clause, A209-3
Vehicle, A209-1
When effective, A209-4
POLITICAL SIGNS
Zoning, 205-60
POLLUTION
Peace and good order, 147-2
Solid waste and recycling, 175-2,
175-3, 175-14, 175-23
Taxation, 192-46
Zoning, 205-44
PRELIMINARY PLANS
Subdivision and land development,
187-16 – 187-20,
187-26, 187-40
PRELIMINARY PLATS
Subdivision and land development,
187-6
PRIVY VAULT
Sewers and sewage disposal,
168-2, 168-20
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
Adoption of standards, 156-1
Amendments, additions and deletions,
156-2
Appeals, 156-3
Demolition, 156-1
Effect on other provisions, 156-4
Establishment of Appeals Board,
156-3
Liability, 156-4
Notice, 156-2
Penalty, 156-2
Permits, 156-1
Utilities, 156-1
When effective, 156-5
– R –
RABIES
Animals, 70-3
RADIATION
Zoning, 205-52
RECORDS
Auditor, 5-2
Bicycles and pedalcycles, 76-3
Junkyards and junk dealers,
128-10
Personnel policies, 39-4, 39-11
Records, access to, A210-1 –
A210-8
Rental housing, 160-3
Solid waste and recycling, 175-19
Subdivision and land development,
187-20, 187-21,
187-27, 187-42
Taxation, 192-8, 192-12, 192-23,
192-28, 192-30, 192-46,
192-52, 192-54
Zoning, 205-12, 205-66, 205-71 –
205-72, 205-74 – 205-76
RECORDS, ACCESS TO
Conditions for special review,
A210-4
Decision to grant or deny request,
A210-3
Designated officials to manage
requests, A210-2
Fees, A210-6
Methods of requesting access,
A210-1
Notices, A210-4 – A210-5
Prepayment for certain requests,
A210-7
Repealer, A210-9
Request form, A210-8
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Zoning, 205-12, 205-22, 205-46,
205-48
RECREATION AREAS, see
PARKS AND RECREATION
AREAS
RECYCLABLES
Solid waste and recycling,
175-3 – 175-11, 175-15,
175-16, 175-31
RECYCLING
Insurance, 122-1
Rental housing, 160-2
Solid waste and recycling, 175-1,
175-3 – 175-5, 175-8 –
175-10, 175-15
Zoning, 205-12, 205-31
REGISTRATION
Bicycles and pedalcycles, 76-3,
76-4
Rental housing, 160-3
Zoning, 205-38, 205-46, 205-72
RENTAL HOUSING
Apartment, 160-3
Classification of units, 160-13
Current licenses, 160-15
Definitions, 160-2
Designation of managing agent,
160-3
Duty to file list of tenants, 160-14
Expiration and renewal of license,
160-8
Hotel, 160-2
Inspection, 160-3, 160-7, 160-11,
160-12
Inspection of rental units and
schedule of fees, 160-12
Inspections, 160-12, 160-13
Issuance of temporary certificate,
160-6
Liability, 160-16, 160-18
License, 160-4 – 160-12,
160-14 – 160-16
Lien, 160-16
Meeting, 160-10
Modification of requirements,
160-13
Motel, 160-2
Notice, 160-3, 160-10
Notice of violation, 160-10
Owners severally responsible,
160-18
Penalty, 160-12
Permit, 160-4, 160-7
Purpose, 160-1
Record, 160-3
Recycling, 160-2
Registration, 160-3
Safety, 160-1, 160-7
Sale, 160-9
Single-family dwelling, 160-12
Suspension or revocation of license,
160-10
Variance, 160-12
Violations and penalties, 160-17
REPORTS
Bicycles and pedalcycles, 76-3,
76-5
Insurance, 122-4, 122-5
Personnel policies, 39-4, 39-12
Sewers and sewage disposal,
168-3, 168-24
Solid waste and recycling, 175-5,
175-19
Streets and sidewalks, 184-4
Subdivision and land development,
187-7, 187-16, 187-17,
187-22, 187-27
Taxation, 192-23, 192-52
CALIFORNIA INDEX
12 02 - 15 - 2006
Zoning, 205-12, 205-52, 205-64,
205-85
RESTAURANTS
Sewers and sewage disposal,
168-25
Zoning, 205-12, 205-27 – 205-29,
205-54
RETIREMENT
Pensions and retirement, 36-1,
36-2, 36-4, 36-6, 36-8 –
36-10, 36-12, 36-14, 36-15
Sewers and sewage disposal,
168-17
RIGHT OF ENTRY
Stormwater management, 181-32
RISK MANAGEMENT
Custody of funds, 48-3
Intent, 48-1
Legislative findings, 48-4
Meeting, 48-1
Participation authorized, 48-2
RODENTS
Junkyards and junk dealers,
128-12
Solid waste and recycling, 175-26
– S –
SAFETY STANDARDS
Animals, 70-3
Insurance, 122-11
Peace and good order, 147-2
Rental housing, 160-1, 160-7
Sewers and sewage disposal,
168-1, 168-15
Solid waste and recycling, 175-2,
175-14, 175-17, 175-23,
175-26
Stormwater management, 181-1,
181-2, 181-22
Streets and sidewalks, 184-24
Subdivision and land development,
187-3, 187-29, 187-36
Zoning, 205-2, 205-4, 205-27,
205-29, 205-31, 205-41,
205-44, 205-47, 205-51,
205-68, 205-69, 205-73,
205-82
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
Mayor and Council, 52-1
Compensation established,
52-1
SALES
Animals, 70-5
Cable television, 83-2
Fireworks, 110-1, 110-2
Personnel policies, 39-2
Rental housing, 160-9
Taxation, 192-3, 192-43, 192-46,
192-49, 192-51
Zoning, 205-12, 205-27, 205-28,
205-31, 205-54, 205-59,
205-60, 205-64
SANITARY FACILITIES
Subdivision and land development,
187-22
SANITATION
Peace and good order, 147-2
Zoning, 205-80
SCHOOLS
Sewers and sewage disposal,
168-14, 168-19
Subdivision and land development,
187-11, 187-26,
187-38
Taxation, 192-46
Zoning, 205-2, 205-12, 205-22,
205-25, 205-27 – 205-29,
205-51, 205-54, 205-55,
205-57, 205-59, 205-63,
205-80
SCREEN
Junkyards and junk dealers,
128-12
Zoning, 205-52, 205-80
SCREENING
Subdivision and land development,
187-29
Zoning, 205-12, 205-45, 205-52,
205-57
SECRETARY AND TREASURER
Appointment to both offices, 55-1
Compensation, 55-1
SEIZURE
Animals, 70-5
SEPTIC TANKS
Sewers and sewage disposal,
168-20
Stormwater management, 181-11
Subdivision and land development,
187-27
SERVICE STATIONS
Zoning, 205-12, 205-27, 205-49
SETBACKS
Junkyards and junk dealers,
128-12
Subdivision and land development,
187-11, 187-27
Zoning, 205-12, 205-39, 205-41,
205-52
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
Holding Tanks, 168-1 – 168-12
Area of use, 168-10
Assessments, 168-6
Authority to adopt rules and
regulations, 168-4
Bond, 168-8
Definitions, 168-2
Duties of improved property
owner, 168-8
Exclusiveness of rights and
privileges, 168-7
Inspection, 168-3
Length of time in existence,
168-9
Nuisances, 168-12
Permit, 168-8
Privy, 168-2
Purpose, 168-1
Rates and charges, 168-6
Reports, 168-3
Rights and privileges granted,
168-3
Rules and regulations to conform
to applicable law,
168-5
Safety, 168-1
Toilet, 168-2
Violations and penalties,
168-11
Water, 168-2
Sewer Use, 168-13 – 168-31
Abandonment of private systems,
168-20
Bonds, 168-27
Borough may do work and
impose appropriate fees,
168-28
Cesspool, 168-20
Conditions for use of Borough's
wastewater sewers,
168-21
Construction by property
owner, 168-26
Costs of damage, 168-23
Definitions, 168-14
Direct connection required,
168-18
Drainage, 168-19, 168-21,
168-23
Explosion hazard, 168-21
Explosive, 168-21
Failure to connect, 168-29
Fees and charges, 168-17
Flammable, 168-21
Fuel, 168-21
Garbage, 168-14, 168-21
Gas, 168-21
Grease traps required, 168-25
Heat, 168-21
Industrial discharges, 168-22
Inspections, 168-14, 168-18,
168-19, 168-24, 168-26 –
168-28
Liable, 168-28
Lien, 168-28
Meeting, 168-21
Meters, 168-22
Multifamily dwelling, 168-14,
168-19, 168-21, 168-22
Notice, 168-17 – 168-19,
168-27, 168-28
Nuisance, 168-20, 168-21,
168-24
Obstruction, 168-21, 168-23
Odor, 168-21
Offense, 168-31
Parking, 168-26
Penalty, 168-17
Permit, 168-14, 168-16,
168-19, 168-21, 168-22,
168-24
Pretreatment standards, 168-24
Privy vault, 168-20
Purpose, 168-15
Reimbursement of cost of construction,
168-27
Reports, 168-24
CALIFORNIA INDEX
13 02 - 15 - 2006
Requirements for connection
to system, 168-19
Restaurants, 168-25
Retirement, 168-17
Safety, 168-15
Schools, 168-14, 168-19
Scope, 168-16
Septic tank, 168-20
Short title, 168-13
Tests, 168-22
Toxic wastes, 168-21
Vandalism, 168-30
Violations and penalties,
168-31
Water, 168-14, 168-17,
168-18, 168-21, 168-22,
168-28
SEXUAL HARASSMENT
Personnel policies, 39-9 – 39-13
SHOPPING CENTERS
Subdivision and land development,
187-38
Zoning, 205-12, 205-27, 205-29
SIGNS
Peace and good order, 147-1,
147-2
Personnel policies, 39-10
Solid waste and recycling, 175-17
Streets and sidewalks, 184-2
Subdivision and land development,
187-16, 187-17
Zoning, 205-12, 205-52, 205-58 –
205-62, 205-71, 205-84
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS
Rental housing, 160-12
Zoning, 205-12, 205-22, 205-24,
205-28, 205-66
See also ONE-FAMILY
DWELLINGS
SITE PLAN
Subdivision and land development,
187-27
Zoning, 205-84
SKETCH PLAN
Subdivision and land development,
187-25
SMOKE
Zoning, 205-23, 205-41, 205-44
SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING
Arbitration Panel, 175-31 –
175-35
Appeal, 175-34, 175-35
Decision of arbitrators, 175-34
Establishment, 175-31
Hearing, 175-33, 175-34
Notice, 175-33
Recyclables, 175-31
Request for arbitration, 175-32
Recycling, 175-1 – 175-12
Air pollution, 175-3
Apartments, 175-5
Collection by unauthorized
persons, 175-7
Curb, 175-6
Definitions, 175-3
Enforcement and administration,
175-10
Establishment of program,
175-4
Existing recycling operations,
175-8
Franchise or license to collect,
175-11
Grade, 175-3, 175-5
Grant of power, 175-4
Hazardous waste, 175-3
Leaf waste, 175-3 – 175-5,
175-10
License, 175-11
Modifications, 175-12
Newspapers, 175-3
Notice, 175-4
Offense, 175-7, 175-10
Ownership of recyclable materials,
175-6
Pollution, 175-2, 175-3
Purpose, 175-2
Recyclables, 175-3 – 175-11
Recycling of materials, 175-9
Report, 175-5
Safety, 175-2
Separation and collection,
175-5
Short title, 175-1
Violations and penalties,
175-10
Water, 175-3
Waste Collection and Disposal,
175-22 – 175-30
Definitions and word usage,
175-24
Fine, 175-30
Garbage, 175-24, 175-25
Injunction powers, 175-29
Insects, 175-26
License, 175-25, 175-28
Nuisances, 175-26
Odors, 175-26
Offense, 175-30
Permit, 175-25
Pollution, 175-23
Prohibited activities, 175-25
Purpose, 175-23
Rodents, 175-26
Safety, 175-23, 175-26
Short title, 175-22
Standards and regulations for
collection, 175-27
Standards for storage of solid
waste, 175-26
Storage, 175-24, 175-26
Violations and penalties,
175-30
Waste Hauler Licensing, 175-13 –
175-21
Definitions and word usage,
175-15
Height, 175-17
Injunctive powers, 175-21
Inspection, 175-17, 175-19
Insurance, 175-18 – 175-20
Leaf waste, 175-15
Liability, 175-18
License, 175-16, 175-18 –
175-20
Litter, 175-17
Littering, 175-17
Notification, 175-17
Nuisances, 175-17
Odors, 175-17
Offense, 175-20
Pollution, 175-14
Prohibited activities, 175-16
Purpose, 175-14
Records, 175-19
Recyclable, 175-15, 175-16
Report, 175-19
Reporting requirements,
175-19
Safety, 175-14, 175-17
Short title, 175-13
Signs, 175-17
Standards for collection and
transportation, 175-17
Vehicles, 175-17 – 175-19
Violations and penalties,
175-20
SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
Subdivision and land development,
187-11
Zoning, 205-12, 205-18, 205-20,
205-22, 205-24, 205-25,
205-27 – 205-29, 205-31,
205-32, 205-36 – 205-37,
205-52, 205-65, 205-68,
205-71, 205-77, 205-80
STEEP SLOPES
Stormwater management, 181-11
STORAGE
Junkyards and junk dealers,
128-2, 128-12
Personnel policies, 39-4
Solid waste and recycling,
175-24, 175-26
Stormwater management, 181-8,
181-11
Subdivision and land development,
187-36
Zoning, 205-12, 205-27, 205-30,
205-31, 205-37, 205-44,
205-46, 205-48, 205-54,
205-55, 205-57, 205-60
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Appeals, 181-35, 181-36
Appeal to Borough Council,
181-35
Appeal to court, 181-36
Definitions, 181-7
Enforcement and Penalties,
181-32 – 181-34
Notice of violation, 181-33
Penalty, 181-33
Permit, 181-33
Right of entry, 181-32
Violations and penalties,
181-34
Water, 181-33
Fees and Expenses, 181-24 –
181-26
Establishment, 181-24
Expenses covered by fees,
181-26
CALIFORNIA INDEX
14 02 - 15 - 2006
Improvements, 181-26
Inspections, 181-24, 181-26
Modification of plans, 181-25
Payment prerequisite to permit
issuance, 181-24
Permit, 181-24 – 181-26
Financial Guarantees and Maintenance,
181-27 – 181-31
Bond, 181-27, 181-28
Borough action, 181-31
Guarantees, 181-27, 181-28
Inspection, 181-29
Lien, 181-30
Maintenance by individual lot
owners, 181-30
Maintenance by private entity,
181-29
Maintenance guarantees,
181-28
Performance guarantees,
181-27
General Provisions, 181-1 –
181-6
Applicability, 181-4
Compatibility with other permit
and ordinance requirements,
181-5
Drainage, 181-2
Driveways, 181-4
Erosion and sedimentation,
181-1, 181-2, 181-5
Lots, 181-4
Parking, 181-4
Performance standards and design
criteria, 181-6
Permit, 181-5
Purpose, 181-2
Safety, 181-1, 181-2
Statement of findings, 181-1
Statutory authority, 181-3
Watercourses, 181-2
Inspections, 181-23
Drainage, 181-23
Grading, 181-23
Improvements, 181-23
Permit, 181-23
Schedule of inspections,
181-23
Permit Requirements and Procedures,
181-15 – 181-22
Abandoned, 181-21
Application for permit, 181-20
Erosion and sedimentation,
181-16
Exemptions, 181-16
Expiration and renewal,
181-21
Land disturbance activities as
part of subdivision or land
development, 181-17
Modification of plans, 181-19
Nuisance, 181-22
One-family dwelling, 181-16
Other land disturbance activities,
181-18
Permit requirements, 181-15
Safety, 181-22
Suspension and revocation,
181-22
Plan Requirements, 181-9 –
181-14
Drainage, 181-11
Driveways, 181-11
Erosion and sedimentation,
181-10, 181-11
Exemptions, 181-10
General requirements, 181-9
Grass, 181-11
Modification of plans, 181-14
One-family dwelling, 181-10
Parking, 181-11
Permit, 181-9
Plan approval, 181-13
Plan contents, 181-11
Plan submission, 181-12
Septic tank, 181-11
Steep slopes, 181-11
Storage, 181-11
Trenches, 181-11
Utilities, 181-11
Water, 181-11
Stormwater Management Requirements,
181-8
Block, 181-8
Drainage, 181-8
General requirements, 181-8
Grass, 181-8
Obstructions, 181-8
Parking, 181-8
Storage, 181-8
Trenches, 181-8
Water, 181-8
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Operation of Self-Propelled Devices
on Sidewalks, 184-19 –
184-26
Bicycles, 184-20 – 184-24,
184-26
Curb, 184-24
Definitions, 184-19
Impounding, 184-26
Obedience to traffic control
devices and regulations,
184-22
Offense, 184-26
Parking, 184-25
Prohibited times, 184-21
Prohibited zones established,
184-20
Ramps and devices, 184-25
Right-of-way to motor vehicles,
184-24
Right-of-way to pedestrians,
184-23
Safety, 184-24
Vehicles, 184-20 – 184-24,
184-26
Violations and penalties,
184-26
Sidewalk and Curb Standards,
184-14 – 184-18
Blocks, 184-15
Brush, 184-16
Curbs, 184-14 – 184-17
Disabilities, 184-17
Drainage, 184-16
Driveway, 184-14
Excavation, 184-16
Fees, 184-14
Fire hydrants, 184-15
Grade, 184-16
Meeting, 184-18
Notice, 184-14
Nuisance, 184-14
Other laws, rules and regulations,
184-17
Parking, 184-14
Penalty, 184-14, 184-18
Permit, 184-14, 184-16
Sidewalk specifications,
184-15
Violations and penalties,
184-18
Snow and Ice Removal, 184-7 –
184-9
Authority for Borough to remove,
184-8
Collection of charges, 184-8
Penalty, 184-8
Responsibility of property
owners, occupants and
tenants, 184-7
Violations and penalties, 184-9
Street Openings, 184-1 – 184-6
Backfilling, 184-3
Barricades, 184-3
Bond, 184-2, 184-4, 184-5
Correction of defects, 184-4
Curb, 184-3, 184-5
Dirt, 184-3
Excavations, 184-1 – 184-5
Fee, 184-1
Grade, 184-3
Inspections, 184-4
Notice, 184-4
Penalty, 184-2
Permit, 184-1 – 184-5
Report, 184-4
Sign, 184-2
Trenches, 184-1 – 184-5
Utilities, 184-2, 184-4
Vehicles, 184-3
Violations and penalties, 184-6
Water, 184-3
Work performed by property
owners, 184-5
Sweeping and Cleaning of Sidewalks,
184-10 – 184-13
Dirt, 184-10 – 184-12
Disposal of dirt, litter and debris,
184-12
Liable, 184-13
Litter, 184-10 – 184-12
Responsibility of property
owners, tenants or lessees,
184-10
Time frame for sweeping,
184-11
Violations and penalties,
184-13
CALIFORNIA INDEX
15 02 - 15 - 2006
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
Administrative Procedures,
187-12 – 187-24
Acceptance of public improvements,
187-23
Backfilling, 187-22
Block, 187-16, 187-17
Bond, 187-24
Drainage, 187-22
Emergency, 187-16, 187-17
Excavations, 187-22
Expedited procedures for minor
subdivisions, minor
land developments, and
plan adjustments, 187-18
Fill, 187-22
Final approval procedure,
187-17
Final plans, 187-17, 187-19 –
187-22, 187-24
Final plat, 187-22
Grading, 187-22
Guarantee, 187-17
Hearing, 187-21
Improvements, 187-12,
187-17, 187-21 – 187-24
Inspections, 187-12, 187-22
Landscaping, 187-22
Meeting, 187-14 – 187-17,
187-20, 187-23
Minor subdivisions, 187-14 –
187-18
Minutes, 187-20
Modifications, waivers, and
flexibility provisions,
187-20
Notices, 187-16 – 187-17,
187-22, 187-23
Official filing date, 187-15
Official Map, 187-21
Parking, 187-22
Phased development, 187-19
Preapplication conference,
187-14
Preliminary approval procedures,
187-16
Preliminary plans, 187-16 –
187-20
Purpose, 187-12
Record, 187-20, 187-21
Release of performance security,
187-22
Remedies to effect completion
of required improvements,
187-24
Report, 187-16, 187-17,
187-22
Sanitary facilities, 187-22
Sign, 187-16, 187-17
Simultaneous processing of
applications, 187-13
Water, 187-14
Application Content, 187-25 –
187-27
Design standards, 187-26
Drainage, 187-27
Easements, 187-25 – 187-27
Erosion and sedimentation,
187-27
Final application requirements,
187-27
Final plan, 187-27
Fire hydrants, 187-25, 187-27
Grades, 187-25 – 187-27
Improvements, 187-25
Inspections, 187-27
Lots, 187-25 – 187-27
Minor subdivisions, 187-26,
187-27
Monuments, 187-27
Notification, 187-27
Open space, 187-25, 187-26
Parking, 187-25, 187-26
Parks, 187-26
Playgrounds, 187-25, 187-26
Preapplication conference
guidelines, 187-25
Preliminary application requirements,
187-26
Preliminary plan, 187-26
Record, 187-27
Reports, 187-27
Schools, 187-26
Septic tanks, 187-27
Setback, 187-27
Site plan, 187-27
Sketch plan, 187-25
Tree, 187-25
Utilities, 187-25 – 187-27
Water, 187-25, 187-27
Watercourses, 187-25, 187-27
Definitions, 187-10, 187-11
Design Standards, 187-28 –
187-40
Blocks, 187-30
Comprehensive Plan, 187-29
Curb, 187-29, 187-35, 187-37
Design standards, 187-29,
187-31
Drainage, 187-29, 187-32,
187-35, 187-36
Easements, 187-32
Erosion and sedimentation,
187-33, 187-36
Fences, 187-29
Grade, 187-29, 187-33, 187-35
Gutters, 187-37
Height, 187-29
Improvements, 187-35, 187-40
Land requirements, 187-28
Landscaping, 187-29
Lots, 187-29 – 187-31
Manholes, 187-36
Minutes, 187-35
Monuments, 187-34
Official Map, 187-29
Pedestrian circulation, 187-38
Performance standards, 187-36
Permit, 187-33, 187-35
Phased development, 187-40
Preliminary plan, 187-40
Recreation areas, 187-38
Safety, 187-29, 187-36
Schools, 187-38
Screening, 187-29
Sewers and water, 187-39
Shopping centers, 187-38
Storage, 187-36
Storm drainage design, 187-35
Storm drainage management,
187-36
Streets, 187-29
Trees, 187-33
Utilities, 187-29, 187-32
Water, 187-33, 187-35,
187-36, 187-39
Watercourses, 187-32, 187-35,
187-36
Enforcement, 187-41 – 187-43
Appeals, 187-41
Construal of provisions,
187-43
Enforcement remedies, 187-41
Liability, 187-41, 187-43
Permit, 187-42
Preventive remedies, 187-42
Record, 187-42
Violations and penalties,
187-41
General Provisions, 187-4 –
187-9
Advertisement, 187-9
Amendment procedure, 187-9
Compliance required, 187-4
Compliance with other requirements,
187-8
Effect of changes in ordinances,
187-6
Effect of chapter, 187-4
Fees, 187-7
Final plan, 187-6
Final plats, 187-6
Hearing, 187-9
Improvements, 187-4, 187-6,
187-7
Inspection, 187-7
Meeting, 187-9
Newspaper, 187-9
Notice, 187-9
Permits, 187-8
Preliminary plat, 187-6
Report, 187-7
Stricter standards to govern,
187-5
Utility, 187-6
Title, Authority and Purpose,
187-1 – 187-3
Authority, 187-2
Comprehensive Plan, 187-3
Improvement, 187-3
Purpose, 187-3
Safety, 187-3
Title, 187-1
Water, 187-3
SWIMMING POOLS
Zoning, 205-12, 205-22, 205-24,
205-29, 205-32, 205-45
CALIFORNIA INDEX
16 02 - 15 - 2006
– T –
TAXATION
Earned Income and Net Profits
Tax, 192-1 – 192-13
Applicability, 192-13
Bond, 192-8
Collection at source, 192-7
Compensation of Officer,
192-9
Declaration and payment of
tax, 192-6
Definitions, 192-3
Exemption, 192-5
Hearings, 192-8
Imposition of tax, 192-4
Inspection, 192-8
Interest and penalties, 192-11
Investigations, 192-8, 192-11
Liability, 192-7, 192-10,
192-11
Livestock, 192-3
Penalty, 192-11, 192-12
Permit, 192-12
Powers and duties of Earned
Income and Net Profits
Tax Officer, 192-8
Records, 192-8, 192-12
Sale, 192-3
Statutory authority, 192-1
Suit for collection of tax,
192-10
Title, 192-2
Violations and penalties,
192-12
Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights,
192-58 – 192-63
Administrative appeals procedures,
192-60
Adoption and compliance,
192-58
Appeals, 192-60
Assessment, 192-60, 192-61
Disclosure statement, 192-59
Fees, 192-63
Hearing, 192-61, 192-63
Hearing officer, 192-61
Taxpayer rights coordinator,
192-62
Occupational Privilege Tax,
192-19 – 192-32
Administration of tax, 192-28
Amount of tax, 192-21
Appeal, 192-28
Dates for determining tax liability
and payment,
192-23
Definitions and word usage,
192-19
Duty of employers, 192-24
Employers and self-employed
individuals residing beyond
Borough limits,
192-27
Exemption, 192-20
Imposition of tax, 192-20
Individuals engaged in more
than one occupation,
192-25
Inspection, 192-30
Insurance, 192-20
Liability, 192-23, 192-29
Penalty, 192-29, 192-30
Records, 192-23, 192-28,
192-30
Reports, 192-23
Returns, 192-22
Saving clause, 192-31
Self-employed individuals,
192-26
Suits for collection, 192-29
Violations and penalties,
192-30
When effective, 192-32
Occupation Tax, 192-33 – 192-40
Audit of accounts, 192-38
Definitions and word usage,
192-33
Discount and penalty, 192-36
Exemption, 192-40
Fine, 192-39
Imposition of tax, 192-34
Insurance, 192-40
Liable, 192-35, 192-39
Notice, 192-35, 192-36
Penalty, 192-36, 192-39
Recovery of tax, 192-37
Violations and penalties,
192-39
Per Capita Tax, 192-14 – 192-18
Appointment of collector,
192-15
Collection by suit, 192-16
Exemptions, 192-18
Failure to pay tax, 192-17
Imposition of tax, 192-14
Insurance, 192-18
Liable, 192-16
Violations and penalties,
192-17
Realty Transfer Tax, 192-41 –
192-57
Acquired company, 192-48
Animals, 192-43
Authority, 192-42
Civil penalties, 192-54
Credits against tax, 192-49
Definitions, 192-43
Documents relating to associations
or corporations and
members, partners, stockholders
or shareholders
thereof, 192-47
Duties of Recorder of Deeds,
192-52
Easement, 192-43, 192-46
Enforcement, 192-56
Excluded transactions, 192-46
Exempt parties, 192-45
Extension of lease, 192-50
Gas, 192-43, 192-46
Hunting, 192-43
Imposition of tax, 192-44
Improvements, 192-43
Interest, 192-44
Liability, 192-45, 192-51
Liens, 192-43, 192-51, 192-55
Open space, 192-46
Pollution, 192-46
Proceeds of judicial sale,
192-51
Record, 192-46, 192-52,
192-54
Regulations, 192-57
Report, 192-52
Sale, 192-43, 192-46, 192-49,
192-51
School, 192-46
Short title, 192-41
Statement of value, 192-53
Tax to become lien, 192-55
Trees, 192-43
TESTS
Personnel policies, 39-3 – 39-7
Sewers and sewage disposal,
168-22
Zoning, 205-12
TIRES
Bicycles and pedalcycles, 76-3
TOBACCO
Peace and good order, 147-2
TOILET FACILITIES
Zoning, 205-12
TOILETS
Sewers and sewage disposal,
168-2
Zoning, 205-12
TOWERS
Cable television, 83-3
Zoning, 205-12, 205-22, 205-27,
205-31, 205-37, 205-41,
205-52
TOXIC WASTES
Sewers and sewage disposal,
168-21
TREES
Animals, 70-3
Peace and good order, 147-2
Subdivision and land development,
187-25, 187-33
Taxation, 192-43
Zoning, 205-12, 205-60
TRENCHES
Stormwater management, 181-7,
181-8, 181-11
Streets and sidewalks, 184-1 –
184-5
– U –
UTILITIES
Peace and good order, 147-2
Property maintenance, 156-1
Stormwater management, 181-11
Streets and sidewalks, 184-2
Subdivision and land development,
187-25 – 187-27,
187-29, 187-32
UTILITY
Cable television, 83-3, 83-6
Construction codes, uniform, 89-3
CALIFORNIA INDEX
17 02 - 15 - 2006
Peace and good order, 147-2
Streets and sidewalks, 184-2,
184-4
Subdivision and land development,
187-6, 187-11, 187-27,
187-32
Zoning, 205-12, 205-25, 205-27 –
205-29, 205-31, 205-32,
205-60, 205-64
– V –
VACCINATION
Animals, 70-2, 70-3
VANDALISM
Sewers and sewage disposal,
168-30
VARIANCES
Rental housing, 160-12
Zoning, 205-12, 205-71, 205-77,
205-79, 205-81
VEHICLES
Bicycles and pedalcycles, 76-1,
76-6
Junkyards and junk dealers,
128-12
Police department policies and
procedures, A209-1
Solid waste and recycling,
175-17 – 175-19
Streets and sidewalks, 184-3,
184-20 – 184-24, 184-26
Zoning, 205-2, 205-12, 205-22,
205-28, 205-31, 205-37,
205-46, 205-48 – 205-50,
205-54, 205-55, 205-57,
205-58, 205-60
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC,
Ch. 199
VENTILATION
Zoning, 205-51
VERMIN
Animals, 70-3
Junkyards and junk dealers,
128-12
VIBRATIONS
Zoning, 205-23, 205-31
VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
Amusements, 67-9
Animals, 70-6
Bicycles and pedalcycles, 76-4
Cable television, 83-10
Fireworks, 110-3
Insurance, 122-9
Junkyards and junk dealers,
128-13
Peace and good order, 147-3
Rental housing, 160-17
Sewers and sewage disposal,
168-11, 168-31
Solid waste and recycling,
175-10, 175-20, 175-30
Stormwater management, 181-34
Streets and sidewalks, 184-6,
184-9, 184-13, 184-18,
184-26
Subdivision and land development,
187-41
Taxation, 192-12, 192-17,
192-30, 192-39
Zoning, 205-75
– W –
WATER
Fees, special, 105-1, 105-4
Junkyards and junk dealers,
128-12
Peace and good order, 147-2
Sewers and sewage disposal,
168-2, 168-14, 168-17,
168-18, 168-21, 168-22,
168-28
Solid waste and recycling, 175-3
Stormwater management, 181-8,
181-11, 181-33
Streets and sidewalks, 184-3
Subdivision and land development,
187-3, 187-14, 187-25,
187-27, 187-33, 187-35,
187-36, 187-39
Zoning, 205-1, 205-2, 205-12,
205-16, 205-37, 205-41,
205-44, 205-51, 205-57,
205-80
WATERCOURSES
Stormwater management, 181-2
Subdivision and land development,
187-11, 187-25,
187-27, 187-32, 187-35,
187-36
Zoning, 205-1, 205-16, 205-22,
205-37
WATER POLLUTION
Zoning, 205-44
WILD ANIMAL
Peace and good order, 147-2
– Y –
YARDS
Zoning, 205-1, 205-12, 205-19,
205-21, 205-29, 205-31,
205-39, 205-41, 205-45,
205-52, 205-55, 205-60,
205-62, 205-65 – 205-68,
205-73, 205-82
– Z –
ZONING
Administrative Provisions,
205-70 – 205-87
Accessory structure, 205-74
Advertising, 205-85
Amendments to chapter,
205-85
Appeals, 205-75 – 205-79,
205-81, 205-84
Appointment of Zoning Officer,
205-70
Building permits, 205-73 –
205-74
Cease and desist orders,
205-71
Certificates of occupancy,
205-72 – 205-74
Comprehensive Plan, 205-84
Conditional uses, 205-71,
205-84
Driveway, 205-74
Duties of Zoning Officer,
205-71
Enforcement procedures,
205-75
Excavation, 205-73
Fees, 205-77
Fill, 205-79
Fines, 205-75
Hearings, 205-71, 205-75 –
205-79, 205-81, 205-82,
205-84 – 205-86
Height, 205-84
Improvements, 205-72, 205-74
Inspections, 205-71, 205-79
Landowner curative amendments,
205-86
Landscaping, 205-75
Liable, 205-75
Lighting, 205-84
Lots, 205-72, 205-84
Mediation option, 205-83
Meetings, 205-77, 205-78
Municipal curative amendments,
205-87
Newspaper, 205-85
Noise, 205-84
Nonconforming uses, 205-71 –
205-72, 205-82
Notices, 205-75, 205-76,
205-78, 205-79, 205-84,
205-85
Odors, 205-84
Off-street parking, 205-84
Parking, 205-80, 205-84
Permit, 205-70 – 205-74,
205-77, 205-79, 205-84
Records, 205-71 – 205-72,
205-74 – 205-76
Registration, 205-72
Report, 205-85
Safety, 205-73, 205-82
Sanitation, 205-80
Schools, 205-80
Screen, 205-80
Signs, 205-71, 205-84
Site plan, 205-84
Special exceptions, 205-71,
205-77, 205-80
Variances, 205-71, 205-77,
205-79, 205-81
Violations and penalties,
205-75
Water, 205-80
Yards, 205-73, 205-82
Zoning Hearing Board administration
and procedures,
205-79
CALIFORNIA INDEX
18 02 - 15 - 2006
Zoning Hearing Board established,
205-78
Zoning Map, 205-85, 205-87
Zoning permits, 205-70 –
205-72, 205-84
Definitions, 205-10 – 205-12
Establishment of Districts, Map
and General Regulations,
205-13 – 205-21
Application of regulations,
205-19
Conditional uses, 205-18,
205-20
Establishment of overlay districts,
205-14
Establishment of zoning districts,
205-13
Establishment of Zoning Map,
205-15
Explanation of use categories,
205-18
Hearing, 205-15, 205-16,
205-18, 205-20
Height, 205-21
Interpretation of district
boundaries, 205-16
Lot, yard and height requirements,
205-16, 205-17,
205-21
Open space, 205-19
Permitted uses, 205-16,
205-20
Special exceptions, 205-18,
205-20
Water, 205-16
Watercourses, 205-16
Yard, 205-19, 205-21
Zoning district regulations,
205-17
Zoning Map, 205-15 – 205-17
General Provisions, 205-1 –
205-9
Appeal, 205-1
Applicability, 205-5
Compliance with chapter,
205-6
Compliance with Municipalities
Planning Code, 205-2
Comprehensive Plan, 205-3,
205-4
Demolition, 205-1
Design standards, 205-7
General purposes, 205-4
Hearing, 205-8
Height, 205-1
Interpretation, 205-7
Lots, 205-5
Mobile homes, 205-2
Multifamily dwellings, 205-2
Natural features, 205-4
Open space, 205-4
Parking, 205-2
Parks, 205-2
Performance standards, 205-1
Permit, 205-6 – 205-8
Permitted uses, 205-8
Relationship to Comprehensive
Plan, 205-3
Safety, 205-2, 205-4
Schools, 205-2
Severability, 205-9
Titles, 205-1
Uses for which no provision is
made, 205-8
Vehicle, 205-2
Water, 205-1, 205-2
Watercourses, 205-1
Yards, 205-1
Nonconforming Lots, Structures
and Uses, 205-65 – 205-69
Abandonment, 205-65, 205-67
Accessory buildings, 205-66
Conditional use, 205-65
Garages, 205-66
Hearing, 205-66 – 205-68
Height, 205-65, 205-67
Improvement, 205-69
Intent and purpose, 205-65
Lots, 205-65, 205-66
Off-street loading, 205-67
Off-street parking, 205-67
Parking, 205-67
Permit, 205-65 – 205-67
Record, 205-66
Repairs and maintenance,
205-69
Safety, 205-68, 205-69
Single-family dwellings,
205-65, 205-66
Special exception, 205-65,
205-68
Yards, 205-65 – 205-68
Overlay District Regulations,
205-33 – 205-38
Animal, 205-37
Antenna, 205-37
Appeal, 205-37
Application of overlay district
regulations, 205-36
Buffers, 205-37
Building permit, 205-38
Conditional uses, 205-36 –
205-37
Emergency, 205-37
Establishment of overlay districts,
205-33
Explosive, 205-37
Flammable, 205-37
Floodway, 205-37
F-P Floodplain Overlay District,
205-37
Hazardous materials, 205-37
Hearing, 205-38
Height, 205-37
H Historic Preservation Overlay
District, 205-38
Hospitals, 205-37
Improvement, 205-37
Insurance, 205-37
Interpretation of overlay districts,
205-35
Mobile homes, 205-37
Notice, 205-38
Obstruction, 205-37
Open space, 205-37
Overlay zoning maps, 205-34
Parking, 205-37
Parks, 205-37
Permit, 205-37, 205-38
Permitted uses, 205-37
Planned residential development,
205-36
Registration, 205-38
Special exception, 205-36,
205-37
Storage, 205-37
Tower, 205-37
Vehicles, 205-37
Water, 205-37
Watercourse, 205-37
Zoning Maps, 205-34
Zoning permit, 205-38
Supplementary Regulations,
205-39 – 205-64
Abandoned, 205-60
Accessible parking requirements,
205-58
Accessory buildings, 205-39,
205-41, 205-46
Accessory structures, 205-52,
205-54
Advertising, 205-59, 205-60,
205-62
Alcoholic beverages, 205-59
Anchored, 205-52
Animals, 205-47, 205-53
Antennas, 205-52
Apartments, 205-54
Appeal, 205-59
Application of yard requirements,
205-39
Basement structures, 205-42
Building permit, 205-64
Bus stops, 205-59
Camping or recreational vehicle
storage, 205-46
Certificate of insurance,
205-52
Certificate of use, 205-63
Church, 205-41, 205-54,
205-59, 205-63
Communications towers and
antennas, 205-52
Curb, 205-49, 205-54
Developments and maintenance
of parking areas,
structures and loading areas,
205-57
Dirt, 205-60
Disabilities, 205-58
Drainage, 205-64
Driveways, 205-49, 205-54
Easement, 205-54
Electrical disturbances, 205-44
Elevators, 205-41, 205-57
Emergency, 205-52, 205-60
Exotic animals, 205-47
Explosive, 205-44
Fences, 205-39, 205-45,
205-50, 205-52, 205-57
Flammable, 205-44
Garages, 205-46, 205-50,
205-57
CALIFORNIA INDEX
19 02 - 15 - 2006
Gasoline service stations and
other drive-in uses,
205-49
Glare, 205-44, 205-62
Grade, 205-39, 205-51,
205-57, 205-60, 205-64
Hearing, 205-54, 205-56,
205-63
Height, 205-39, 205-41,
205-45, 205-52, 205-53,
205-60
Home occupation, 205-54
Hospitals, 205-54, 205-55,
205-57
Hotels, 205-54, 205-55
Improvements, 205-64
Individual mobile
homes/manufactured
homes, 205-51
Inspection, 205-46, 205-52,
205-59
Insurance, 205-52, 205-60
Joint facilities for parking or
loading, 205-56
Kennels, 205-53
Liability, 205-52, 205-60
License, 205-52, 205-53,
205-59
Lighting, 205-44, 205-45,
205-52, 205-57, 205-60 –
205-62
Lot area measurements,
205-43
Lots, 205-39, 205-53, 205-54,
205-57, 205-64
Manufactured homes, 205-51
Meeting, 205-52, 205-60,
205-63
Methadone treatment facilities,
205-63
Minors, 205-59
Mobile homes, 205-51
Motels, 205-54
Motor vehicle repair garage,
205-50
Multifamily dwellings,
205-54, 205-60
Noise, 205-44, 205-53
Nonconforming signs, 205-60
Notice, 205-60, 205-63
Odors, 205-44
Off-street loading and unloading,
205-55, 205-57
Off-street parking, 205-52,
205-54, 205-56, 205-57
Oversized equipment storage,
205-48
Parking, 205-46, 205-49,
205-52, 205-54, 205-56 –
205-58, 205-60, 205-62
Performance standards, 205-44
Permit, 205-40, 205-51,
205-53, 205-59 – 205-61,
205-63, 205-64
Playground, 205-59, 205-63
Political signs, 205-60
Pollution, 205-44
Radiation, 205-52
Recreational vehicles, 205-46,
205-48
Registration, 205-46
Report, 205-52, 205-64
Restaurants, 205-54
Safety, 205-41, 205-44,
205-47, 205-51
Safety standards, 205-51
Sales, 205-54
Schools, 205-51, 205-54,
205-55, 205-57, 205-59,
205-63
Screen, 205-45, 205-52,
205-57
Service stations, 205-49
Setback, 205-39, 205-41,
205-52
Sexually oriented business
permit applications,
205-59
Signs, 205-52, 205-58 –
205-62
Smoke, 205-41, 205-44
Special exception, 205-52
Storage, 205-44, 205-46,
205-48, 205-54, 205-55,
205-57, 205-60
Swimming pools, 205-45
Temporary structures, 205-40
Towers, 205-41, 205-52
Tree, 205-60
Utility, 205-60, 205-64
Vehicles, 205-46, 205-48 –
205-50, 205-54, 205-55,
205-57, 205-58, 205-60
Ventilation, 205-51
Water, 205-41, 205-44,
205-51, 205-57
Water pollution, 205-44
Yards, 205-39, 205-41,
205-45, 205-52, 205-55,
205-60, 205-62
Zoning District Regulations,
205-22 – 205-32
A-1 Agricultural District,
205-22
Accessory uses, 205-22,
205-24, 205-28, 205-29,
205-31
Animal, 205-22
Antenna, 205-22, 205-27,
205-31
Apartment, 205-25, 205-28,
205-29, 205-32
Bulk regulations, 205-22,
205-24, 205-25, 205-27 –
205-29, 205-31, 205-32
Bus stop, 205-24, 205-25,
205-27 – 205-29, 205-32
C-1 Commercial District,
205-27
C-2 Mixed Use Commercial
District, 205-28
Cemetery, 205-22
Cluster development, 205-29
Commercial districts, 205-26
Comprehensive Plan, 205-23
Conditional uses, 205-22,
205-24 – 205-25,
205-27 – 205-29, 205-31,
205-32
Curb, 205-27, 205-31
Garage, 205-28
Glare, 205-23
Height, 205-23
Home occupation, 205-22,
205-24, 205-28, 205-29
Hospital, 205-27
Hotel, 205-27 – 205-29
I Institutional District, 205-32
Improvements, 205-27,
205-28, 205-30, 205-31
Industrial district, 205-30
Junkyard, 205-31
Kennel, 205-22, 205-31
Landscaping, 205-30
Livestock, 205-22
M-1 Industrial District, 205-31
Manufactured home, 205-22
Mobile home, 205-22
Motel, 205-27 – 205-29
Multifamily dwelling, 205-25,
205-28
MU Special Mixed Use District,
205-29
Natural features, 205-22
Noise, 205-23, 205-31
Odors, 205-23, 205-31
Off-street parking, 205-26
Open space, 205-22
Parking, 205-22, 205-24 –
205-29, 205-31, 205-32
Parks, 205-22, 205-25,
205-27 – 205-29, 205-32
Permit, 205-29, 205-32
Permitted uses, 205-22,
205-24, 205-25, 205-27 –
205-29, 205-31, 205-32
Places of worship, 205-22,
205-24, 205-25, 205-27 –
205-29
Planned residential development,
205-24
Plumbing, 205-28
R-1 Single-Family Residential
District, 205-24
R-2 Multifamily Residential
District, 205-25
Recreational vehicle, 205-22
Recycling, 205-31
Residential districts, 205-23
Restaurant, 205-27 – 205-29
Safety, 205-27, 205-29,
205-31
Sales, 205-27, 205-28, 205-31
School, 205-22, 205-25,
205-27 – 205-29
Service station, 205-27
Shopping center, 205-27,
205-29
Single-family dwelling,
205-22, 205-24, 205-28
Smoke, 205-23
CALIFORNIA INDEX
20 02 - 15 - 2006
Special exceptions, 205-22,
205-24, 205-25, 205-27 –
205-29, 205-31, 205-32
Storage, 205-27, 205-30,
205-31
Swimming pool, 205-22,
205-24, 205-29, 205-32
Tower, 205-22, 205-27,
205-31
Utility, 205-25, 205-27 –
205-29, 205-31, 205-32
Vehicle, 205-22, 205-28,
205-31
Vibrations, 205-23, 205-31
Watercourses, 205-22
Yard, 205-29, 205-31
ZONING MAP
Zoning, 205-12, 205-15 – 205-17,
205-34, 205-85, 205-87
ZONING PERMITS
Zoning, 205-12, 205-38, 205-70 –
205-72, 205-84