Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 1190]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1008(b) of the Borough Code [53 P.S. § 46008(b)],
the codification of a complete body of legislation for the Borough of
Catasauqua, County of Lehigh, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as revised,
codified and consolidated into chapters, articles and sections by General
Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters 1 through 280, together
with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as a
single ordinance of the Borough of Catasauqua, which shall be known and is
hereby designated as the "Code of the Borough of Catasauqua," hereinafter
referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the
prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued in
full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the
Borough Council of the Borough of Catasauqua, and it is the intention of
said Borough Council that each such provision contained within the Code
is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such
provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and only
changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to be
enacted from the effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions
contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are hereby repealed;
provided, however, that such repeal shall only be to the extent of such
inconsistency, and any valid legislation of the Borough of Catasauqua which
is not in conflict with the provisions of the Code shall be deemed to remain
in full force and effect.
§ 1-4. Ordinances saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 7-11-2005.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Borough prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Borough or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending,
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Borough.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Borough or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the Borough or other instruments or evidence of
the Borough's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Borough.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
§ 1-4 CATASAUQUA CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted ordinances.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Borough or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the Borough,
except as subsequently set by resolution.
A. Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances and resolutions of the Borough for adoption and revision as
part of the Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the
Borough Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code
as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed had been previously
formally amended to read as such.
B. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, changes and revisions of a substantive
nature, as set forth in Schedule A1 attached hereto and made a part
hereof, are hereby made to various ordinances and resolutions included
in the Code. These changes are enacted to bring provisions into
conformity with the desired policies of the Borough Council, and it is
the intent of the Borough Council that all such changes be adopted as
part of the Code as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed have
been previously formally amended to read as such. All such changes
and revisions shall be deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of
the Code specified in § 1-15.
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-6B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1190." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
Borough offices.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:5
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-9. Filing of copy of Code.
At least one copy of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with
the Ordinance Book in the office of the Borough Secretary and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copy
shall be certified to by the Borough Secretary, as provided by law, and such
certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Borough Secretary,
available to persons desiring to examine the same, during all times while
said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Borough Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
C. Nomenclature. Throughout the Code, any references to the following
are updated to read as indicated:
(1) "Justice of the Peace" or "District Magistrate" to "District Justice."
(2) "Department of Environmental Resources" or "DER" to
"Department of Environmental Protection" or "DEP."
(3) "Department of Community Affairs" to "Department of Community
and Economic Development."
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ 1-6 CATASAUQUA CODE § 1-10
1:6
intended to include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall
thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the postbound
book containing said Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book
containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the Borough
Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all
ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Borough Council subsequent to
the effective date of this codification which the Borough Council shall adopt
specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included
therein by reference until such changes or new ordinances or resolutions
are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which time such
supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Borough Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction and of the adoption of the
Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. The enactment
and application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the
notices of introduction and adoption, as required by law, and the availability
of at least one copy of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be
deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the Borough
to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not
exceeding $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
thereof, by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or unconstitutional.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Borough Council that this
ordinance and the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid
§ 1-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:7
or unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or
part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after November 7, 2005.
§ 1-14 CATASAUQUA CODE § 1-15
1:8
ARTICLE II
Payment of Court Costs and Attorneys' Fees
[Adopted 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1288]
§ 1-16. Violators assessed court costs and reasonable attorneys'
fees.
All existing and future Borough ordinances are hereby amended to include
the following enforcement provision: "Any person found guilty of violating
an ordinance shall be assessed court costs and reasonable attorneys' fees
incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings."
§ 1-17. Effect on other provisions.
Nothing contained in this article shall in any way modify the municipal
claims and liens procedures and enforcement actions for zoning under the
Municipalities Planning Code, including collections and fees as set forth in
those ordinances.
§ 1-18. Determination of reasonable rates.
It shall be presumed that the attorneys' fee hourly rate is reasonable as
long as it is equal to the rate that the Borough pays its Municipal Solicitor.
Additional charges may be reasonable depending on the complexity and
difficulty of the matter and, thus, the presumption of reasonableness at the
approved current rate for the Borough Solicitor for litigation shall be a floor
and not a ceiling on said rates.
§ 1-19. Municipal Solicitor's rate.
The Municipal Solicitor's rate shall be the rate that is then in effect for
the Borough as concerns municipal litigation and shall automatically
correspond in the future to whatever rate is approved by the Borough.
§ 1-20. Intent.
In order to protect the law-abiding taxpayers of the Borough, this article
requires a mandatory payment of court costs and reasonable attorneys' fees
incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings where a person is
found guilty of violating a Borough ordinance.
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-20
1:9
Chapter 5
AUDITOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fiscal affairs — See Ch. 40.
§ 5-1. Appointment of certified public accountant as Auditor
authorized.
The Borough Council shall, by resolution, annually before the
commencement of a fiscal year, appoint a certified public accountant or firm
of certified public accountants to audit the accounts, records and all other
evidences of financial transactions of the Borough and Borough officers for
the fiscal year then closing, and to file a report thereof to Borough Council,
and perform all duties and be subject to the same penalties and obligations
as are imposed by law on an elected Borough auditor.
§ 5-2. Legal authority for appointment of Auditor; abolition of office
of Borough Auditor.
This chapter is enacted under the authority of the Act of the General
Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania No. 116 of 1963 and, as
provided therein, upon appointment of said certified public accountant or
firm of certified public accountants, the office of Borough Auditor is thereby
abolished.
§ 5-3. Compensation of certified public accountant.
The resolution appointing said certified public accountant shall fix the
compensation to be paid from Borough funds for said services.
Chapter 10
AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL
§ 10-1. Intention to organize authority.
The Council hereby signifies its intention and desire to organize an
Authority under the provisions of the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945,
as amended.2
§ 10-2. Articles of Incorporation.
The Burgess, the President of Borough Council, and the Secretary thereof
are hereby authorized and directed to execute on behalf of the Borough of
2. Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 1-20 CATASAUQUA CODE § 10-2
5:10
Catasauqua Articles of Incorporation for said Authority, in substantially the
following form:
Articles of Incorporation
[Amended 5-5-1986 by Res. No. 5-86]
To The Secretary of The Commonwealth,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania:
In compliance with the requirements of the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L.
382, known as "Municipality Authorities Act of 1945," as amended,
the Borough of Catasauqua, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania, desiring to
incorporate an Authority thereunder, does hereby certify:
1. The name of the Authority is "Catasauqua Borough Authority."
2. Said Authority is formed under the provisions of the Act of May 2,
1945, P.L. 382, as amended.
3. No other Authority organized under the Act of May 2, 1945,
P.L. 382, as amended, is in existence in or for the incorporating
municipality, the Borough of Catasauqua.
4. The name of the incorporating municipality is Borough of
Catasauqua, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania.
5. The names and addresses of its municipal authorities are as
follows:3
6. The names addresses and terms of office of the first members of
the Board of the Authority to be formed hereby are as follows:4
7. The ordinance authorizing the creation of said Authority, certified
from the records of the Council of the Borough of Catasauqua,
together with the advertisement of notice of filing these Articles
of Incorporation, are each submitted herewith.
8. Said Authority shall have a term of existence for a period of 50
years from the date of June 1, 1986.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned have executed these Articles
on behalf of the Borough of Catasauqua and have caused to be fixed the
seal thereof this 15th day of May, 1952.
Ralph C. Brown
President of Borough Council
(Borough Seal)
Attest: John T. Stratton, Secretary
Frank A. Leidrich, Burgess
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
3. Editor's Note: Here follow the names and addresses of the principal officers of the
Borough at the time of enactment of this ordinance.
4. Editor's Note: Here follow the names, addresses and terms of office of the first members of
the Authority Board.
§ 10-2 AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL § 10-2
10:11
Articles of Incorporation
[Amended 5-5-1986 by Res. No. 5-86]
County of Lehigh; ss;
On this 15th day of May, 1952, before me, the undersigned Notary
Public, personally came the above named Frank A. Leidrich, Ralph C.
Brown, and John T. Stratton, whose official positions in the Borough of
Catasauqua are respectively Burgess, President of Borough Council, and
Secretary, and who, in due form of law, acknowledged the foregoing
Articles of Incorporation to be the Act and Deed of the Borough of
Catasauqua for the purposes therein specified.
Grace E. Walp, Notary Public
My Commission Expires
(Seal) January 4, 1952
§ 10-3. Initial project.
The initial project to be undertaken by the Authority is to acquire, hold,
construct, improve, maintain, operate, own, and/or lease, either in the
capacity of lessor or lessee, sewers, sewer systems or parts thereof and
sewage treatment works including works for treating and disposing of
industrial waste in and for the Borough of Catasauqua and for such other
territory as it may be authorized to serve.
Chapter 15
BOROUGH COUNCIL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Manager — See Ch. 50. Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 75.
§ 10-2 CATASAUQUA CODE § 10-3
10:12
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 5-7-1962 (Ch. I, Secs. 11 to 21, of the 1962 Code)]
§ 15-1. Regular meetings.
Regular meetings of the Council of the Borough of Catasauqua shall be
held in the Municipal Building, on the first Monday of each month, at
7:30 p.m. Provided, such time shall be Eastern Standard Time or Eastern
Daylight Saving Time, as the case may be, depending upon the standard
of time generally observed in the Borough at the time. Provided further, in
any month when a legal holiday shall fall on the first Monday, the regular
meeting of the Council shall be held on the first Tuesday of such month, at
the time and place herein prescribed.
§ 15-2. Special meetings.
Special meetings of the Council may be called by the President of the
Council at his discretion and shall be called by him at the written request of
any two or more members of the Council. All members of the Council shall
have at least 20 hours' notice of any special meetings which may be given
verbally or in writing. The notice of such meeting is to state whether the
meeting is to be for general or special purposes, and, if the meeting is to
be for special purposes, the notice shall contain a general statement of the
nature of the business to be transacted. The presence of any member at a
special meeting shall constitute a waiver of notice.
§ 15-3. Adjourned meetings.
The Council may adjourn a meeting to any time agreed upon by a majority of
the members present at such meeting, and, a quorum being present thereat,
the said adjourned meeting may proceed to consider any general business
in the case of an adjourned regular meeting, or special business for which
the meeting was called, in the case of an adjourned special meeting.
§ 15-4. President and Vice President of Council.
At the biennial organization meeting of Council, the Council shall, as
provided by law, elect a President of Council and a Vice President of
Council. In case of the absence of the President of Council from any meeting
thereof, the Vice President may preside over such meeting, and, in case of
the absence of the President of Council from the Borough, or his incapacity,
the Vice President may, in any situation that he deems necessitates the
same, call a special meeting of the Council.
§ 15-5. Committees of Council. [Amended 11-2-1981]
A. Within 15 days after the biennial organization of Council, the President
shall announce his appointments of members of the standing
committees of Council. Such members shall, so long as they remain
§ 15-1 AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL § 15-5
10:13
§ 15-6. Standing committees. [Amended by 12-6-1965; 1-9-1978 by
Res. No. 1-78; 1-5-1982 by Res. No. 1-82; 1-7-2002 by Res. No. 3-02]
Every standing committee shall consist of three members, the first named
thereto to act as chairman and the second as vice chairman, the latter to
serve as chairman in the absence or inability of the chairman to act. The
standing committees shall be as follows: General Government Committee,
Public Safety Committee, Public Utilities Committee (formerly the Public
Works Committee), Planning and Zoning Committee, Recreation, and Public
Works Committee (formerly Streets/Mechanical Committee).
§ 15-7. Special committees.
Special committees may be appointed as occasion may require, by the
President of Council, or otherwise if so directed by Council.
§ 15-8. Order of business.
The order of business at the meetings of the Council shall be as follows,
except that, at any meeting, the Council, on motion, may agree to such
changes and modifications of such order of business for such meeting as the
situation may warrant:
members of Council, retain such committee appointments until
successors thereto shall have been appointed following the succeeding
biennial meeting of Council, except that, in any case, the President of
Council, at any time, in his discretion, may remove any member from
any committee or make changes in committee appointments.
B. All bills for material furnished or for labor done which are less than
$100 shall be signed by the Manager and all bills over $100 shall be
signed by the Central Government Committee. All petitions, resolutions
and other communications presented to the Council shall be referred to
the proper committee for consideration, unless otherwise ordered by a
2/3 vote of the members present.
A. Call to order.
B. Reading of the minutes of the last preceding regular and special
meetings. (The name of the presiding officer and of each member of the
Council present shall appear upon the minutes.)
C. Reports of the Mayor, Treasurer and any other officers of the Borough.
D. Reports of standing committees, in the order of their appointment.
E. Reports of special committees, in the order of their appointment.
F. Presentation of petitions, memorials or remonstrances.
G. Business left unfinished at previous meetings.
H. New business.
§ 15-5 CATASAUQUA CODE § 15-9
10:14
§ 15-9. Passage of ordinances and resolutions.
Any ordinance or resolution may be passed finally at the meeting at which
it is first introduced, with the exception of those ordinances which, by law,
must be considered at more than one meeting, or which must be introduced
at one meeting and passed finally at a subsequent meeting.
§ 15-10. Rules of order.
In the conduct of the meetings of the Council, the following rules of order
shall apply:
§ 15-11. Modification, suspension or repeal of bylaws.
These bylaws or any provision thereof may be amended, modified, added
to or repealed by a majority vote of the members of Council present at
any regular meeting of the Council or at any special meeting called for
A. Every member, when speaking, shall respectfully address the chair, and
when called to order by him or by any member of the Council shall take
his seat until such point of order shall have been decided.
B. No member shall speak more than twice upon any question open for
discussion, without the unanimous consent of the Council.
C. The President of Council may, on his own motion, enter into the
discussion of any question, after appointing the Vice President of
Council, or another member thereof in the absence of the Vice
President, to preside during the pendency of the question.
D. In the vote on any question before the Council, the yeas and nays may
be demanded by any member or ordered by the presiding officer, in
which case the names of the members shall be called alphabetically.
E. When a motion shall have been made and seconded, it shall be reduced
to writing, if desired by the presiding officer or any member, and then
read by the Secretary before being debated.
F. No member shall leave his seat during the session without the consent
of the presiding officer, nor shall any member engage in conversation
with another member during the transaction of business.
G. When a question has been voted upon and decided, it shall be in order
for any two members of the majority, or, when Council has been divided
equally, for any two members upon either side of the question, to move
for a reconsideration of the question, but such reconsideration shall not
be in order unless moved at the same or the next regular meeting of the
Council.
H. The rules of parliamentary procedure comprised in Robert's Rules of
Order shall govern the meetings of the Borough Council in all situations
in which such rules are applicable and in which they are not
inconsistent with the law or anything in these bylaws.
§ 15-9 AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL § 15-11
10:15
the purpose. Provided, no such change shall be effective until the following
regular meeting of the Council. Provided further, no rule shall be suspended
except with the consent of 2/3 of the members present.
§ 15-11 CATASAUQUA CODE § 15-11
10:16
ARTICLE II
Use of Conference Calls for Participation and Voting at Meetings
[Adopted 7-8-2013 by Res. No. 12-13]
§ 15-12. Conditions for use of conference calls.
The Borough Council hereby authorizes the use of a telecommunication
conference call for attendance of Council members at a public meeting
under the following conditions:
§ 15-13. Quorum.
At the start of each regular or special meeting, a Councilperson who is
present by telecommunication device, as set forth in § 15-12 above, shall
not count towards the establishment of a quorum. If a quorum of members
is physically present at the beginning of the meeting and is thereafter lost
for whatever reason, the person participating by telecommunication device
shall thereafter count in determination of a quorum.
§ 15-14. Acceptable reasons for physical absence.
Council hereby authorizes participation by telecommunication devices for
one or more of the following reasons for physical absence:
A. The absent Councilperson (or Councilpersons) must be able to speak
and hear comments and votes of members of Council who are physically
present or also using a telecommunication device;
B. The absent Councilperson (or Councilpersons) must be able to hear
public comments;
C. The absent Councilperson (or Councilpersons) must be able to hear the
comments and votes of Council members who are not physically present
at the meeting;
D. The telecommunication device must allow the transmission and receipt
of sound just as though the absent Councilperson were present at the
meeting; and
E. The absent Councilperson (or Councilpersons) during an executive
session must follow all rules and regulations that would apply if such
person (or persons) were physically present at the meeting. (The absent
Councilperson must assure that the executive session is private and not
overheard by third parties.)
A. Illness or disability of the member of Council;
B. Care of or the birth of a newborn in the member's immediate family;
C. Emergency; and
D. Family or business travel.
§ 15-12 AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL § 15-14
10:17
Chapter 20
BUILDING, MUNICIPAL
§ 15-14 CATASAUQUA CODE § 15-14
10:18
ARTICLE I
Smoking
[Adopted 11-3-2003 by Ord. No. 1160]
§ 20-1. Smoking prohibited.
There shall be no smoking allowed in any portion of the Catasauqua
Municipal Complex. This prohibition shall include all offices, squad rooms,
utility rooms, meeting rooms, halls, and lobbies.
§ 20-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord. No.
1288]
Any person violating this article upon conviction of the same shall be subject
to a fine of up to $1,000 or imprisonment of up to 90 days. Any person found
guilty of violating an ordinance shall be assessed court costs and reasonable
attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings.
§ 20-1 AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL § 20-2
10:19
Chapter 30
CIVIL SERVICE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 65.
§ 20-2 CATASAUQUA CODE § 20-2
30:20
ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 30-1. Definitions and word usage.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases,
wherever used in these rules and regulations, shall be construed to have the
meaning indicated herein:
APPLICANT — Any individual who applies in writing to the Commission in
response to a legally advertised notice of vacancy and/or examination for
any position in the Police Department.
APPOINTING AUTHORITY — The Borough Council of the Borough of
Catasauqua, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The Borough Council of the Borough of
Catasauqua, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH MANAGER — The Manager/Secretary of the Borough of
Catasauqua.
CERTIFICATION — The submission to the appointing authority pursuant to
their request of three names taken from the eligible list developed by the
Civil Service Commission.
CHAIRPERSON — The Chairperson of the Civil Service Commission of the
Borough of Catasauqua, Pennsylvania.
COMMISSION — The Civil Service Commission of the Borough of
Catasauqua, Pennsylvania.
ELIGIBLE — A person whose name is recorded on a current eligible list or
furlough list.
ELIGIBLE LIST — The list of names of persons who have passed all
examinations for a particular position in the Police Department.
EXAMINATION — The series of tests given to candidates to determine their
qualifications for a position in the Police Department.
FURLOUGH LIST — The list containing the names of persons temporarily
laid off from positions in the Police Department because of a reduction
in the number of officers. However, if the furloughed employee does not
express his intent in writing to remain on the list, his name will be removed
after two years.
MUNICIPAL POLICE DEPARTMENT — Any municipal or governmental body
police department from any state which has a selection process for its police
officers equivalent to or similar to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania's
Civil Service Statute contained in the Borough Code. A municipal police
department shall not include school police, private police, part-time police,
college or university police or any other police department which does not
specifically meet the aforesaid definition of a municipal police department
(including police departments which do not have three or more officers and
thus do not have a civil service requirement).
§ 30-1 CIVIL SERVICE § 30-1
30:21
POLICE OFFICER — For purposes of these rules and regulations, an entry
level sworn full-time position in a police department.
PROBATIONER — An officer in the Police Department who has been
appointed from an eligible list but who has not yet completed the (work-test
period) probationary period.
REDUCTION IN RANK — A change to a lower rank where the employee
has fulfilled all of the requirements of these rules and regulations for his
appointment to both his prior and current rank. However, a decrease in
salary with a change to a different position (not a rank) shall not constitute
a reduction in rank.
REMOVAL — The permanent separation of a police officer from the Police
Department.
SECRETARY — The Secretary of the Civil Service Commission of the
Borough of Catasauqua, Pennsylvania.
STATE POLICE — Any police department of any state with general law
enforcement powers over the state as a whole.
SUSPENSION — The temporary separation without pay of a police officer
from the Police Department.
VICE CHAIRPERSON — The person who shall serve in the absence of the
Chairperson of the Civil Service Commission of the Borough of Catasauqua,
Pennsylvania.
§ 30-2. Gender.
The words "he," "his," "him" and "men," when used in these rules and
regulations, represent both the masculine and feminine genders.
§ 30-1 CATASAUQUA CODE § 30-2
30:22
ARTICLE II
Civil Service Commission.
§ 30-3. Establishment; vacancies; oath.
§ 30-4. Incompatible offices.
No Commissioner shall at the same time hold an elective or appointed office
under the United States government, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
or any political subdivision of the commonwealth, including the Borough of
Catasauqua, except that one member of the Commission may be a member
of the teaching profession.
§ 30-5. Organization; quorum.
The Commission first appointed shall organize within ten days of its
appointment and shall elect one of its members as its Chairperson, one as
Vice Chairperson and one as the Secretary. The Commission shall thereafter
meet and organize on the first Monday of February of each even-numbered
year. Two members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, and no
action of the Commission shall be valid unless it shall have the concurrence
of at least two members.
§ 30-6. Duties of Chairperson/Vice Chairperson.
The Chairperson, or in his absence the Vice Chairperson, shall preside at
all meetings and hearings of the Commission, decide all points of order
or procedure and perform any duties required by law or these rules and
regulations.
§ 30-7. Duties of Secretary.
The Secretary shall carry on at the direction of the Commission all official
correspondence of the Commission, send out all notices required by law
and these rules and regulations, keep a record of each examination or other
A. The Commission shall consist of three Commissioners who shall be
qualified electors of the Borough of Catasauqua. Pursuant to the
Borough Code, the Commissioners were originally appointed by the
Borough Council to serve for the terms of two, four and six years, and as
terms expire, Commissioners shall be appointed for terms of six years.
B. Any vacancy occurring on the Commission for any reason whatsoever
shall be filled by the Borough Council for the unexpired term within the
period of 30 days after such vacancy occurs.
C. Members of the Commission, before entering upon the discharge of the
duties of their office, shall take an oath or affirmation to support the
Constitution of the United States and of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and to perform their official duties with fidelity. No Civil
Service Commissioner shall receive compensation.
§ 30-3 CIVIL SERVICE § 30-7
30:23
official action of the Commission and perform all other duties required by
law or these rules and regulations. If the Secretary is unavailable, or if, in
the sole discretion of the Chairperson, the Chairperson determines that it
is appropriate to expedite the business of the Commission, the Chairperson
may assume the ministerial duties of the Secretary.
§ 30-8. Commission meetings.
Except for the biennial organizational meeting, all other meetings shall be
held either at the call of the Chairperson or at the call of two members of the
Commission. All meetings shall be open to the public except as provided by
applicable law. At least 48 hours' written notice of each public meeting shall
be given to each member. Meeting notices to the public shall conform to law
and these rules and regulations. The order of business of all Commission
meetings shall include but not be limited to:
§ 30-9. Clerks and supplies.
Borough Council shall furnish the Commission with supplies and clerical
assistance as may be necessary for the Commission to fulfill its duties.
In addition, the Commission shall select and retain counsel to serve as
its Solicitor and any other consultants or experts, including physicians
and psychiatrists/psychologists, as necessary. The elected and appointed
officials of the Borough shall assist the Commission with all reasonable and
appropriate expenses, including payment of reasonable compensation for
any counsel or experts retained by the Commission.
§ 30-10. Minutes and records.
A. Roll call.
B. Approval of minutes of previous meetings.
C. Public input.
D. Unfinished business.
E. Hearing of cases.
F. New business.
G. Communications and reports.
A. The Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings and records of
examinations and other official action. All records of the Commission
shall be preserved and disposed of according to the Retention and
Disposition Schedule for Records of Pennsylvania Municipalities issued
by the Local Government Records Committee under the authority of the
Municipal Records Act, 1968, P.L. 961, No. 428, 53 P.S. § 9001.
B. Any and all records related to disciplinary action filed with the
Commission shall only be open to public inspection upon completion of
the disciplinary proceeding and a finding that at least one of the
§ 30-7 CATASAUQUA CODE § 30-10
30:24
§ 30-11. Investigations.
The Commission shall have the power to initiate and conduct investigations
concerning all matters relating to the administration and enforcement of
these rules and regulations. The Chairperson of the Commission is
authorized to administer oaths and affirmations in connection with such
investigations.
§ 30-12. Subpoenas.
§ 30-13. Annual report.
The Commission shall make an annual report to the Borough Council
containing a brief summary of its work during the year and a full accounting
for any expenditures of public monies. The annual report shall be available
charges was sustained. Upon request of the police officer during the
pendency of a disciplinary action, these records shall be open to public
inspection subject to reasonable regulation. The Secretary shall keep
minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each
question. If the member is absent or fails to vote, the Secretary shall
indicate that fact in the minutes.
A. The Commission shall have the power to issue subpoenas over the
signature of the Chairperson, to require the attendance of witnesses
and production of records and papers pertaining to any investigation or
inquiry. The fees of such witnesses for attendance and travel shall be
the same as for witnesses appearing in the courts and shall be paid
from appropriations for the incidental expenses of the Commission.
B. All officers in public service and employees shall attend and testify
when required to do so by the Commission.
C. If any person shall refuse or neglect to obey any subpoena issued by the
Commission, upon conviction of such refusal or neglect in a summary
proceeding, that person shall be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed
$100, and in default of the payment of such fine and cost, shall be
imprisoned for a period not to exceed 30 days.
D. If any person shall refuse or neglect to obey any subpoena issued by the
Commission, the Commission may apply by petition to the Court of
Common Pleas of Lehigh County for its subpoena, requiring the
attendance of such person before the Commission or the Court to testify
and to produce any records or papers necessary, and in default thereof
to be held in contempt of court.
E. The Commission shall have the power to make investigations
concerning all matters pertaining to any investigation, inquiry or
hearing. The Chairperson is authorized to administer oaths and
affirmations in connection with such investigations.
§ 30-10 CIVIL SERVICE § 30-13
30:25
for public inspection. The report shall be filed on or before April 1 of the
following year.
§ 30-13 CATASAUQUA CODE § 30-13
30:26
ARTICLE III
Applications and Qualifications for Initial Employment
§ 30-14. Announcement of application period and examinations.
§ 30-15. Eligibility for examination.
In order to be eligible for participation in any examination for any position
with the Police Department, every applicant must submit a completed
application form to the Commission (and meet all other applicable eligibility
requirements) before the deadline stated by the Commission for that
specific examination. The applicant must make an oath or affirmation that
the application is completed truthfully, and the applicant is subject to
the penalties of 18 Pa.C.S. § 4904 relating to unsworn falsification to
authorities. The Commission shall establish the application form to be used.
Said application form shall be submitted to Borough Council prior to its
use and adoption for comment. The Borough shall establish the amount
of a nonrefundable application/processing fee which must be paid at the
time of submission of the application.5 The official application form and all
notations, references and statements appearing in it are incorporated by
reference into these rules and regulations and shall be as much a part of
these rules as if they were fully described herein.
§ 30-16. Discrimination.
A. Whenever the need for a new police officer eligibility list occurs, the
Commission shall make public notice of the police officer examination
application period at least 30 days prior to the date of commencement
of the examination process. This notice shall be given by publication in
a minimum of one newspaper of general circulation in the Borough, and
a copy of the notice shall be posted on the bulletin board in the Borough
offices. Additional public notice may be given at any time at the
discretion of the Commission. The public notice shall contain, at a
minimum, the following information:
(1) Title and general requirements of the position to be filled.
(2) Deadline for the acceptance of applications.
(3) Date, time and place for the commencement of the examination
process.
B. The public notice may further include a statement of the residence
requirements, starting salary and benefits, education requirements,
application processing fee and/or any other pertinent information as
deemed appropriate by the Commission.
A. The Borough of Catasauqua is an equal opportunity employer. It is the
Borough's and the Commission's policy to grant equal employment
5. Editor's Note: See Ch. A285, Fees.
§ 30-14 CIVIL SERVICE § 30-16
30:27
§ 30-17. Application availability.
Application forms shall be available to all interested persons in the office
of the Borough Manager and from such other offices and officers that
the Commission, from time to time, may choose to designate. Application
forms may be mailed upon written or telephone request. However, the
Commission assumes no responsibility for missed filing deadlines due to a
delay in the receipt of the application.
§ 30-18. Application period.
The application period shall be no less than 14 calendar days in length.
§ 30-19. Filing of applications.
Completed applications for police officer positions may be received at any
time during normal business hours in the office of the Borough Manager
and by such other offices and officers as the Commission may designate.
The receipt of such applications shall be subject to the following conditions:
§ 30-20. Recording of applications.
The Commission shall review each application as soon as practical after
filing for the purpose of determining that such application is complete and
contains no omissions. Any application which is incomplete is invalid and
may, at the discretion of the Commission, be returned to the applicant for
completion and refiling prior to the filing deadline. The Secretary or other
designated officer shall date, number and record in the order of receipt all
opportunities to qualified persons without regard to race, religion,
color, national origin, gender, age, marital status or non-job-related
physical or mental handicap or disability. The Borough and the
Commission will provide equal opportunities in employment and
promotion.
B. Further, no discrimination shall be exercised against any disabled
person capable of performing normal customary police functions,
except to the extent permitted pursuant to the Americans with
Disabilities Act and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.
A. Applications must be received on or before 4:30 p.m. of the day set by
the Commission as the close of the application period.
B. At the time of filing, all applications must be accompanied by the
nonrefundable processing fee paid in cash or by personal check. A
receipt will be given for any fee paid. No application will be accepted
for filing without payment of the appropriate fee.
C. An application becomes invalid one year after the deadline per
Subsection A above or when an eligibility list is certified for that
position.
§ 30-16 CATASAUQUA CODE § 30-20
30:28
completed applications which, once recorded, become Commission records
and shall not be returned to the applicants.
§ 30-21. Willful prior false application.
No person who has made any willful false application in the past to any
police department shall be permitted to make an application or future
application for any position in the Police Department.
§ 30-22. Age requirement.
All applicants must have reached their 21st birthday before the deadline for
submitting completed applications.
§ 30-23. General qualifications for police officer applicants.
All applicants for police officer must meet the following qualifications:
A. Shall be a citizen of the United States.
B. Must have reached his or her 21st birthday before the deadline for
submitting completed applications.
C. Must possess a valid motor vehicle operator's license from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
D. Shall be physically, medically and psychologically fit to perform the
essential job functions of a police officer as further defined § 30-24.
E. Must have acquired, before the deadline for submitting completed
applications, at least one of the following:
(1) A diploma from an accredited high school or graduate equivalency
diploma and be certified under Pennsylvania Act 120.
(2) Have obtained a bachelor's degree from an accredited college or
university.
(3) Have obtained an associates' degree from an accredited college or
university in criminal justice/law enforcement or a related police
field.
(4) Must be in the last semester of obtaining his or her college degree
or associates' degree in law enforcement and certify that he or she
will have obtained that degree by the time the civil service testing
is complete ("complete" to be defined as the time after completion
of the written test, oral test, physical agility test and background
examination). Further, if an applicant is allowed to proceed under
this provision, if they have not obtained a degree at the time the
civil service testing is complete, his or her name shall be
automatically removed from the testing process and he or she shall
be considered ineligible.
§ 30-20 CIVIL SERVICE § 30-23
30:29
§ 30-24. Essential job functions of a police officer.
Each of the following are essential functions of a police officer's job:
(5) A high school diploma or graduate equivalency diploma and have
served successfully as a full-time police officer for two continuous
years with a state police force (or its equivalent, such as highway
patrol) or as a police officer in a municipal police department.
F. Shall speak, read and write the English language.
G. Must be of good moral character.
H. Must reside in the Borough or within 10 miles of the geographic limits
of the Borough. This requirement must be satisfied within two years
following the date on which the oath of office as a police officer of the
Catasauqua Police Department is signed.
A. Running for several hundred yards;
B. Climbing over obstacles;
C. Crawling;
D. Pushing motor vehicles;
E. Pulling or carrying accident, fire or crime victims;
F. Using physical force to apprehend and subdue arrestees;
G. Withstanding prolonged exposure (as long as eight hours) to extreme
weather conditions;
H. Withstanding prolonged periods of standing and sitting;
I. Withstanding frequent exposure to stress-producing situations, such as
encountering persons injured or killed by accidents, crimes or suicide;
J. Dealing with domestic disputes;
K. Dealing with verbal and physical abuse of the police officer, including
taunts, insults and threats to the police officer, family members or
fellow police officers;
L. Communicating effectively with individuals suffering from trauma;
M. Operating a motor vehicle for long periods of time;
N. Using a firearm effectively;
O. Filling out written reports in a clear and concise manner;
P. Hearing;
Q. Walking;
§ 30-23 CATASAUQUA CODE § 30-24
30:30
§ 30-25. Rejection of applicant.
R. Using hands to finger, handle or operate objects, controls or tools such
as a police car, police radio, VASCAR unit, telephone, handgun and
other weapons, handcuffs, breathalyzer, pager, first aid equipment and
a personal computer, including word processing software;
S. Reaching with hands and arms;
T. Balancing;
U. Smelling;
V. Stooping and kneeling;
W. Seeing, including close vision, distance vision, color vision, peripheral
vision, depth perception and the ability to adjust focus;
X. Working in an environment with a noise level that is generally
moderate, although occasionally louder;
Y. Working near moving mechanical parts;
Z. Working in high, precarious places;
AA. Working with explosives;
BB. Withstanding exposure to wet and/or humid conditions, extreme heat or
extreme cold; and
CC. Withstanding short-term exposure to fumes, airborne particles, toxic or
caustic chemicals and/or vibration.
A. The Commission may refuse to examine, or, if examined, may refuse to
certify as eligible after examination, any applicant who is found to lack
any of the minimum qualifications for examination prescribed in these
rules and regulations for the particular position for which the applicant
has applied. In addition, the Commission may refuse to examine, or, if
examined, may refuse to certify, any applicant who is physically or
mentally unfit to perform the full duties of the position applied for, or
who is a habitual substance abuser, who is guilty of any crime involving
moral turpitude, or of infamous or notoriously disgraceful conduct, or
who has been dismissed from public service for delinquency or
misconduct in office, or who is affiliated with any group whose policies
or activities are subversive to the forms of government set forth in the
Constitutions and laws of the United States and the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
B. The Commission shall refuse to certify as eligible any applicant who
fails to accurately and truthfully disclose all facts and information
requested of the applicant in the application, psychological testing,
physical examination or interviews conducted pursuant to the
background examination. If an applicant fails to appear for any
§ 30-24 CIVIL SERVICE § 30-25
30:31
§ 30-26. Hearing for disqualified applicants.
Any applicants or other persons who believe that they are aggrieved by the
actions of the Commission, including but not limited to refusing to examine
or to certify them as eligible after examination, may request a hearing
before the Commission. Within 10 days after such request, the Commission
shall designate a time and place for the hearing, which shall be conducted
pursuant to the procedures set forth in the Local Agency Law, 2 Pa.C.S.
§ 101 et seq. The applicant or aggrieved party must make his request for a
hearing in writing within 10 calendar days of the date when the party knew
or should have known of the Commission's action which is being challenged.
§ 30-27. Continuing duties of applicants and/or persons on
eligibility list.
All applicants or persons on the eligibility list shall have a continuing duty
to apprise the Commission/Borough of the applicant's or eligible person's
current address and telephone number. All notices will be deemed received
by the applicant or eligible person if sent to the current address of that
applicant or eligible person on file with the Commission by regular, firstclass
mail.
scheduled examination or interview, that applicant shall immediately
be removed as an eligible applicant. If an applicant's credit history is
unsatisfactory so as to possibly affect police work, this may disqualify
the applicant.
C. If, at any time, an applicant desires to be removed from further
consideration for inclusion in the eligibility list, the applicant shall
submit that request to the Commission. After receipt of the same, the
Commission shall remove that person's name from further
consideration as an applicant. The Commission shall notify that person
in writing of the same.
§ 30-25 CATASAUQUA CODE § 30-27
30:32
ARTICLE IV
Examination and Grading Procedure
§ 30-28. Notice of examination.
In addition to the public notice of § 30-14, the Commission shall give written
notice of each examination to each qualified applicant. The notice shall be
mailed or otherwise delivered to each applicant at least 10 days prior to the
date of the examination. The notice shall specify the date, time, duration
and place of the examination and explain the following:
§ 30-29. General examination requirements.
The examination for police officer will consist of a written and an oral
examination which will be graded on a one-hundred-point scale with the
written examination representing 50% of the final score and the oral
examination representing 50% of the final score. In addition, each applicant
will undergo a physical fitness test and a background investigation. The
fitness test and background investigation will be graded on a pass/fail
basis for every applicant. After an applicant has been extended an offer
of employment, final appointment shall be contingent upon the applicant
passing both a physical and psychological examination.
§ 30-30. Appointment of examiners.
The Commission shall appoint a written examination administrator, an oral
examination administrator, a physical fitness examiner, a physician
examiner and a psychological examiner to conduct the appropriate
examination required by these rules and regulations.
§ 30-31. Written examinations.
The written examination shall be graded on a one-hundred-point scale.
To pass the written examination, a person must score 70% or greater on
the examination and have a score which places that person in the top
35 applicants taking the test. Applicants scoring less than 70% shall be
rejected. In the event that a tie score occurs with people scoring above
70% or higher, then all applicants with that score will be considered as
passing as long as it would have put any one of the applicants with a tie
score in the top 35 scores of the applicants on the test. Within 30 days
of the administration of the written examination, all applicants shall be
given notice as to whether they have passed the written examination. Those
A. Only applicants receiving notices to report for any examination shall be
permitted to participate in such examination, and each applicant shall
present his/her notice and a photo I.D. motor vehicle operator's license
to the examiner before being examined.
B. Any person who fails to report for the examination in accordance with
the instructions contained in the notice shall be disqualified.
§ 30-28 CIVIL SERVICE § 30-31
30:33
candidates who have passed the above written examination will be eligible
to continue with the testing.
§ 30-32. Oral examination.
The oral examination shall be graded on a one-hundred-point scale with a
score of 70% or higher necessary for passing. The oral examination shall
involve questioning applicants on how they would handle situations relevant
to police work, their character and reasoning abilities. Within 30 days after
the oral examination, applicants whose scores are passing shall be informed
of their numerical scores on the oral examination as well as their numerical
score on the written examination. If their scores on the oral examination
are not passing they shall be informed of the same without the necessity of
providing a numerical score. Each applicant who has passed the written and
oral exams shall be informed of the date for physical fitness testing.
§ 30-33. Veterans preference points.
Pursuant to the Veterans Preference Act, any applicant for the position
of patrol officer who qualifies as a "soldier" under the Act shall receive
an additional 10 points on top of his total score if the applicant received
passing scores under §§ 30-31 and 30-32. Any applicant requesting veterans
preference points must furnish sufficient proof of both service and
honorable discharge in accordance with instructions from the Commission
in order to be eligible to receive the veterans' preference points.
§ 30-34. Physical fitness testing.
A. The Civil Service Commission shall administer a physical fitness test to
all applicants for the position of police officer, and the applicants must
meet and be able to successfully accomplish all of the following items:
(1) Stretcher carry. Applicants will be paired off and required to carry
a stretcher with a simulated patient weighing approximately 200
pounds over a distance of 100 feet. Those applicants failing on the
first attempt will be allowed to retake the exercise with a person
who has successfully completed the exercise.
(2) Body drag. An applicant is required to remove a simulated motor
vehicle operator weighing approximately 200 pounds from behind
the steering wheel of a motor vehicle and drag the simulated
operator to a point 50 feet from the motor vehicle.
(3) Quarter mile run. An applicant is required to run a distance of one
quarter mile on a premeasured course in less than 110 seconds.
(4) Window climb. An applicant is required to climb through a six-foothigh
level window without assistance onto a three-foot level
platform on the other side of the window and then to the ground.
Applicants must then circle around a marker twenty feet beyond
§ 30-31 CATASAUQUA CODE § 30-34
30:34
§ 30-35. Background investigation.
the window and return up the three-foot high platform and out the
window onto the ground below.
(5) Thirty-second trigger pull. Within a thirty-second time limit per
hand, an applicant is required to repeatedly pull fifteen times for
each hand the trigger of a double action nonfunctional revolver
with arms horizontally extended.
B. The Civil Service Commission, at its discretion, may elect to administer
the physical fitness test before proceeding with the written examination
under § 30-31 and the oral examination under § 30-32.
A. The Commission shall request the Chief of Police or the Chief's
designee to conduct a background investigation on each applicant who
has passed the written examination, oral examination and physical
fitness test. The background investigation shall include, whenever
reasonable or practicable, interviews with the applicant's family,
acquaintances, current and former employers, current and former
neighbors, references and current and former teachers and school
officials. In addition, the applicant's credit history and record of
criminal convictions shall be investigated. The applicant may be
interviewed directly when the information collected during the
background investigation requires clarification or explanation.
B. After the background investigation is completed, the Chief, or his
designee, shall make a written recommendation to the Commission on
whether the applicant is appropriate for consideration for appointment
as a police officer.
C. Evaluation of the applicant shall be based on the criteria set forth in
§ 30-23 of these rules and regulations. This recommendation shall be in
writing, and if the recommendation is to disqualify, then a detailed
written explanation of the reasons for disqualification must be included.
The Commission shall make the final determination on whether the
information collected during the background investigation warrants
rejection of the candidate.
D. Within 30 days after the Commission considers the recommendation of
the Chief of Police or his designee, each applicant will be informed of
whether he has passed the background investigation.
E. The Chief of Police or the Chief's designee shall report the results of the
background examiner to the Commission either as a whole or in
segments of 10 at the election of the Commission. If the Commission
requests segmented background investigations, the Chief shall begin
his background investigations on the applicants with the top 10 scores
(including, where applicable, veteran's preference points). The Chief
will then proceed sequentially with the next group of 10 applicants
having the next highest scores until all successful applicants have
§ 30-34 CIVIL SERVICE § 30-35
30:35
received a background investigation and the result of the same have
been reported to the Commission.
§ 30-35 CATASAUQUA CODE § 30-35
30:36
ARTICLE V
Certification of Eligibles and Appointment
§ 30-36. Creation of eligibility list.
§ 30-37. Removal from eligibility list.
A. At the completion of the examination requirements set forth in Article
IV, written examination, oral examination, background investigation
and physical fitness test, the Commission shall rank all passing
applicants on a list with the applicant receiving the highest score at the
top of the list and the applicant receiving the lowest passing score at
the bottom of the list. Applicants who qualify for veterans preference
points shall have those points added to their passing score prior to
being ranked on the eligibility list. In the case of tied scores, the tie will
be broken by giving preference to the applicant who submitted a final
completed application first. If both tied applicants submitted their
completed applications on the same day, then the applicants shall be
ranked by the drawing of lots.
B. At the election of the Commission, the eligibility list may be approved in
segments of 10 based upon the receipt of the results of the background
investigation as set forth in § 30-35. If segmented, the eligibility list
shall initially consist of 10 applicants and the same shall be valid
immediately without awaiting results from the background
investigations of the lower scoring applicants. The Commission shall
add to the eligible list further names upon receipt and review of the
results of the subsequent background investigations on the remaining
successful applicants.
C. The eligibility list shall be valid for two years from the date the
Commission approves the whole list or, if segmented, from the date of
approval of the first group of applicants. The Commission may, at its
sole discretion, by a vote of the majority of the Commission at a duly
authorized Commission meeting, extend the list for an additional year.
The Commission may, at its sole discretion, void an eligibility list at any
time for any reason.
A. If a person on the eligibility list fails to respond to a notice sent to that
party's current address on file with the Commission or fails to appear
for any scheduled testing or interviews, that party's name shall be
removed from the eligibility list upon action of the Commission.
B. If a person no longer desires to remain on the eligibility list, that person
shall notify the Commission of the same and the Commission shall
remove that person's name from the list.
C. In the event of either Subsection A or B above, after the Commission
takes action to remove the person's name from the eligibility list, it shall
notify the person in writing of that person's removal from the list.
§ 30-36 CIVIL SERVICE § 30-37
30:37
§ 30-38. Appointment.
D. The name of a person appearing on the eligibility list shall be removed
by the Commission if that person is appointed to a position in the Police
Department.
E. The name of a person appearing on the eligibility list shall be removed
by the Commission if that person declines an appointment to a
permanent position in the Police Department.
F. The name of a person appearing on the eligibility list shall be removed
by the Commission if that person indicated availability for appointment
and is so appointed but fails to report for duty at the time prescribed,
unless, in the opinion of Borough Council, such person can show good
and sufficient reason for failing to report.
G. The Commission may, at its own discretion, remove from the eligibility
list the name of any person certified for appointment consideration
three times but not appointed.
A. Borough Council may fill any vacancy in an existing position in the
Police Department which occurs as a result of expansion of the police
force, retirement, resignation, disability or death by the reappointment
or reinstatement of a former employee of the Police Department who
had been furloughed. Except for physical and psychological
examinations, no other testing shall be required for a furloughed
employee or a rehired or reappointed employee.
B. If no furlough list exists or if positions remain to be filled after all of the
officers on the furlough list were offered reemployment, every position,
except that of Chief of Police, shall be filled only in the following
manner:
(1) Borough Council shall notify the Commission of any vacancy which
is to be filled and shall request the certification of three names from
the list of eligibles;
(2) If three names are not available, then the Commission shall certify
the names(s) remaining on the list;
(3) Borough Council shall make an appointment from one of the three
names certified with reference to the merits and fitness of the
candidates. However, when one of the three applicants on the
certified list is a veteran, that applicant shall be selected.
C. Borough Council may object to one or more of the persons certified for
the reasons set forth in § 30-25 of these rules and regulations. If the
candidate to whom Borough Council objects fails to timely exercise the
rights of appeal under § 30-26 or if the Commission declines to uphold
the appeal, the Commission shall strike the name of that candidate from
the eligibility list and certify the next highest name for inclusion on the
list of three candidates for each name stricken off.
§ 30-37 CATASAUQUA CODE § 30-39
30:38
§ 30-39. Physical and psychological examinations.
After Borough Council selects a candidate from the certified list of three for
appointment to the vacant position, the candidate shall submit to a physical
examination and a psychological examination by appropriate experts
appointed by the Commission. The psychological examination shall include
the administration of the MMPI or MMPI-2 by the examiner. If the candidate
successfully passes the physical and psychological examinations, then that
employee may be appointed to the vacant position in the Police Department
for which the application was submitted. The appointment shall be
contingent upon successfully passing both the physical and psychological
examinations. Failure to pass either examination shall result in the
candidate being rejected from consideration. The applicant's name will also
be removed from the eligibility list. The rejected candidate may appeal this
decision under § 30-26. The Commission shall then certify another name to
be included with the two previously certified names for consideration by
Borough Council pursuant to § 30-38.
§ 30-39 CIVIL SERVICE § 30-39
30:39

ARTICLE VI
Furloughs
§ 30-40. Furlough lists.
Whenever Borough Council shall deem it necessary to make personnel
reductions in the police force, the Commission shall prepare and maintain
a list containing the name, rank and length of full-time service of each
furloughed officer. Names on the furlough list shall be arranged in priority
order based on the length of service of each furloughed officer.
§ 30-41. Removal of names from furlough lists.
A. In addition to other reasons stated as grounds for removal in these rules
and regulations, the name of a person appearing on a furlough list shall
be removed by the Commission if that person:
(1) Is appointed to a position in the Police Department; or
(2) Declines an appointment to a permanent position in the Police
Department; or
(3) Indicated availability for appointment and is so appointed but fails
to report for duty at the time prescribed, unless, in the opinion of
Borough Council, such person can show good and sufficient reason
for failing to report.
B. The Commission may, at its own discretion, remove from a furlough list
the name of any person certified for appointment consideration three
times as the top name, but not appointed.
C. Nothing in this section, however, shall be construed as authorizing the
removal of the name of a person from a furlough list who refuses to
accept a position of lower rank than that from which furloughed.
§ 30-40 CIVIL SERVICE § 30-41
30:41

ARTICLE VII
Promotions; General Information and Qualifications
§ 30-42. Promotion policy.
Promotions in the Police Department shall be based on the needs of the
Police Department and the Borough. A rank shall be filled only when, in the
opinion of the Borough Council, the Police Department and the Borough will
benefit from such action. All ranks specified in the Police Ordinance6 need
not be populated.
§ 30-43. Promotion eligibility lists.
The Commission shall create eligible lists for the positions of Sergeant,
Lieutenant and Captain when requested by Borough Council. A promotional
eligibility list certified by the Commission shall remain in effect for a period
of two years from the date of its certification unless voided earlier by the
Commission. The Commission may remove the name of any candidate from
the promotional eligibility list who is subsequently determined to have been
actually ineligible according to these rules and regulations.
§ 30-44. General qualifications.
Any applicant for promotion to the rank of Sergeant, Detective/Special
Investigator, Lieutenant or Captain shall be a current full-time member of
the Police Department with at least three years, continuous full-time service
in order to be eligible for the rank of Sergeant, five years for Detective/
Special Investigator, seven years for Lieutenant and nine years for Captain.
Additionally, the applicant must have served a minimum of two years in his/
her current rank or position. Each applicant shall also meet the following
qualifications:
A. He/she shall have demonstrated an ability to carry out orders from
superiors as documented by immediate supervisors and the Chief of
Police in written evaluations.
B. He/she shall have demonstrated a working knowledge of police science
and administration.
C. He/she shall demonstrate leadership ability to deliver and supervise the
work of subordinates.
D. He/she shall have received at least a grade of "satisfactory" on his/her
latest service rating; provided that an evaluation of the experience,
training, general background and such other records of performance of
the applicant, at the discretion of the Commission, may be substituted
for the service rating.
6. Editor's Note: See Ch. 65, Police Department.
§ 30-42 CIVIL SERVICE § 30-45
30:43
§ 30-45. Notification of vacancy.
When a rank within the Police Department is to be filled by promotion,
Borough Council shall submit a written request to the Commission for
certification of a list of eligibles for the vacant rank. If a current eligible
list for the rank to be filled does not exist, the Commission shall direct the
Borough Manager to post a notice of the opening on the bulletin board in
Police Headquarters. This notice shall be posted at least three weeks prior
to the date set for the written promotion examination and shall contain the
following information:
A. The rank to be filled and its qualification requirements.
B. The place, date and time of the written examination.
C. A statement specifying that all qualified officers interested in applying
for the opening must file a letter of intent with the Secretary or
Borough Manager.
D. The deadline for accepting letters of intent, such deadline being at least
14 days after the date of the notice.
§ 30-45 CATASAUQUA CODE § 30-45
30:44
ARTICLE VIII
Application for Promotion
§ 30-46. Letter of intent.
Each person interested in applying for promotion shall file a signed letter
of intent with the Secretary or Borough Manager. Letters of intention may
be received at any time during normal business hours in the office of the
Borough Manager. The receipt of such letter of intention shall be subject to
the following conditions:
§ 30-47. Investigation of applicants.
An investigation of the character and reputation of the applicant may be
made by the Commission or its designee.
§ 30-48. Rejection of applicant.
The Commission may refuse to examine for promotion any applicant who:
§ 30-49. Hearing for disqualified applicant.
Any applicant who believes he/she is aggrieved by the action of the
Commission in refusing to examine or to certify him/her as eligible after
examination may request a hearing before the Commission. The applicant
must make the written request within 10 calendar days of the date of
the written notice of such action. The Commission shall, within 10 days
following receipt of such written request, designate a time and place for
the hearing where the applicant may appear in person and be represented
by counsel. The hearing shall be conducted pursuant to the procedure set
forth in the Local Agency Law, 2 Pa. Cons. Stat. § 101 et seq., whereupon
the Commission shall review its refusal to make such examination or
certification, shall take such testimony as may be offered and render a
written decision. The decision of the Commission shall be final; however, the
applicant has the right of appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Lehigh
County by filing such appeal within 30 days from the date of notice of entry
by the Commission of its final decision.
A. The letter shall be received on or before 4:30 p.m. of the deadline date
set by the Commission.
B. Letters of intent shall become invalid for testing purposes when a
current promotional eligibility list is certified for that position.
A. Does not possess the qualifications specified in § 30-44.
B. Is physically or mentally unfit to perform the full duties of the position
to which he/she seeks promotion.
§ 30-46 CIVIL SERVICE § 30-49
30:45

ARTICLE IX
Promotion Examinations
§ 30-50. Notice of examination.
The Commission shall give written notice of each promotion examination to
each qualified applicant. The notice shall be mailed or otherwise delivered
to each applicant at least 10 days prior to the date of the examination. The
notice shall specify the date, time, duration and place of the examination
and explain the following:
§ 30-51. Examination process.
Examination for promotion shall consist of a written examination, an oral
examination and an evaluation of the applicant's service rating and
performance, performed in that order. Questions in the written and oral
examinations shall be practical in nature and fairly test the merits,
experience and fitness of the applicant. The evaluation of the applicant's
service rating and performance may be made in conjunction with the Mayor
and Chief of Police.
§ 30-52. Grading of examinations and evaluation.
The written and oral examinations and the evaluation of the applicant's
service record and performance shall each be graded on a scale of 0% to
100%. The minimum passing scores for the written examination, the oral
examination and the evaluation of service record and performance shall
be 70% on each segment. Any applicant who fails to attain the minimum
passing score on any examination or evaluation shall be disqualified from
further consideration for promotion and his/her name shall not appear on
the eligible list. For those applicants who pass each examination and the
evaluation, a final overall score shall be determined by adding 45% of the
written examination score and 25% of the oral examination score to 30% of
the evaluation score.
§ 30-53. Notice of applicant's grade.
When the grading of each examination is completed, the Secretary shall
give each applicant written notice of his/her grade. Any applicant not
A. Only applicants receiving notices to report for examination shall be
permitted to participate in such examination, and each applicant shall
present his/her notice and photo I.D. motor vehicle operator's license to
the examiner before being examined.
B. Failure to report for an examination in accordance with the instructions
contained in the notice shall be a cause for disqualification, absent a
waiver of such requirement by the Commission upon good cause shown.
The decision of the Commission on any waiver request shall be final and
binding.
§ 30-50 CIVIL SERVICE § 30-53
30:47
receiving a passing grade on any examination is disqualified from
continuing in the selection process for the position for which he/she applied.
§ 30-54. Administration of examinations.
Administration of the written and oral examinations and the evaluations
of the service records and performance shall be the responsibility of the
Commission. The Commission, however, may designate qualified agencies
or individuals to conduct or assist in the written and oral examinations while
reserving the right to accept or reject for cause, in whole or in part, the
recommendations, evaluations and conclusions provided by such agencies
or individuals.
§ 30-55. Rules for conducting written examinations.
The Commission shall prepare a statement of instructions and rules for the
conduct of written examinations. The designated examiner shall administer
each examination in accordance with the instructions of the Commission
and be responsible for enforcing the rules of conduct for written
examinations.
§ 30-56. Breaking tie scores.
When two or more eligible applicants receive the same final overall score,
the order in which the names of such persons appear on the eligible
list shall be determined by their respective scores on that part of the
examination assigned the greatest weight. In the event a tie still exists, the
next lower weighted score shall be used. If a ties still exists, the final tiebreaker
shall be the lengths of service of each applicant.
§ 30-57. Eligible list.
When all examinations and evaluations have been completed and final
overall scores have been computed, the Commission shall prepare a
promotion eligible list.
§ 30-53 CATASAUQUA CODE § 30-57
30:48
ARTICLE X
Promotions; Certification of Eligibles and Appointments
§ 30-58. Certification of promotion.
Upon receipt of a request from Borough Council for certification of a list of
eligibles for promotion to the rank specified, the Commission shall certify
the names of the top three persons, or a lesser number if three are not
available, on the promotion eligible list for the rank to be filled.
§ 30-59. Promotional appointment.
When Borough Council receives the certified list of eligibles from the
Commission, it may elect to make an appointment from such list of eligibles,
unless it makes objections to the Commission as to the qualifications of
one or more of the candidates certified by the Commission. Should such
objections be sustained by the Commission, the Commission shall remove
the name of such person from the eligible list and certify the next highest
person on the list. After an appointment is made, the names of those persons
not appointed shall be returned to the eligible list unless removed for cause
as stated above.
§ 30-58 CIVIL SERVICE § 30-59
30:49

ARTICLE XI
Probation
§ 30-60. Probationary period.
Every successful applicant to the position of patrol officer or to a
promotional position within the Police Department shall serve a twelvemonth
probationary period commencing upon the swearing in of the officer.
For newly hired police officers, the one-year probationary period shall not
commence until after the officer has completed training under Act 120
and receives a certification number. During training and the probationary
period, a newly hired officer may only be dismissed for cause for the reasons
set forth in § 30-65. A promoted officer, during probation, may be returned
to a prior rank only for cause for the reasons set forth in § 30-65. The
Chief of Police shall report to Council at a minimum of every three months
during the probationary period of any new officer or new promotion on
the progress of that person in that position. However, at the end of the
twelve-month probationary period, if the conduct of the probationer has
not been satisfactory to the Borough of Catasauqua, the probationer shall
be notified in writing that the appointment will not be permanent. At that
time, a newly hired officer's employment shall end and a promoted officer
shall return to a previous rank. Any officer who is not informed in writing
that his performance has been unsatisfactory shall receive a permanent
appointment to the new position. Any probationer who is notified in writing
that appointment will not be made permanent has no rights of appeal under
these rules and regulations.
§ 30-60 CIVIL SERVICE § 30-60
30:51

ARTICLE XII
Provisional Appointments
§ 30-61. Provisional appointment to fill vacancy.
Whenever there are urgent reasons for the filling of a vacancy in any
position in the Police Department and there are no names on the eligible
list for such appointment, Borough Council may nominate a person to
the Commission for noncompetitive examination, and such nominee may
be certified by the Commission as qualified after such noncompetitive
examination, and may be appointed provisionally to fill such vacancy. It shall
thereupon become the duty of the Commission within three weeks to hold
a competitive examination and certify a list of eligibles and then a regular
appointment shall then be made from the name or names submitted by
the Commission; provided that nothing within this section shall prevent the
appointment, without examination, of persons temporarily as police officers
in cases of riot or other emergency.
§ 30-61 CIVIL SERVICE § 30-61
30:53

ARTICLE XIII
Chief of Police
§ 30-62. Nomination.
In the event of a vacancy in the office of Chief of Police, Borough Council
shall nominate a person to fill the position and, in writing, request that
the Commission certify the nomination by subjecting the nominee to a
noncompetitive examination administered by the Commission.
§ 30-63. Job qualifications.
Any person seeking appointment to the position of Chief of Police shall meet
all of the following minimum requirements:
§ 30-64. Examination procedure.
A. The nominee shall have a minimum of 10 years' full-time law
enforcement experience.
B. If the nominee is not a current full-time member of the Borough of
Catasauqua Police Department, he/she must meet all qualifications of
the entry level police officer position.
C. The nominee shall demonstrate leadership ability to deliver and
supervise the work of subordinates.
D. The nominee shall be medically fit and able to perform all of the
essential functions of a police officer as set forth in these rules and
regulations and any the job related functions of Chief of Police.
A. The nominee shall take both a written examination and an oral
examination.
(1) The written examination administered to the nominee shall be of
such a nature as to fairly and thoroughly evaluate that person's
police job knowledge. The Commission shall select the type of
written examination to be administered and the examination shall
be specifically job-related to the duties, skills and responsibilities of
a police chief. At least four weeks prior to the administration of the
written test, the Commissioner or testing entity selected by the
Commission shall provide the nominee with information relative to
the length and format of the test and the subject areas which will
be covered in the test, including any specific reading material that
should be reviewed.
(2) The oral examination shall be administered by a panel of three
citizens of the Borough of Catasauqua selected by the Civil Service
Commission. One such member of the oral examination board shall
be a member of the Civil Service Commission. The other two
members shall be chosen by the Civil Service Commission to
represent the public interest. The oral examination shall focus on
§ 30-62 CIVIL SERVICE § 30-64
30:55
the nominee's experience as a police officer, goals for the
Department, goals for the Borough and his interpersonal relations
and administrative skills. The length and format of the oral
examination shall be determined by the oral testing board and the
results of the oral examination shall be reported to the Civil Service
Commission in writing.
B. If the Civil Service Commission determines that the nominee has
passed both the written and oral examination (the determination of a
passing score to be solely left to the discretion of the Civil Service
Commission), then he/she shall be certified by the Commission as
qualified and the same shall be reported to the Council for the Borough
of Catasauqua which then has the option to appoint him or her to the
position of Chief of Police.
§ 30-64 CATASAUQUA CODE § 30-64
30:56
ARTICLE XIV
Suspensions, Removals and Reductions in Rank
§ 30-65. Criteria for suspension, removal or reduction in rank.
§ 30-66. Procedure.
Whenever any police officer is suspended, removed or reduced in rank, the
specific charges warranting each such action shall be stated in writing by
Borough Council. The charges shall be stated clearly and in sufficient detail
to enable the officer to understand the charges made against him/her and
to be able to answer them. The charges shall specify the section of law
or regulation as well as the factual basis for the violation of that law or
regulation. As soon as practicable within five days after Borough Council
votes to file the charges, the original copy of the statement of charges
shall be delivered to the officer either by personal service or by certified or
A. No person employed in the Borough Police Department shall be
suspended, removed or reduced in rank except for the following
reasons:
(1) Physical or mental disability affecting his/her ability to continue in
service and perform the essential duties of his/her position as
certified by a medical doctor designated by Borough Council. In the
event that the certification indicates that the person could not
perform the essential duties even with reasonable
accommodations, that person shall receive an honorable discharge
from service.
(2) Neglect or violation of any official duty or Police Department rule
or regulation.
(3) Violation of any law which provides that such violation constitutes a
misdemeanor or felony or violation of a law which constitutes a
summary offense which results in the suspension or revocation of
the person's driving privileges in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(4) Inefficiency, neglect, intemperance, immorality, disobedience of
orders or conduct unbecoming an officer.
(5) Intoxication while on duty or the use of any drug or narcotic
without a prescription, whether on or off duty.
(6) Engaging or participating in conducting of any political or election
campaign other than to exercise his/her own right of suffrage.
(7) Failure to comply with the Borough residency requirement stated
in these rules and regulations.
B. No person shall be removed for any unlawful discriminatory reason.
§ 30-65 CIVIL SERVICE § 30-66
30:57
registered mail. A copy of the statement of charges shall also be delivered
to the Commission.
§ 30-67. Hearings on suspension, removal and reduction in rank.
The officer who has been suspended, removed or reduced in rank may
appeal the decision of Borough Council by filing a written request for a
hearing with the Commission within 10 business days after the officer
received the statement of charges. The Commission shall schedule a
hearing within 10 business days of receipt of the officer's written request
unless continued by the Commission for cause at the request of the
Commission, Borough Council or the officer. Notice of the date, time and
place of the hearing shall be delivered either by personal service or by
certified or registered mail to each of the principals involved in the case.
The notice shall be mailed to all other parties who have stated an interest in
the hearing; provided, however, that any failure to give the notice required
by this section shall not invalidate any subsequent action taken by the
Commission. The accused officer, at all times, has the right to employ legal
counsel before the Commission.
§ 30-68. Hearing procedure.
A. In conducting the hearing, the Commission's standard of review shall
be to determine whether sufficient evidence has been presented to
support the statutory reason for the disciplinary action. If the
Commission finds that sufficient evidence has been introduced to
support the charge, the Commission shall not modify the penalty
imposed by Borough Council unless it finds that the penalty is arbitrary,
discriminatory or an abuse of Borough Council's discretion. In
considering the appropriateness of the penalty, the Commission shall
not substitute its judgment for that of Borough Council.
B. Each hearing shall be conducted in the following manner:
(1) The hearing shall be open to the public unless, prior to the
commencement of the hearing, a written or oral request, on the
record, to close the hearing is made by the charged officer.
(2) All testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation. Oaths or
affirmations may be administered by the Chairperson, or, in his/her
absence, the Vice Chairperson, or by a court reporter engaged to
record the hearing testimony.
(3) The Chairperson shall call the hearing to order, state the general
purpose of the hearing, make note of the parties present and have
the Secretary read the written charges against the accused officer,
together with the record of action taken against such officer, and
any written reply from the accused officer.
§ 30-66 CATASAUQUA CODE § 30-68
30:58
§ 30-69. Commission decisions on hearings.
Within 30 calendar days after the hearing, the Commission shall issue its
decision in the form of a written order approved by at least two members
of the Commission. The written order shall include all findings of fact. If,
during the hearing, opposing facts are presented, the Commission shall
include in its written order a decision as to what it considers to be the
correct facts. The findings and decision of the Commission shall be certified
to the person making the charges, to the accused officer, to the Mayor and
to Borough Council.
(4) The Chairperson shall afford each person making charges, or his/
her counsel, an opportunity to make further statements in support
of the charges and to produce any witnesses.
(5) The Chairperson shall afford the accused officer, or his/her counsel,
an opportunity to question or cross-examine the person making
charges and to question or cross-examine any witnesses produced
by such person.
(6) The Chairperson shall afford each person making charges, or his/
her counsel, an opportunity to produce any witness, to crossexamine
any witness produced by the accused officer and to make a
summation.
(7) The Chairperson shall afford the accused officer, or his/her counsel,
the opportunity to produce any witness and to make a summation.
(8) The Commission shall be the judge of admissible evidence and
procedure and shall not be bound by technical rules of evidence. At
any time during the hearing, the Commission may question or
cross-examine the person making charges, the accused officer and
any witness.
(9) A stenographic transcript of all testimony taken at the hearing shall
be made and filed with and preserved by the Commission, along
with all other records pertinent to the case. Such records shall be
sealed and closed to public inspection in the event the charges are
dismissed. These records shall be retained or disposed of in
accordance with these rules and regulations and/or Borough
requirements.
A. If the Commission fails to uphold the charges, then the accused officer
shall be reinstated with full pay for the period during which he/she was
suspended, removed or demoted, if such suspension, removal or
demotion had been effected, and no charges shall be officially recorded
against his/her record.
B. If the Commission sustains the charges and orders the suspension,
removal or demotion of the accused officer, the accused officer shall
have the immediate right of appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of
§ 30-68 CIVIL SERVICE § 30-69
30:59
Lehigh County, such appeal to be filed with said Court within 30 days
from the date of notice of entry by the Commission of its final order.
§ 30-69 CATASAUQUA CODE § 30-69
30:60
ARTICLE XV
Commission Forms
§ 30-70. Use of forms.
The Commission may adopt and use various types of forms to perform its
official functions. These forms and all notations, references and statements
appearing in them are incorporated by reference into these rules and
regulations and shall be as much a part of these rules as if they were fully
described herein.
§ 30-71. Copies of forms.
Copies of these rules and regulations and all official forms shall be printed
for public distribution at the expense of the Borough and shall be made
available for distribution from the Secretary or the offices of the Borough
Manager.
§ 30-70 CIVIL SERVICE § 30-71
30:61

ARTICLE XVI
Amendment of Rules and Regulations
§ 30-72. Authority to amend.
The Commission may amend, revise, void or replace these rules and
regulations for any reason by action of a majority of the Commission at any
properly convened meeting of the Commission, insofar as such changes do
not run contrary to the Civil Service Section of the Borough Code (Act of
1965, P.L. 6560, No 581). Before any changes to these rules and regulations
become effective, those changes must be approved by Borough Council.
§ 30-72 CIVIL SERVICE § 30-72
30:63
Chapter 35
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 130, Art. IV. Pensions, retirement and benefits — See Ch.
55.
§ 35-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACTIVE FIRE FIGHTERS — Members of the Catasauqua Fire Department
who have at least one year of training by the Fire Department, including
on-job training, and who, in the opinion of the Fire Chief, have qualified to
fight fires and perform other emergency services normally associated with
a fire department. In addition to the above, active fire fighters must have
completed their Pennsylvania Fire Academy "Essentials of Fire Fighting"
program.
BOROUGH MANAGER — The Borough Manager of the Borough of
Catasauqua.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the Borough of Catasauqua.
COMPANY — Any fire company in existence at the time of the passage of
this chapter or, in the event of the establishment of a centralized fire station,
those companies designated by the Fire Chief.
COUNCIL — Council of the Borough of Catasauqua.
FIRE CHIEF — The Fire Chief of the Borough of Catasauqua.
FIRE DEPARTMENT — The Borough of Catasauqua Fire Department.
FIRE POLICE — Duly appointed members of the Catasauqua Fire Police.
OFFICERS — Any qualified active fire fighter duly appointed or elected as
an officer of the Catasauqua Fire Department.
ROG — The Catasauqua Fire Department Recommended Operating
Procedures.
§ 35-2. Composition of Department.
A. The Catasauqua Fire Department shall be composed of the active fire
fighters of the following fire and rescue companies: the East End Hose
and Chemical Company No. 1; the Southwark Hose Company No. 9; the
Phoenix Fire Company No. 1; and the Catasauqua Rescue Squad.
B. The Borough may, at any time, however, by the amendment of this
chapter change the composition of the Catasauqua Fire Department by
§ 30-72 CATASAUQUA CODE § 35-2
30:64
§ 35-3. Function of active fire fighters.
The function of the active members of the Catasauqua Fire Department
shall be as follows:
§ 35-4. Fire Chief.
The chief executive officer of the Catasauqua Fire Department shall be the
Fire Chief who shall be appointed yearly by and serve at the pleasure of
Borough Council. In case of a vacancy in the office of Fire Chief, Borough
Council shall appoint an Acting Fire Chief until another Fire Chief can
be selected. The Fire Chief shall receive such compensation as Borough
Council may establish from time to time.
recognizing the active fire fighters of one or more additional fire
companies located either within or outside of the Borough as members
of the Fire Department or by removing any fire company from the list
of those comprising the Fire Department.
C. In the event that the Borough should establish a centralized fire station,
the names of all the above-mentioned fire companies shall be dissolved
and the apparatus of each company shall be numbered by the Fire Chief
according to the unit numbers assigned by the Lehigh County
Communications Center.
A. To answer any type of fire alarm or call whether it be a general alarm,
private call, investigation of a reported fire or any emergency call of any
type within the limits of the Borough of Catasauqua or outside of the
limits as provided by mutual aid agreement, service agreements or
other agreements executed by Borough Council.
B. To engage in any type of drill, training, ceremony, practice tests,
parades or other duty when duly called or authorized by the Fire Chief
or, in his absence, a duly appointed designee.
A. Powers and duties of the Fire Chief. The powers and duties of the Fire
Chief shall be as follows:
(1) The Chief shall attend all fires and alarms answered by the
Catasauqua Fire Department and supervise and direct the
operations of the companies belonging to the Fire Department
except in any case where the Chief shall be absent from the
Borough for legitimate reasons. In the event that the Chief shall be
absent from the Borough, the Chief shall notify the Assistant Chief
who shall serve as Acting Fire Chief and shall perform all the duties
and exercise all of the authority vested with the Fire Chief. In the
event of the absence of the Fire Chief and the Assistant Chief, the
Deputy Chief shall serve as Acting Fire Chief. In the event of the
absence of the Fire Chief, Assistant Chief or Deputy Chief, the first
Captain to arrive at the scene of a fire or emergency call will serve
as the Acting Fire Chief.
§ 35-2 CIVIL SERVICE § 35-4
30:65
§ 35-5. Officers.
The officers of the Catasauqua Fire Department shall be nominated or
elected from an eligibility list in accordance with the guidelines of the
Catasauqua Fire Department ROG.
(2) The Chief shall assign the duties of the Assistant Chief to Training
Officer, Communications Officer and Quartermaster; the duties of
the Deputy Chief to Safety Officer, Fire Prevention Officer and
Personnel Officer.
(3) The Chief shall have full authority over all of the active fire fighters,
all apparatus belonging to the Catasauqua Fire Department and
shall issue and enforce such orders which, in the Chief's judgment,
are necessary for the protection of lives and property.
(4) The Chief shall enforce all of the rules and regulations of the Fire
Department and all orders pertaining thereto.
(5) The Chief shall annually, in the month of January, submit a full
report of the activities of the Fire Department to Borough Council
for the preceding year which shall include a list of all fires within
and outside the Borough, the costs of the fires and the losses
resulting therefrom.
(6) The Chief shall inform the Borough Manager of any conditions in
the Borough which, in his opinion, constitute a safety and fire
hazard.
(7) The Chief shall perform such other duties and may exercise such
other authority as shall be prescribed in this chapter or in any other
ordinance which Borough Council may adopt.
(8) The Chief shall provide Borough Council a monthly fire report of
responses, property loss and, when applicable, injuries or death to
civilians or fire fighters.
A. Assistant/Deputy Chief. There shall be one Assistant Chief and one
Deputy Chief who shall be appointed by Council. The membership of the
active fire fighters shall submit nominees for Assistant Chief and
Deputy Chief from the eligibility list. The nominees are to be
determined by election during the month of December. The Fire Chief
shall confirm the names of the persons nominated to Borough Council
and may make recommendations to Council on the individuals who
were nominated. Borough Council shall act on the persons submitted by
the Fire Chief in the month of January at its regularly scheduled
monthly meeting or at a special public meeting. Appointments are to be
for the calendar year in which the appointment is made, beginning on
the date of appointment and ending December 31. Unless specific
action is taken by Borough Council to the contrary, all then current
appointees as of December 31 will remain in their position on an
interim basis until Council's regularly scheduled, or special, public
§ 35-4 CATASAUQUA CODE § 35-5
30:66
meeting in January of the succeeding year. In the event that Council is
dissatisfied with the persons submitted, it shall notify the Fire Chief in
writing that another person(s) shall be submitted and the fire fighters
shall renominate for the position(s) in question. During the interim
period that a renomination is taking place, the Fire Chief shall appoint
persons to serve as Acting Assistant Chief or Acting Deputy Chief. In
the event of a vacancy in the position of Assistant Chief or Deputy
Chief during a calendar year, the Fire Chief shall, with approval of
Council, appoint any qualified active fire fighter to fill the vacancy for
the remainder of the year.
(1) The Assistant Chief and Deputy Chief shall be under the
supervision and direction of the Fire Chief.
(a) Assistant Chief: training. The Assistant Chief shall be
responsible for training and be required to plan and administer
a systematic program of training drills. The Assistant Chief
shall form and head the Fire Department training committee.
The Assistant Chief shall be responsible for keeping records of
training activities and shall make recommendations to the Fire
Chief on methods of improving the quality of training
operations.
(b) Candidates for fire schools held outside the Borough of
Catasauqua shall have prior approval of Borough Council.
(c) The Assistant Chief shall also be responsible for taking care of
all communications equipment and assure that all such
equipment is accounted for and is in proper working condition.
The Assistant Chief shall serve as the Fire Department
Quartermaster and be responsible to issue and maintain the
personal protective equipment and shall also maintain the Fire
Department supply room. The Assistant Chief may assign a fire
fighter as an assistant.
(2) Deputy Chief. The Deputy Chief shall be the Fire Department
Safety Officer and Fire Prevention Officer. The Deputy Chief shall
form a Department Safety Committee and head it. The Deputy
Chief may appoint a fire fighter to assist, who will be the on-scene
Safety and Accountability Officer. The Deputy Chief shall
administer the annual fire fighter physical program. The Deputy
Chief shall form and head the Fire Prevention Education
Committee and may appoint a fire fighter to assist as a fire
prevention officer. The Deputy Chief shall assist the Chief and the
Assistant Chief when requested with additional duties.
(3) The Assistant Chief and/or Deputy Chief shall assume command at
fire or other emergency scene in the absence of the Chief and shall
direct operations until the Chief arrives. When the Chief arrives at
the fire or emergency scene, the Assistant Chief and Deputy Chief
shall report and follow the orders of the Chief. They may supervise
§ 35-5 CIVIL SERVICE § 35-5
30:67
operations as directed and may give orders to subordinate officers
and active fire fighters. The first officer to arrive at any fire or
emergency scene shall be the active officer in charge until a higherranking
officer arrives.
B. Election of Captains and Engineers for each fire company. There shall
be one Captain and one Engineer for each piece of apparatus belonging
to the Catasauqua Fire Department. Each Captain and Engineer shall
be elected annually in the month of December, in accordance with the
guidelines of the Catasauqua Fire Department ROG for the following
calendar year beginning January 1 and ending December 31, by the
active fire fighters of the company to which they are assigned. The
names of the persons elected by each company as the Captains and
Engineer shall be submitted in writing to the Fire Chief within five days
after the elections take place. The Fire Chief shall confirm the names of
the persons elected to Borough Council and may make
recommendations to Council on the officers who were elected. Borough
Council shall act on the list of elected officers which is submitted by the
Fire Chief in the month of January at its regularly scheduled meeting.
Appointments are to be for the calendar year in which the appointment
is made, beginning on the date of appointment and ending December
31. Unless specific action is taken by Borough Council to the contrary,
all then current appointees as of December 31 will remain in their
position on an interim basis until Council's regularly scheduled, or
special, public meeting in January of the succeeding year. In the event
that Council is dissatisfied with any of the elected officers submitted, it
shall notify the Fire Chief in writing that a new officer shall be elected
for the position and the respective company shall have a reelection for
the position in question. The name of the person who is not approved by
Council may not appear on the new ballot. The name of the new person
elected shall be submitted to Council by the Fire Chief no later than the
February meeting of Council. In the event that Council would still be
dissatisfied with the officer selected, it may appoint a person to the
position in question. During the interim period that a reelection is
taking place, the Fire Chief shall appoint a person to serve as the Acting
Officer for the unfilled position. In the event of a vacancy in the position
of Captain and Engineer during a calendar year, the Fire Chief shall,
with the approval of Council, appoint any qualified fire fighter to fill the
vacancy for the remainder of the year.
C. Duties of Captains. Each Captain shall be in charge of the fire apparatus
of the company. Each Captain shall be responsible for the care and
maintenance of this apparatus and all the equipment which is assigned
to the company. Each Captain shall also see to it that the apparatus and
the equipment are always clean and ready for immediate use at all
times. Each Captain shall keep the Fire Chief informed of the condition
of the apparatus and shall immediately report any mechanical defects
in this equipment. Each Captain shall be responsible for getting the
apparatus and equipment of the Department ready for immediate
service after each time they have been in use. At fire scenes or other
§ 35-5 CATASAUQUA CODE § 35-5
30:68
emergencies, the Captain shall be responsible for the proper
positioning of the apparatus of the company and for the operation of
the equipment of the apparatus. Each Captain shall follow the orders
of the superior officers and shall delegate orders to the personnel of
the company. When there is no superior officer present at a fire or
emergency scene, the Captain shall assume command of the operations
until the superior officer arrives.
D. Engineers; drivers/operators.
(1) Engineers. The Engineer of each company shall be responsible for
assisting the Captain in charge of the apparatus of the respective
company and shall be responsible for and shall keep the vehicle
and equipment in good condition and ready for immediate use. If
the Engineer notices any mechanical problems with the apparatus
or the equipment of the apparatus, the Engineer shall immediately
report the problems to the Captain. The Engineer shall drive the
apparatus and shall follow the orders of all of the superior officers.
While driving the apparatus on public or private thoroughfares and
property, the Engineer shall exercise due caution with regard to the
safety of the vehicle and the safety of other vehicles and persons.
The Engineer shall operate the equipment on the apparatus in
accordance with the directions of the superior officers.
(2) Drivers/operators. The duties of the drivers/operators of each
company shall be the same as those duties of the Engineer in their
absence.
(3) An Engineer and/or driver/operator, upon conviction of a motor
vehicle violation while on duty, may be suspended by Council for a
period of up to one year.
(4) Each Engineer and/or driver/operator must annually prepare an
operator certification of violations and personal driving record.
This certification must include all motor vehicle violations with the
following details: the date, offense, location and type of vehicle
operated. The violations to be placed on the certification list shall
only include matters in which there has been a plea or finding of
guilt. This certification must be made pursuant to the provisions of
18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4904 covering unsworn falsification to authorities.
Additional certifications may be requested of any Engineer and/or
driver/operator at any time by the Chief. Upon review of the
certification, the Chief may recommend to Council that the
Engineer and/or driver/operator be removed or suspended from
said position. Council shall then review the matter and determine if
the Engineer and/or driver/operator shall be removed or suspended
(and if suspended, the length of the same).
(5) Any Engineer and/or driver/operator who has his motor vehicle
operator's license suspended or revoked must immediately report
§ 35-5 CIVIL SERVICE § 35-5
30:69
§ 35-6. Duties of active fire fighters.
It shall be the duty of all active fire fighters to obey the commands of
their superior officers while in fire service, including the cleaning and
maintenance of equipment. Each fire fighter shall perform other duties
in the station as assigned by the superior officers in order to keep the
station in a clean and respectable condition. In addition to following the
orders of the officers of a designated company, each fire fighter shall also
obey the orders of the Fire Chief, the Assistant Chief, Deputy Chief and
superior officers of the other companies. Each fire fighter shall perform
the actual work at fire scenes and other emergencies as directed by his
superior officers. In the event that no officer is present at a fire scene or
other emergency, the senior active fire fighter of the company shall assume
command of all operations until an officer arrives.
§ 35-7. Additional driver/operators.
In order to assure a sufficient number of trained driver/operators, the Fire
Chief may designate, upon the recommendation of the Captain of each
company, additional active fire fighters to serve as backup driver/operators
in the event that the Engineer of a company cannot be present for a fire call.
§ 35-8. Payments to personnel.
The Catasauqua Fire Department is a volunteer organization. As such, each
member of the Department serves in an unpaid capacity. Any payment made
by the Borough of Catasauqua to any of the officers or other personnel
of the Department is explicitly not as compensation for the work they are
performing, but is reimbursement for expenses incurred in the performance
of their duties. Borough Council may establish guidelines for payment of
any reimbursement, whether requiring documentation of actual expenses
or establishing a flat rate of reimbursement, and may further establish a
schedule of reimbursement payments.
§ 35-9. Removal of active fire fighters.
An active fire fighter may be removed from the list of active fire fighters
by the Fire Chief upon notification from the Captain of each company that
the fire fighter has not responded to alarms for a one-month period or has
not attended training sessions for a one-month period without a legitimate
excuse. Upon removal from the list as an active fire fighter, the individual
shall, within 10 days from the written notice of his removal, return all
Department and company equipment to the Captain of the company. Failure
to comply will result in the appropriate legal prosecution by the Borough.
the same to the Chief and that the Engineer and/or driver/operator
shall immediately be removed from said position by Council.
§ 35-5 CATASAUQUA CODE § 35-10
30:70
§ 35-10. Suspension of Fire Department members.
Every member of the Fire Department shall obey all the provisions of this
chapter and all the orders of the superior officers at all times when the Fire
Department is engaged in any authorized activity. Any member, including
any officer violating or failing to conform to any of the requirements of this
section, shall be subject to suspension by the Fire Chief who shall report
such suspension to the Borough Manager. It shall be the responsibility of
the Borough Manager to report such suspension to Borough Council after
giving the suspended member at least five days' written notice to appeal
for a hearing before Council which shall proceed to investigate the charges
made and shall hear both sides of the case. If Council shall find such
charges to be well founded, it may, by majority vote, either suspend or expel
the individual member from the Fire Department.
§ 35-11. Company equipment to revert to Borough.
If any company, after having been admitted to the Catasauqua Fire
Department, shall for any reason wish to leave the Department or to
disband its personnel, all fire apparatus and fire equipment in the
possession of the company shall revert to the Borough.
§ 35-12. Repairs to fire apparatus.
All needed repairs to any apparatus of the Catasauqua Fire Department
shall be reported to the Borough Manager by the Fire Chief and shall be
corrected as soon as possible under the direction of the Borough Manager
and the Fire Chief.
§ 35-13. Conduct in fire houses.
No person other than an active fire fighter shall frequent, sleep in or loiter
about any apparatus or equipment area in the Borough fire stations. No
person shall consume alcoholic beverages or illegal drugs, nor gamble, nor
create disturbance by fighting or disorderly conduct in any of the apparatus
or equipment areas. All personnel shall leave the fire station before 2400
hours, until 0700 hours unless assigned for emergency standby by the Fire
Chief.
§ 35-14. Care, maintenance and use of fire apparatus; violations
and penalties. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1288]
It shall be the duty of the Captain of each company to see that all of the
fire apparatus belonging to the Borough and assigned to the company shall
at all times be kept in a clean and proper condition for immediate use,
that all equipment shall be cleaned and placed upon the truck immediately
after use, that all chemical tanks are properly filled and ready for use and
that the apparatus is kept in the best possible condition at all times. It
shall be unlawful for any person, except the officers of the Catasauqua Fire
Department, at any time, to take any of the fire apparatus from the place
where the same is kept. No such fire apparatus shall be removed from
§ 35-10 CIVIL SERVICE § 35-14
30:71
its fire house except for authorized Fire Department activities. Any person
violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction therefor
before the Mayor or any District Justice of the Borough, be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than $100 and costs of prosecution and, in default
of payment thereof, imprisonment in the Lehigh County prison for not
more than 30 days. Any person found guilty of violating an ordinance shall
be assessed court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the
Borough in the enforcement proceedings.
§ 35-15. Prohibited acts by public; violations and penalties.
[Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1288]
It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder or interfere with any of the
activities of the Fire Department while the Department is engaged in going
to or returning from a fire in the extinguishment thereof or to disobey any
of the orders of the Fire Chief or designee which are issued at the scene of
a fire for the control of the fire and lessening congestion and interference
thereat, or for the safety of the members of the Fire Department and the
public. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section
shall, upon conviction thereof before the Mayor or any District Justice of
the Borough, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $100 and costs
of prosecution, and in default of payment thereof, imprisonment for not
more than 30 days in the Lehigh County prison. Any person found guilty
of violating an ordinance shall be assessed court costs and reasonable
attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings.
§ 35-16. Fire Police.
The Fire Police of the Borough of Catasauqua shall be under the supervision
and direction of the Chief of Police. All Fire Police shall be appointed
or removed by the Chief of Police and shall receive compensation as
established by Borough Council. All Fire Police shall be provided with
uniforms as shall be designated by the Mayor and Chief of Police.
A. Officers. The officers of the Fire Police shall consist of one Captain, one
Lieutenant, and one Sergeant who shall be elected by the Fire Police
from their own membership on an annual basis. The Fire Police shall
have their election of officers in the month of November for the
following calendar year subject to the approval of the Chief of Police
and Borough Council.
B. Function. The function of the Fire Police shall be to direct and control
the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic during fire calls or perform
any other appropriate related function as designated by the Chief of
Police.
C. Membership. All Fire Police appointed by the Chief of Police must be
members in good standing with one of the fire companies.
§ 35-14 CATASAUQUA CODE § 35-17
30:72
§ 35-17. Provisions to supersede company regulations or bylaws.
This chapter and any additional ordinances adopted by Borough Council
shall supersede any regulation or bylaw of any company comprising the
Catasauqua Fire Department.
Chapter 37
FIRE INSPECTOR
§ 37-1. Position created.
The position of Fire Inspector is hereby created for the purpose of
conducting plan reviews; performing inspections; investigating complaints;
verifying compliance and identifying corrective actions necessary for
compliance; initiating enforcement actions for violations of the IFC and
any other laws, regulations, codes, standards and ordinances relating to
fire safety; supporting the Office of Emergency Management and the Office
of the Fire Marshal; developing initiatives to sustain the volunteer fire
services, performing cause and origin investigations; and performing any
other duties as the Borough Manager or Borough Council may from time to
time deem necessary to fire safety and emergency management.
§ 37-2. Job description.
The Borough Manager shall create a job description which identifies the
essential duties, responsibilities and qualifications for the Fire Inspector.
The job description and any amendments thereto shall be subject to review
and approval by resolution of Council.
§ 37-3. Serving and reporting.
The Fire Inspector will serve in the Borough's Department of Emergency
Services and Office of Code Enforcement and will report directly to the
Borough Manager.
§ 37-4. Appointment.
The Fire Inspector shall be appointed by resolution of Council.
§ 37-5. Fee schedule.
The Borough Manager or his designee shall develop a fee schedule for
services performed by the Fire Inspector and other matters related thereto.
The fee schedule and any amendments thereto shall be subject to the review
and approval by resolution of Council.
§ 35-17 CIVIL SERVICE § 37-5
30:73
Chapter 40
FISCAL AFFAIRS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auditor — See Ch. 5.
Earned Income Taxation Department — See
Ch. 90.
Taxation — See Ch. 240.
§ 37-5 CATASAUQUA CODE § 37-5
30:74
ARTICLE I
Remission of Taxes and Water Rents
[Adopted 10-6-1915 by Ord. No. 198 (Ch. I, Secs. 118 to 119, of the
1962 Code)]
§ 40-1. Remission against property of Catasauqua Park and Play
Ground Association.
All Borough and special taxes, and all rental for water as supplied by
the Catasauqua Municipal Plant and assessed against the property of the
Catasauqua Park and Playground Association, bounded by Chapel, Berks,
Walnut and St. John Streets, are hereby remitted, all water so supplied shall
be under and subject to the ordinances and regulations of said Borough, and
all water pipes and mains necessary for the purposes of said Association
shall be laid on said property of said Association by said Borough at the cost
and expense of said Borough.
§ 40-2. Duration of remission.
Said remission of taxes and water rent shall continue so long as the property
of the Catasauqua Park and Play Ground Association aforesaid shall be used
for public park and playground purposes for the benefit of the inhabitants
of the Borough of Catasauqua, and no longer.
§ 40-1 CIVIL SERVICE § 40-2
30:75

ARTICLE II
Capital Reserve Fund
[Adopted 12-2-1957 by Ord. No. 393 (Ch. I, Secs. 112 to 117, of the
1962 Code)]
§ 40-3. Capital reserve fund created.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Act of Assembly of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania of May 4, 1927, P.L. 519 Article XII, section 1202, as
amended, there be and hereby is created a separate capital reserve fund for
anticipated legal capital expenditures.
§ 40-4. Authorized uses of moneys in fund.
The money appropriated and paid into said fund shall be used, from time
to time, for the construction, purchase or replacement of or addition to
municipal buildings, equipment, machinery, motor vehicles or other capital
assets of the Borough and for no other purpose.
§ 40-5. Certain sinking fund balances payable into fund.
There be and is hereby appropriated to and directed to be paid into said
fund all balances remaining after payment in full of the principal and
interest of all bonds secured thereby in Sinking Fund "F" Street
Improvement Ordinance No. 253, of July 1, 1923, and Sinking Fund "G"
Street Improvement Ordinance No. 286, of August 1, 1928, together with
interest accrued upon said balances.
§ 40-6. Appropriations from general Borough funds.
Council may hereafter appropriate moneys from the general Borough funds
to be paid into said capital reserve or other disposition of any Borough
property or from any other source, unless received or acquired for a
particular purpose.
§ 40-7. Supervision by Council over fund.
The funds shall be controlled, invested, reinvested, and administered and
the moneys therein and income from such moneys expended for any of
the purposes for which the fund is created in such manner as may be
determined by Council.
§ 40-8. Investment of moneys in fund.
The money in the fund, when invested, shall be invested in securities
designated by law as legal investments for sinking funds of municipalities.
§ 40-3 CIVIL SERVICE § 40-8
30:77

ARTICLE III
Bureau of Collections
[Adopted 3-1-1965 by Ord. No. 533 (Ch. I, Secs. 121 to 125, of the
1962 Code)]
§ 40-9. Bureau of Collections created.
There is hereby created a bureau to be known as Bureau of Collections
which shall administer the provisions of all ordinances or regulations of
Borough of Catasauqua levying any tax, service charge, permit or license
fee or municipal charge of whatever nature or kind and which shall include
within its operation by way of definition and not of limitation the Earned
Income Tax Department, collection of per capita taxes, sewer and water
rents, refuse collection and any other matters specifically referred to it from
time to time.
§ 40-10. Supervision over Bureau of Collections.
Pursuant to Section 5 of Ordinance No. 435 of Borough of Catasauqua,7 the
supervision and management of said Bureau shall be under the Borough
Manager.
§ 40-11. Responsibility of Bureau of Collections.
The Bureau of Collections shall provide, at the expense of Borough of
Catasauqua, office facilities, bookkeeping and clerical personnel, books,
records, mailing lists, supplies, printing, postage, blanks and forms
necessary for the performance of the duties of the respective departments
and shall maintain and keep current a list of all residents and inhabitants
of the Borough of Catasauqua. It shall further provide personnel to receive
collections at the office designated by the Bureau during ordinary business
hours of each week and to issue receipts therefor.
§ 40-12. Bureau authorized to furnish facilities and personnel to
Tax Collector.
The Bureau of Collections is hereby authorized and empowered to furnish
its facilities and personnel to the duly elected Tax Collector of the Borough
of Catasauqua, upon terms satisfactory to the Borough, to the extent
permitted by law, upon request of said Tax Collector and upon proper
authorization in writing as may be required or permitted by law.
§ 40-13. Status of certain real estate taxes.
All real estate taxes received at the office of the Bureau of Collections by
an employee of the Bureau and receipted for by such employe pursuant to
the provisions of § 40-12 hereof shall be deemed to have been collected and
paid over to Borough of Catasauqua.
7. Editor's Note: See Ch. 50, Manager.
§ 40-9 CIVIL SERVICE § 40-13
30:79

ARTICLE IV
General Fee Schedules
[Adopted 2-7-1966 by Ord. No. 558 (Ch. I, Sec. 129, of the 1962
Code)]
§ 40-14. General fee schedules adopted and changed by resolution.
Borough Council may by resolution adopt and change from time to time
general fee schedules prescribing fees for permits issued for services
rendered in accordance with Zoning Ordinance No. 4468 and other
applicable Borough ordinances.9
8. Editor's Note: See Ch. 280, Zoning.
9. Editor's Note: See Ch. A285, Fees.
§ 40-14 CIVIL SERVICE § 40-14
30:81

ARTICLE V
Trust Account
[Adopted 12-28-1972 by Ord. No. 686 (Ch. I, Secs. 130 to 132, of the
1962 Code)]
§ 40-15. Trust account established for federal revenue-sharing
funds.
A separate trust account be hereby established with the First National Bank
of Allentown for the deposit of federal revenue-sharing funds.
§ 40-16. Administration of trust account.
The Borough Secretary-Manager and Borough Treasurer be authorized to
administer, control and invest said monies in accordance with all federal
and state laws.
§ 40-17. Appropriations authorized from trust account. [Amended
10-6-1980 by Ord. No. 811]
All appropriations from this account be made by resolution of Borough
Council. The annual budget resolution shall serve as authority for all
appropriations made in accordance therewith.
§ 40-15 CIVIL SERVICE § 40-17
30:83

ARTICLE VI
Bond Requirements
[Adopted 3-6-1978 by Ord. No. 760 (Ch. I, Secs. 134 to 138, of the
1962 Code)]
§ 40-18. Bond required for contracts.
All contracts for goods and services with the Borough in excess of $2,000
shall have a bond or other good security acceptable to the Solicitor.
§ 40-19. Determinations of bond amount. [Amended 2-2-1987 by
Ord. No. 910]
Said bond shall be of sufficient surety in the amount up to 50% of the
amount of the liability for the goods and services contracted for, the amount
to be determined by Borough Council or the Borough Manager.
§ 40-20. Exemption of certain contracts from requiring bond.
Borough Council may for good cause specifically exempt certain contracts
from the requirement of said bond, except in those cases where bond is
required by the Borough Code.
§ 40-21. Bond shall apply to emergency goods and services.
This requirement of a bond or other good security on contracts shall also
apply to contracts for emergency repairs, goods or services unless
exempted by Council.
§ 40-22. Additional bond. [Added 2-2-1987 by Ord. No. 910]
Any person, copartnership, association, or corporation entering into a
contract with the Borough for the construction, erection, installation,
completion, alteration, repair of or addition to any public work or
improvement of any kind whatsoever where the amount of such contract
is in excess of $1,500, before commencing work under such contract, shall
execute and deliver to the Borough an additional bond for the use of any
and every person, copartnership, association, or corporation interested, in
a sum of 100% of the contract price conditioned for the prompt payment of
all material furnished and labor supplied or performed in the prosecution of
the work.
§ 40-18 CIVIL SERVICE § 40-22
30:85

ARTICLE VII
Sale of Borough Property
[Adopted 7-10-2013 by Res. No. 17-1310]
§ 40-23. Sale of property under $1,000.
The Catasauqua Borough Council hereby authorizes the Borough Manager
to sell the personal property of the Borough which has an estimated value
of less than $1,000 pursuant to the following procedure:
A. The Borough Manager shall determine the value of the subject personal
property (the "property") by obtaining five vendors dealing in the
property, or goods substantially similar to the property, in their regular
course of business.
B. The second lowest estimate shall constitute the minimum permissible
sale price for the property (the "minimum price").
C. The Borough Manager may then solicit and accept written offers of
purchase at a price in excess of the minimum price (individually
referred to as a "purchase offer").
D. After three consecutive business days following receipt of the most
recent purchase offer, the Borough Manager may accept the highest
purchase offer received to that date and sell the property with or
without prior approval of Council. In the alternative, the Borough
Manager may reject all purchase offers or other offers at any time.
E. The Borough Manager shall report such sale at the Council meeting
immediately subsequent to such sale.
10.Editor’s Note: This resolution also superseded former Article VII, Sale of Borough
Property, adopted 12-4-1978 by Res. No. 10-78 (Ch. I, Sec. 133, of the 1962 Code).
§ 40-23 CIVIL SERVICE § 40-23
30:87
Chapter 42
HEALTH, BOARD OF
§ 42-1. Board of Health established.
A Board of Health is hereby established in and for the Borough of
Catasauqua, in accordance with the provisions of Article XXXII of the
Borough Code, as added by the Act of 1947 P.L. 1621. The Board of Health
shall have general supervision over sanitary conditions in the Borough and
shall perform all the duties and may exercise all the powers vested by law
in boards of health in boroughs. The Board of Health shall meet regularly,
at a stated time and place, at least once each month, and shall hold special
meetings as the health conditions of the Borough may require. Any member
of the Board of Health who, without sufficient cause, or without having been
excused from attendance by the Board of Health, shall fail to attend any of
the stated meetings of the Board of Health over a period of six months, or
who shall otherwise neglect his duties as a member of the Board of Health
for a period of six months, shall be considered as having withdrawn from
membership on the said Board, and the Borough Council shall proceed to fill
the vacancy thus created. Provided, the Board of Health now in existence
in the Borough shall constitute the Board of Health hereby established, and
the tenure of the members of such Board of Health shall not be affected by
this chapter.
§ 42-2. Special emergency authority of Board.
The Board of Health shall also have authority, in case of the prevalence or
threatened prevalence of any contagious or infectious disease, to order and
direct that special emergency measures be taken by persons residing or
being in the Borough. Such orders promulgated by the Board of Health may
deal with: contacts between individuals, whether or not such individuals
have been directly exposed to any such disease; the cleaning and/or
disinfection of premises; the removal of persons from unsanitary or exposed
places to other locations; the disposal of refuse; and the control of animals
and/or insects. Every such order shall be effective, during the time of any
such emergency, just as if it had been specifically set forth in this chapter,
and any person who shall violate any such order shall, upon conviction
thereof before the Mayor or any District Justice of the Borough, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $50 and costs of prosecution, and,
in default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment in the County
Jail for not more than 30 days.
§ 42-3. Abatement of certain conditions; penalty for maintenance
thereof.
No person or persons, firm or corporation shall maintain or permit to be
maintained on any property owned or occupied thereby within the Borough
any condition productive of a nuisance detrimental or a menace to the
public health or which may be so declared by the Board of Health, and, upon
§ 40-23 CATASAUQUA CODE § 42-3
30:88
receipt of a notice from the Board of Health that such a condition exists on
property owned or occupied thereby, it shall be the duty of such person or
persons, firm or corporation to abate such nuisance to the satisfaction of the
Board of Health within the time limit specified in such notice. In addition to
the responsibility for the cost of such abatement, with a further amount of
10% thereof, such person or persons, firm or corporation shall be guilty of
a violation of this chapter, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to
the penalty hereinafter provided for such violations.
§ 42-4. Unfit food products not to be permitted in stores or in
vendors' vehicles.
No person, firm or corporation conducting or operating any store, shop,
stand or delivery vehicle within the limits of the Borough for the sale of
meat, fish, butter, eggs, fruit, vegetables, bread or any other article of food
which is subject to decay, mold or decomposition, shall have or keep in or
about such store, shop, stand or vehicle, any meat, fish, butter, eggs, fruit,
vegetables, bread or any other article of food which is decayed, decomposed
or spoiled, as to render it unwholesome, offensive or otherwise unfit for
human consumption.
§ 42-5. Sanitation in food stores and vehicles; access of health
authorities thereto.
All stores, shops, stands and vehicles, from which articles of food are
vended or sold, shall at all times be kept clean and in a sanitary condition,
free from offensive odors and any accumulation of decomposed animal or
vegetable matter, and shall at all times be open to the inspection of the
Health Officer of the Borough or any other authorized agent of the Board of
Health.
§ 42-6. License required for public eating and drinking places.
[Added 12-29-1980 by Ord. No. 818]
Each public eating and drinking place in the Borough of Catasauqua shall
be required annually to obtain and display a license issued by the Board of
Health.
A. Inspection before approval. Said license shall be issued only after
inspection and approval by the Health Officer or his authorized agent.
B. License fee. The annual fee for health licenses shall be in accordance
with a "Schedule of Fees and Charges" established by resolution of the
Council of the Borough of Catasauqua.11 [Amended 12-26-1984 by
Ord. No. 881]
11.Editor's Note: See Ch. A285, Fees.
§ 42-3 CIVIL SERVICE § 42-7
30:89
§ 42-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord. No.
1288]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, for every such violation, upon conviction thereof before the
Mayor or any District Justice of the Borough, be sentenced to pay a fine of
not more than $50 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of
such fine and costs, to imprisonment in the County Jail for not more than 30
days. Provided, each day's violation of any of the provisions of this chapter
shall constitute a separate offense. Any person found guilty of violating
an ordinance shall be assessed court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees
incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings.
Chapter 43
INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS
§ 42-7 CATASAUQUA CODE § 42-7
30:90
ARTICLE I
Susquehanna Municipal Trust
[Adopted 9-3-2013 by Ord. No. 1292]
§ 43-1. Caption and preamble.
The caption and preamble of this article set forth above are incorporated
herein by reference.12
§ 43-2. of agreement.
This political subdivision hereby approves entering into the agreement, a
copy of which is attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference (and
which shall be filed with the minutes of the meeting at which this article
was enacted),13 with the intent and effect that this political subdivision shall
be bound by the agreement and shall join and participate in the trust.
§ 43-3. Authority to execute and deliver agreement.
The President or Vice President of the governing body, acting alone or
together with the Secretary or Assistant Secretary, is hereby authorized and
directed on behalf of the political subdivision:
§ 43-4. Authority to take appropriate action.
The governing body of the political subdivision is hereby authorized to take
such other action as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out the
purposes of this article and of the agreement.
A. To execute and deliver the agreement; and
B. To execute and deliver such additional instruments, and to take such
further actions, as may be necessary or appropriate to carry forth the
agreement and the transactions to be effected under the agreement,
including payment to the trust of such amounts as are due by the
political subdivision pursuant to the agreement.
12.Editor's Note: The preamble to Ord. No. 1242 stated as follows: "A. A number of political
subdivisions within Lehigh County, Pennsylvania, have investigated whether it would be
mutually beneficial to cooperate with each other in obtaining workers' compensation
insurance. B. The Susquehanna Municipal Trust (the "Trust") has been established for the
purpose of (i) seeking the prevention or lessening of claims due to injuries of employees
of the Trust's members and (ii) pooling workers' compensation and occupational disease
insurance risks, reserves, claims and losses and providing self-insurance and reinsurance
therefor. C. The Trust is established pursuant to an intergovernmental cooperation
agreement entitled the 'Susquehanna Municipal Trust - Trust Agreement' ('the
Agreement'). D. Pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 23, Subchapter A,
Intergovernmental Cooperation, of the General Local Government Code, 53 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 2301 et seq. (Intergovernmental Cooperation Law), a municipality may enter into an
intergovernmental cooperation agreement upon the passage of an ordinance by its
governing body."
13.Editor's Note: A copy of the agreement is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 43-1 CIVIL SERVICE § 43-5
30:91
§ 43-5. Findings.
As required by the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act,14 the
following matters are specifically found and determined:
§ 43-6. Severability.
The provisions of this article are severable, and if any section, sentence,
clause or part or provision hereof shall be held to be illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision of the
court shall not affect the remaining sections, clauses, parts or provisions of
this article. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the political subdivision
that such article would have been enacted if such illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional section, sentence, clause, part or provision had not been
included herein.
§ 43-7. Construal of provisions.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to affect any suit or
proceeding in any court, or any rights acquired or liability incurred, or any
cause of action existing prior to the enactment of this article.
A. The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the agreement.
B. This political subdivision shall participate in the trust for a minimum
initial term of two years as set forth in the agreement.
C. The purpose and objectives of the agreement are as set forth in the
preamble of this article and in the agreement;
D. The manner and extent of financing the agreement are that:
(1) No borrowing will be required by the political subdivision;
(2) Funds to implement the political subdivision's obligations under
the agreement shall come from normal and usual budgeted
amounts for such matters; and
(3) Other provisions governing the manner and extent of the financing
of the trust shall be as set forth in the agreement.
E. The trust shall be managed by its own Plan Committee and Board of
Trustees pursuant to the terms of the agreement.
F. All property, real or personal, of the trust shall be acquired, managed,
licensed or disposed of by the trust in accordance with the terms of the
agreement.
G. The trust created by the agreement shall be empowered to enter into
contracts for policies of group insurance and employee benefits,
including social security, pursuant to the terms of the agreement.
14.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 43-5 CATASAUQUA CODE § 43-8
30:92
§ 43-8. When effective.
This article shall become effective immediately upon enactment hereof.
§ 43-8 CIVIL SERVICE § 43-8
30:93
Chapter 45
LIBRARY
§ 45-1. Designation and authority.
The Public Library of Catasauqua is hereby authorized and designated to
act for and on behalf of the Council of the Borough of Catasauqua to provide
public library service to the residents and taxpayers of the Borough.
Chapter 50
MANAGER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Borough Council — See Ch. 15.
Civil service— See Ch. 30.
Pensions, retirement and benefits — See Ch.
55.
§ 50-1. Creation of office.
The office of Borough Manager is hereby created by the Borough of
Catasauqua, Pennsylvania.
§ 50-2. Appointment and removal.
The Manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term by a majority of
all the members of Council. The Manager shall serve at the pleasure of
the Council and he may be removed at any time by a majority vote of all
its members. At least 30 days before such removal becomes effective, the
Council shall furnish the Manager with a written statement setting forth its
intention to remove him and the reasons therefor.
§ 50-3. Qualifications. [Amended 5-6-2019 by Ord. No. 1381]
The Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of his executive and
administrative abilities, with special reference to his actual experience in
or his knowledge of accepted practices in respect to the duties of his office
as herein outlined. The Manager need not be a resident of the Borough of
Catasauqua or of the State of Pennsylvania at the time of his appointment;
however, within 60 calendar days of his first day of work as Manager, he or
she shall establish, and thereafter maintain, a residence within a radius of
15 air miles of Borough Hall.
§ 50-4. Compensation. [Last amended 12-10-2018 by Ord. No. 1378]
Compensation of the Borough Manager effective January 1, 2019, and until
further notice of the Borough Council of the Borough of Catasauqua, shall
§ 43-8 CATASAUQUA CODE § 50-4
45:94
be paid biweekly during his term of service, at the rate of $95,000 per
annum.
§ 50-5. Powers and duties. [Amended 10-6-1980 by Ord. No. 811]
A. The Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the Borough
and he shall be responsible to the Council as a whole for the proper and
efficient administration of the affairs of the Borough. His powers and
duties shall relate to the general management of all Borough business
not expressly by statute imposed or conferred upon other Borough
officers.
B. Subject to recall by ordinance of Council the powers and duties of the
Borough Manager shall include the following:
(1) He shall supervise and be responsible for the activities of all
municipal departments, except those activities of the Police
Department which are by law under the jurisdiction of the Mayor
and which have not been delegated by him to the Manager
pursuant to § 50-6 hereof.
(2) He shall hire and, when necessary for the good of the service, shall
suspend or discharge all employees under his supervision; provided
that persons covered by any civil service provisions of the Borough
Code shall be hired, suspended, or discharged in accordance with
such provisions; provided, further, that the Manager shall report, at
the next meeting thereof of Council, any action taken by authority
of this subsection.
(3) He shall prepare and submit to Council before the close of the fiscal
year, or on such alternate date as Council shall determine, a budget
for the next fiscal year and an explanatory budget message. In
preparing the budget the Manager, or an officer designated by him,
shall obtain from the head of each department, agency, board or
officer, estimates of revenues and expenditures and other
supporting data as he requests. The Manager shall review such
estimates and may revise them before submitting the budget to the
Council.
(4) He shall be responsible for the administration of the budget after
its adoption by the Council.
(5) He shall hold such other municipal offices or head one or more of
the municipal departments as Council may from time to time direct,
and shall perform all the duties of such officers, in addition to the
specific duties assigned to the Manager by this chapter.
(6) He shall attend all meetings of Council and its committees with the
right to take part in the discussion and he shall receive notice of all
special meetings of Council or its committees.
§ 50-4 LIBRARY § 50-5
45:95
(7) He shall prepare the agenda for each meeting of Council and
supply facts pertinent thereto.
(8) He shall keep the Council informed as to the conduct of Borough
affairs; submit periodic reports on the condition of the Borough
finances and such other reports as the Council requests; and make
such recommendations to the Council as he deems necessary.
(9) He shall submit to Council, as soon as possible after the close of the
fiscal year, a complete report on the financial and administrative
activities of the Borough for the preceding year.
(10)He shall see that the provisions of all franchises, leases, permits,
and privileges granted by the Borough are observed.
(11)He may employ, by and with the approval of Council, experts and
consultants to perform work and to advise in connection with any of
the functions of the Borough.
(12)He shall attend to the letting of contracts in due form of law, and he
shall supervise the performance and faithful execution of the same
except insofar as such duties are expressly imposed upon some
other Borough officer by statute.
(13)He shall see that all money owed the Borough is promptly paid and
that proper proceedings are taken for the security and collection of
all the Borough's claims.
(14)He shall be the Purchasing Officer of the Borough and he shall
purchase, in accordance with the provisions of the Borough Code,
all supplies and equipment for the various agencies, boards,
departments, and other offices of the Borough in an amount not to
exceed the maximum amount authorized by the Borough Code
without the consent of Council. He shall keep an account of all
purchases and shall, from time to time, or when directed by
Council, make a full written report thereof. He shall also issue rules
and regulations, subject to the approval of Council, governing the
requisition and purchasing of all materials, supplies and
equipment.
(15) All complaints regarding services or personnel of the Borough shall
be referred to the office of the Manager. He, or an officer
designated by him, shall investigate and dispose of such
complaints, and the Manager shall report thereon to Council.
(16)He shall cooperate with the Borough Council at all times and in all
matters that the best interests of the Borough and of the general
public may be maintained.
§ 50-5 CATASAUQUA CODE § 50-6
45:96
§ 50-6. Delegation of Mayor's powers and duties.
The Mayor is hereby authorized to delegate to the Borough Manager,
subject to recall by written notification at any time, any of his nonlegislative
and nonjudicial powers and duties.
§ 50-7. Limitation on Council's powers.
Neither the Council nor any of its committees or members thereof shall
dictate or attempt to dictate the hiring of any person to, or his discharge
from, employment by the Manager, or in any manner take part in the hiring,
suspending or discharging of employees in the administrative service of the
Borough except as required to do so by the civil service provisions of the
Code. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Council, its committees, and
its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the
Borough Manager and neither the Council nor any of its committees, or any
of its members shall give orders, publicly or privately, to any subordinates
of the Manager. Provided, however, that the Manager shall at all times
be and remain subject to all lawful directions, restrictions and provisions
of Council properly adopted or enacted at a regularly constituted public
meeting thereof.
§ 50-8. Disability or absence of Manager.
If the Manager becomes ill or needs to be absent from the Borough, he shall
designate one qualified member of his staff who shall perform the duties
of the Manager during his absence or disability. The person so designated
shall not perform these duties for a period longer than two weeks without
the approval of the Council.
Chapter 55
PENSIONS, RETIREMENT AND BENEFITS
Chapter 60
PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 60-1. Establishment.
A Planning Commission consisting of five members is hereby created and
established for the Borough of Catasauqua, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania,
pursuant to the provisions of Article II, Section 201, of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as established by the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L.
805, No. 247, as amended and reenacted.
§ 60-2. Composition; terms of office.
The Planning Commission shall be comprised of five members who shall be
appointed for terms of office of four years, except that the terms of office for
§ 50-6 PENSIONS, RETIREMENT AND BENEFITS § 60-2
55:97
the members first appointed shall be so fixed that no more than two shall be
reappointed or replaced during any future calendar year.
§ 60-3. Powers and duties.
The Planning Commission shall have all the powers and duties conferred
and imposed upon it as set forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, established by the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as amended
and reenacted.
Chapter 65
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Civil service — See Ch. 30. Pensions, retirement and benefits — See Ch.
55.
§ 60-2 CATASAUQUA CODE § 60-3
65:98
ARTICLE I
Part-Time and Extra Officers
[Adopted 5-1-1978 by Ord. No. 764 (Ch. I, Secs. 65 to 70.1, of the
1962 Code)]
§ 65-1. Selection of part-time or extra officers. [Amended 7-6-1999
by Ord. No. 1100]
Borough Council shall select from a list of qualified applicants submitted by
the Mayor and Chief of Police.
§ 65-2. Preparation of list of applicants. [Amended 7-6-1999 by Ord.
No. 1100]
The list of qualified applicants shall be prepared by the Mayor and Chief of
Police.
§ 65-3. Civil service and police contract provisions shall not apply.
No part-time or extra police shall be subject to the civil service provisions
of the Borough Code, nor are they subject or covered by the terms of the
police contract for full-time officers.
§ 65-4. Rules of conduct shall apply.
Except for the provisions concerning dismissal, all part-time or extra police
shall be subject to the rules and regulations on police conduct of the
Borough.
§ 65-5. Removal of part-time or extra officers.
Part-time or extra police officers once appointed by Council can be removed
at any time for any reason by a majority vote of Council.
§ 65-6. Swearing in.
After being selected as a part-time or extra police officer, each person so
selected shall be sworn in by the Mayor.
§ 65-7. Police power of part-time or extra officers.
Part-time or extra police shall have all law enforcement powers of full-time
police.
§ 65-1 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 65-7
65:99

ARTICLE II
Establishment and Administration
[Adopted 1-8-1979 by Ord. No. 778 (Ch. I, Secs. 51 to 64.7, of the
1962 Code)]
§ 65-8. Department recognized and established.
The existing Police Department of Catasauqua is hereby recognized and
established as the Police Department of said Borough.
§ 65-9. Enumeration of ranks.
There is hereby established the following ranks for police in the Borough:
Chief of Police, Captain, Lieutenant, Sergeant and Patrolman.
§ 65-10. Appointment to ranks.
Borough Council may designate one of said policemen as Chief of Police.
Borough Council may also appoint one or more qualified candidates as
determined by the Civil Service Rules and Regulations (see Chapter 30
of this Code) to the ranks of Captain, Lieutenant and Sergeant. Said
appointments by Council are permissive only and it is not required that all
ranks be filled.
§ 65-11. Order of ranks.
The Chief of Police shall be the head of the Department and have
supervision over all officers and members thereof. Following him in rank
shall be the captain, the lieutenant, the sergeants and patrolmen, in order
of seniority in rank of each group.
§ 65-12. Detectives. [Amended 7-6-1999 by Ord. No. 1100]
There is hereby established a position of detective within the Catasauqua
Police Department. The Mayor may appoint one or more police officers to
this position at the Mayor's sole discretion. The Mayor may remove and/
or replace any police officer appointed to this position at any time for any
reason. It is specifically understood that "detective" is a position and not
a rank protected under civil service provisions. The officers assigned to
the position of detective shall have primary responsibility to undertake the
investigation of complex crimes and to take over and complete the criminal
investigation after regular police officers have initially gone to the scene of
a criminal occurrence.
§ 65-13. Duties of Chief of Police. [Amended 7-6-1999 by Ord. No.
1100]
The Chief of Police shall be the keeper of the Borough lockup and shall have
custody of all persons incarcerated therein. He shall keep such records and
make such reports concerning the activities of his Department as may be
required by statute or by the Mayor. The Chief shall be responsible for the
§ 65-8 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 65-13
65:101
performance by the Police Department of its functions and all persons who
are members of the Police Department shall serve subject to the orders of
the Chief of Police. The Chief shall have the power to appoint officers who
have positions of detective to duties other than those enumerated as their
primary function on a temporary basis.
§ 65-14. Rules and regulations applicable to all police officers.
The Borough Council may promulgate and must approve all rules and
regulations for the conduct of police officers within the Department.
Violators of these rules shall be subject to disciplinary procedures provided
under the civil service provisions of the Borough Code (see Chapter 30 of
this Code).
§ 65-15. Special orders. [Amended 7-6-1999 by Ord. No. 1100]
The Chief of Police and/or the Mayor may issue command orders which
shall be posted in the police headquarters. Any violations of these command
orders shall result in disciplinary action against the police officer in
violation of the same.
§ 65-16. Part-time police.
See Article I of this chapter.
§ 65-17. Special police.
Pursuant to the Borough Code, during an emergency, the Mayor may
appoint special police for the Borough of Catasauqua, said police to have
full police powers for the duration of their appointment.
§ 65-18. Special school police. [Amended 7-6-1999 by Ord. No.
1100]
Pursuant to the Borough Code, upon request of the Board of School
Directors of the school district in which the Borough is located, the Mayor
may appoint special school police who shall have the duty of controlling
or directing traffic at or near schools and who shall be in suitable and
distinctive uniform and shall display a badge or other sign of authority.
Such police shall be vested with all the power of local police officers related
to traffic direction while on duty and shall be under and subject to the
direction of the Mayor. They shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and
shall not come within the civil service provisions and shall not be entitled to
participate in any police pension plan or plans now in effect or hereinafter
effective.
§ 65-19. Dog handlers. [Added 3-1-1982 by Ord. No. 835; amended
7-6-1999 by Ord. No. 1100]
There is hereby established a dog handler position within the Catasauqua
Police Department. The Mayor and Borough Council may appoint police
§ 65-13 CATASAUQUA CODE § 65-19
65:102
officers to this position if Council and the Mayor believe that an officer
is qualified and a need exists for the same. The Mayor and Council may
remove any police officer appointed to this position at any time for any
reason. It is specifically understood that dog handler is a position and not a
rank protected under the civil service provisions. The officer assigned to the
position of dog handler shall use a dog approved by the Mayor and Chief of
Police and shall undertake the necessary training to enable him to carry out
his duties effectively with the dog. The duties of the dog handler shall be as
directed by the Mayor and Chief of Police and shall be in accordance with
the police regulations concerning the same.
§ 65-20. Rules and regulations applicable to part-time police,
special police and special school police.
All persons duly serving as part-time police, special police and special
school police shall be subject to the same discipline, rules and regulations
as apply to the regular patrolmen, except as to uniform.
§ 65-21. Residence requirements for police officers.
All police officers heretofore appointed and in the employ of the Borough
of Catasauqua who are residents in the Borough of Catasauqua or within a
distance not greater than 10 miles from the Borough of Catasauqua and any
police officer hereafter employed by the Borough of Catasauqua shall reside
within the geographical limits of the Borough of Catasauqua or within a
distance not greater than 10 miles from the geographical limits of the
Borough of Catasauqua.
§ 65-22. Time limit for meeting residence requirements; effect of
failure to do so.
§ 65-23. Authority of Police Civil Service Commission.15
The Police Civil Service Commission of the Borough of Catasauqua is hereby
authorized by rule or regulation to require police officers to comply with the
residence requirements established by this article.
A. Any police officer hereafter employed by said Borough of Catasauqua
and not living within its geographical limits or within a distance of 10
miles from the geographical limits of the Borough of Catasauqua shall
be given 12 months following the close of his term of probationary
service to meet the residence requirements as set forth in § 65-21
hereof.
B. If said police officer shall not have complied with the requirements of
this article within the said period of 12 months, the Borough Council
may, in its discretion, either suspend such police officer until
requirements of residence are met or dismiss the said police officer
immediately.
15.Editor's Note: See Ch. 30, Civil Service, of this Code.
§ 65-19 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 65-24
65:103
§ 65-24. Interpretation of residence requirements.
The requirements for police officers of the Borough of Catasauqua, as set
forth in this article, are in addition to any and all requirements set forth by
any Act of Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 65-24 CATASAUQUA CODE § 65-24
65:104
Chapter 68
RECORDS
§ 65-24 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 65-24
65:105

ARTICLE I
Open Records Policy
[Adopted 11-3-2008 by Ord. No. 1227]
§ 68-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this policy is to assure compliance with Act 3 of 2008, the
Pennsylvania Right-to-Know Law, as amended; to provide access to public
records of Catasauqua Borough; to preserve the integrity of Catasauqua
Borough's records; and to minimize the financial impact to the residents of
the Borough regarding the resources utilized in the receipt and processing
of public record requests and the retrieval and copying of public records.
§ 68-2. Designation of Open Records Officer; fees; guidelines.
A. The Borough of Catasauqua hereby designates the Borough Manager as
the Open Records Officer of the general Borough documents. As
concerns all police documents, the Borough designates the Chief of
Police of the Catasauqua Police Department as the Open Records
Officer. It is the policy of the Borough to require the presence of a
designated employee when public records are examined and inspected.
B. Further, the Borough will charge reasonable fees for the duplication of
public records of the Borough or the Police Department.
C. In accord with the Right to Know Act, the Open Records Officer will
comply with the following guidelines to the extent practical:
(1) Upon receiving a request for a public record, the Open Records
Officer shall:
(a) Note the date of receipt on the written request;
(b) Compute the day on which the five-day period will expire and
make a notation of that date on the written request; and
(c) Maintain a copy of the written request for the record until the
matter has been concluded.
(2) The Borough Manager/Chief of Police may designate certain
employee(s) to process public record requests.
(3) All requests for public records of the Borough under this policy
shall be specific in identifying and describing each public record
requested. In no case shall the Borough be required to create a
public record which does not exist or to compile, maintain, format
or organize a public record in a manner in which the Borough does
not currently compile, maintain, format or organize the public
record. All requests for public records shall be submitted in writing
on forms prepared and provided by the Borough, a copy of which is
attached to this article,16 or on the form of the commonwealth's
Office of Open Records. No other form will be accepted. All
§ 68-1 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 68-2
65:107
requests shall include the date of the request; requestor's name,
address, and telephone number; certification of United States
residency; signature of requestor; and, if duplication is requested,
appropriate payment.
(4) The Open Records Officer, or designated employee, shall make a
good faith effort to determine whether each record requested is a
public record.
(5) The Open Records Officer or designated employee shall respond to
the requestor within five business days from the date of receipt of
the written request. If the Borough does not respond within five
business days of receipt thereof, the request is deemed denied.
(6) The response provided by the Borough shall consist of:
(a) Approval for access to the public record;
(b) Review of the request by the designated employee; or
(c) Denial of access to the record requested.
(7) The response provided by the Borough shall consist of:
(a) Approval for access to the public record;
(b) Redaction of portions of the public record; or
(c) Request for additional time for the retrieval of the stored
record in a remote location;
(d) Inform the party that additional time will be necessary because
of staffing limitation;
(e) Inform the party that legal review is necessary to determine
whether the record is subject to access under the Act; or
(f) Request an extension of time from the requestor, in writing.
(8) The fees for duplication of public records shall be as established by
the commonwealth's Office of Open Records or the Borough of
Catasauqua, whichever is greater. The Borough may, at its
discretion, waive the fees.
(9) In the event the estimated cost of fulfilling a request submitted
under this policy is expected to exceed $100, the designated
employee(s) shall obtain the expected cost in advance of fulfilling
the request to avoid unwarranted expense of Borough resources.
(10) Review of request.
(a) If the request is being reviewed, the notice provided by the
Borough shall be in writing and include the reason for the
16.Editor's Note: A copy of the form is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 68-2 CATASAUQUA CODE § 68-2
65:108
review and the expected response date, which shall be within
30 days of the notice of review. If the Borough does not
respond within 30 days thereof, the request is deemed denied.
Review of the request is limited to situations where:
[1] The record requested contains information which is
subject to access, as well as information which is not
subject to access that must be redacted prior to a grant of
access. The redacted information is considered a denial as
to that information;
[2] The record requires retrieval from a remote location;
[3] A timely response cannot be accomplished due to staffing
limitations;
[4] A legal review is necessary to determine whether the
record requested is a public record;
[5] The requestor has failed to comply with the Borough's
policy and procedure requirements; or
[6] The requestor refuses to pay the applicable fees.
[7] The extent or nature of the request precludes a response
within the required time period.
(b) Upon a determination that one of the factors listed above
applies, the Borough shall send written notice to the requestor
within five business days of receipt of the request for access.
The notice shall include a statement notifying the requestor
that the request for access is being reviewed, the reason for
the review, a reasonable date that a response is expected to be
provided and an estimate of applicable fees owed when the
record becomes available. If the date that a response is
expected to be provided is in excess of 30 days, following the
five business days allowed for, the request for access shall be
deemed denied unless the requestor has agreed in writing to
an extension to the date specified in the notice. If the requestor
agrees to the extension, the request shall be deemed denied on
the day following the date specified in the notice if the agency
has not provided a response by that date.
(11) If access to the record requested is denied, the notice provided by
the Borough shall be in writing as indicated on the form attached
hereto17 entitled "Denial of Request to Review and/or Duplicate
Catasauqua Borough Records."
(12) The Borough may:
17.Editor's Note: A copy of the form is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 68-2 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 68-2
65:109
(a) Deny access to the public record under the provisions of Act 3
of 2008 including, but not limited to, failure to comply with the
Borough's policies regarding access to records, and the
requestor's refusal to pay applicable fees authorized by this
Act;
(b) Deny the record as it is one of the exceptions under Section
708 of the Public Records Act;
(c) Deny the request as the record is protected by privilege;
(d) Deny the request as the record is exempt from disclosure
under any other federal or state law, regulation or judicial
order or decree;
(e) Deny the record as it is a disruptive request;
(f) Deny the record as it may request information which could lead
to disaster or potential damage.
(13)Within 30 days of the mailing date of the final determination of the
appeals officer, the requestor or Borough may file a petition for
review or other document as required by rule of court with the
Court of Common Pleas for Lehigh County. The decision of the
court shall contain findings of fact and conclusions of law based
upon the evidence as a whole. The decision shall clearly and
concisely explain the rationale for the decision. A petition for
review under this section shall stay the release of documents until a
decision is issued.
(14) This policy shall be available for review at the Borough office.
§ 68-2 CATASAUQUA CODE § 68-2
65:110
Chapter 70
RECREATION BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 195.
§ 70-1. Creation; membership; terms of office; replacement.
[Amended 12-1-2003 by Ord. No. 1161]
§ 70-2. Duties. [Amended 12-1-2003 by Ord. No. 1161]
The duties of the Recreation Board shall be to advise and to make
recommendations to Borough Council on recreational programs and
services; to assist the Borough Manager in the preparation of the annual
budget; plan activities throughout the year and work with the Catasauqua
Public Works Department of Recreation Operator in planning activities
throughout the summer.
§ 70-3. Organization; required meetings.
The members of the Board shall elect their own Chairman and Secretary
and shall select all other necessary officers to serve for a period of one
year. The Chairman shall be responsible for conducting and presiding over
the meetings, and the Secretary shall be responsible for keeping and
maintaining minutes of each meeting and submitting copies thereof to the
Borough Council within 30 days of said meeting. The Board shall conduct at
least one meeting for each quarter of a year, a portion of the first of which
A. There shall be created a Recreation Board consisting of five members,
who shall be appointed by the Borough Council of the Borough of
Catasauqua by resolution. Each member shall serve for a period of four
years; however, the initial appointments shall be made in such a manner
that the members' terms expire as follows:
(1) One member within one year from the date of their appointment.
(2) One member within two years from the date of their appointment.
(3) One member within three years from the date of their appointment.
(4) Two members within four years from the date of their appointment.
B. After the expiration of the original terms provided, all members shall be
appointed for a term of four years unless dismissed or removed by
Council prior thereto. Any vacancies occurring for any reason shall be
filled by the Borough Council by appointing an individual to serve the
balance of the unexpired term of the member who resigns or is
removed.
§ 68-2 RECREATION BOARD § 70-3
70:111
shall be utilized for the purpose of organizing and electing officers and such
other meetings as it shall deem necessary and proper.
§ 70-4. Voting; notice of meetings. [Amended 12-1-2003 by Ord. No.
1161]
All action taken by the Board shall be taken only after a vote of three
affirmative votes has been obtained and shall be effective only at a meeting
where each member is given at least 48 hours' prior written notice.
§ 70-5. Annual report. [Amended 12-1-2003 by Ord. No. 1161]
By September 30 of each calendar year the Board shall submit in writing a
report summarizing:
§ 70-6. Recreation Committee attendance.
At least one member from the Recreation Committee of Borough Council
shall be in attendance at each Recreation Board meeting. The responsibility
for said attendance shall be with the Chairman of the Recreation
Committee.
Chapter 75
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Borough Council — See Ch. 15.
Manager — See Ch. 50.
Pensions, retirement and benefits — See Ch.
55.
Earned Income Taxation Department — See
Ch. 90.
A. Its programs for the year past.
B. Problems encountered.
C. Recommendations.
D. Summary of recommendations for the budget of the next succeeding
year.
E. Such other matters as it deems appropriate in properly advising
Council.
§ 70-3 CATASAUQUA CODE § 70-6
70:112
ARTICLE I
Solicitor
[Adopted 8-6-1948 by Ord. No. 339 (Ch. I, Sec. 71, of the 1962
Code)]
§ 75-1. Basis of compensation of Solicitor. [Amended 2-2-1970 by
Ord. No. 636]
The Borough Solicitor shall receive an annual retainer in such amounts as
Council shall, from time to time, prescribe, to be payable monthly. Said
retainer shall be paid in full compensation for attendance at no more
than 12 meetings per year; correspondence; telephone consultations and
advice; drafting ordinances and resolutions; office conferences on routine
matters; general, routine advice and services. Extra charges shall be made
for all other items of work, including but not limited to formal written
opinions; drafting contracts, leases and deeds; real estate and title work;
bond issues; proceedings to adopt, change, widen or vacate streets or
alleys; condemnation proceedings; commencement, prosecution and
defense of any legal or administrative proceedings brought for or against
the municipality, authority, or any of its members, officers or employees in
their capacity; attendance at more than 12 meetings per year; and any other
unusual or extraordinary services for which the Solicitor shall receive an
amount as shall be reasonable under the circumstances and in accordance
with customary charges for same in this locale.
§ 75-1 RECREATION BOARD § 75-1
70:113

ARTICLE II
Tax Collector
[Adopted 3-1-1965 by Ord. No. 534 (Ch. I, Sec. 120, of the 1962
Code)]
§ 75-2. Salary of Tax Collector. [Last amended 1-9-2017 by Ord. No.
1345]
The duly elected Tax Collector of the Borough of Catasauqua shall be paid
a salary of $3,500 annually for the collection of Borough of Catasauqua real
estate taxes commencing January 1, 2018.
§ 75-2 RECREATION BOARD § 75-2
70:115

ARTICLE III
Mayor
[Adopted 12-29-1973 by Ord. No. 696 (Ch. I, Sec. 1, of the 1962
Code)]
§ 75-3. Salary of Mayor. [Amended 10-6-1980 by Ord. No. 811;
11-3-1986 by Ord. No. 905]
The compensation of the Mayor of the Borough of Catasauqua shall be set
at $2,150 per year.
§ 75-3 RECREATION BOARD § 75-3
70:117

ARTICLE IV
Borough Council
[Adopted 12-29-1973 by Ord. No. 696; amended in its entirety
11-3-1986 by Ord. No. 905 (Ch. I, Secs. 22 to 25, of the 1962 Code)]
§ 75-4. Compensation of Council.
The compensation of each Councilperson of the Borough of Catasauqua
other than the President of Council shall be set at $2,000 per year.
§ 75-5. Compensation of Council President.
The compensation of the President of Council of the Borough of Catasauqua
shall be $2,150 per year.
§ 75-6. Payment subsequent to October 31, 1985.
The aforesaid compensation shall be paid only to members of Council,
the President of Council and the Mayor who were elected subsequent to
October 31, 1985. For any and all Councilpersons, Council President or
Mayor elected or appointed prior thereto, the salaries shall remain the same
as established by Ordinance 811 until the said person or persons take office
after the next municipal election involving that particular position.
§ 75-7. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect immediately and compensation shall be
payable January 1, 1987. It is the intention of this provision that the raises
enacted by Borough Council shall be effective for those members of Council,
Council President or Mayor so entitled thereto on the aforesaid date and
thereafter.
§ 75-4 RECREATION BOARD § 75-7
70:119
Chapter 80
SEXUAL HARASSMENT
§ 80-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SEXUAL HARASSMENT — Any unwelcome sexual advances, requests for
sexual favors and other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature when:
§ 80-2. Sexual harassment prohibited.
Sexual harassment is hereby prohibited between employees of the Borough
of Catasauqua. Sexual harassment is declared to be a serious violation of
the work rules of this Borough and, if proven, shall be grounds for the
imposition of discipline. Discipline for the offense shall range from an oral
or written reprimand to suspension without pay or, ultimately, termination
depending upon the following:
§ 80-3. Employee rights.
Any employee who believes that another employee is engaging in sexual
harassment may file a complaint within a reasonable period of time after
the event (normally not more than 180 days).
§ 80-4. Retaliation prohibited.
No person filing a complaint under this policy or who legitimately assists
another in prosecution of any such complaint shall be subjected to
retribution or retaliation of any kind for doing so.
§ 80-5. Filing complaints.
All complaints of sexual harassment shall be filed in writing with the
Borough Manager or, in cases involving the Borough Manager, the Council
Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term
or condition of a person's employment; or
A.
Submission to or rejection of such conduct by a person is used as a
basis for employment decisions affecting that person; or
B.
Such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with
a person's work performance; or
C.
Such conduct creates an intimidating, hostile or offensive work
environment.
D.
A. The individual facts of any given case; and
B. The employment record of the person committing such harassment.
§ 75-7 CATASAUQUA CODE § 80-5
80:120
President. The complaint shall state with specificity the dates, times and
places of the actions complained of and the specific facts surrounding the
incidents complained of.
§ 80-6. Investigation.
§ 80-7. Adjudication.
A. Complaints filed under this policy shall be promptly and thoroughly
investigated by the Borough Manager or his designee. If the complaint
involves the Borough Manager, the investigation shall be conducted by
the Council President or his designee.
B. Upon completion of the investigation, the investigator shall prepare a
comprehensive report addressing all allegations in the complaint and
objectively documenting all relevant factual findings of the
investigation. The investigatory report shall contain conclusions as to
the complaint's validity and the sanction or penalty to be imposed.
C. The report shall be immediately forwarded to Borough Council and a
copy of the same shall be sent to both the complainant and the party
subject to the investigation.
D. Either the complainant or the party subject to the investigation shall
have the right to request a hearing before Borough Council by filing a
request for the same, in writing, within 15 days after receipt of the
report of the investigator. If no request for a hearing is filed, the report
of the investigator shall become final and the decision dismissing the
complaint or imposing sanctions shall become the final determination of
the complaint.
A. Within 30 days after receiving receipt of a request for hearing, the
Borough Council shall hold an administrative hearing in public or in
private at the request of the defendant on the complaint. The hearing
shall be conducted before a court reporter. Witnesses may be
subpoenaed and required to provide testimony. The court reporter shall
require all witnesses to provide testimony under oath and shall prepare
a verbatim transcript/recording of the proceedings which shall serve as
the official record of the hearing.
B. Either party shall be entitled to attend the hearing and testify in his or
her own behalf, and shall be entitled to confront and cross-examine the
employee who filed the complaint. Either party may have his or her own
counsel at said hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing or within 15
days thereafter, the Borough Council shall make findings concerning
the innocence or guilt of the accused of the offense of sexual
harassment.
C. If the Council President has acted in the capacity of investigator, he
shall not participate as a hearing officer with the rest of Council nor
shall he have any vote at the conclusion of said hearing.
§ 80-5 SEXUAL HARASSMENT § 80-7
80:121
§ 80-8. False accusations.
Due to the serious and private nature of this offense, false accusations of
sexual harassment are, and will be treated as, a disciplinary offense and will
result in the same level of punishment as that applied to one who engages
in sexual behavior.
Chapter 90
TAXATION DEPARTMENT, EARNED INCOME
GENERAL REFERENCES
Manager — See Ch. 50. Taxation — See Ch. 240.
§ 90-1. Earned Income Tax Department created.
There is hereby created a department to be known as the "Earned Income
Tax Department," which shall administer the provisions of Earned Income
Tax Ordinance No. 397 of the Borough of Catasauqua,18 as enacted and
reenacted, and, further, administer the provisions of any ordinance or
agreement providing for reciprocity in the collection and transmission of
earned income or wage taxes between the Borough of Catasauqua and any
other municipality and the provisions of any agreement for collection of
such taxes for Catasauqua Union School District as may be approved by
Borough Council of Borough of Catasauqua and Catasauqua Union School
District.
§ 90-2. Manager appointed Income Tax Officer; authority.
Pursuant to Section 5 of Ordinance No. 43519 of the Borough of Catasauqua,
the Borough Manager is hereby appointed Income Tax Officer ex officio,
and, as such, shall perform all the duties of such office as provided in
Ordinance No. 397, as enacted and reenacted, and he is hereby authorized
to organize the Department hereby created and employ such help as may be
necessary for the proper administration of the duties of said Department, at
all times subject to the approval of the Borough Council of the Borough of
Catasauqua.
Chapter 95
D. The standard required for a finding of guilt is that the record be
supported by substantial credible evidence.
E. If a finding of guilt is made by Borough Council, Council may impose
any penalty it deems appropriate.
18.Editor's Note: See Ch. 240, Taxation.
19.Editor's Note: See Ch. 50, Manager.
§ 80-7 CATASAUQUA CODE § 90-2
90:122
WATER DEPARTMENT AND SEWAGE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 210. Water — See Ch. 265.
§ 95-1. Position of Supervisor created.
The position of Supervisor of the Water Department and Sewage
Department of the Borough of Catasauqua is hereby created.
§ 95-2. Appointment and tenure of Supervisor.
The position of Supervisor of the Water Department and the Sewage
Department shall be held by one and the same person to be appointed
by Borough Council for an indefinite term, to serve at the pleasure of
Council, and whose duties shall be such as prescribed by this chapter and
as designated from time to time by Borough Council.
§ 95-3. Duties of Supervisor.
It shall be the duty of said Supervisor to supervise the water supply system
and the sewage system of Borough of Catasauqua and the employees
thereof, and attend to the proper operation, extension and maintenance of
all water mains, branches, valves, pumps, pumping houses, wells, pumping,
purifying and fluoridating apparatus in conjunction with said water supply
system, and attend to the proper operation, extension and maintenance
of all trunk lines, branches, valves, pumps, pumping and other apparatus
pertaining to the sewage system, the sewage disposal plant and the
inspection of any connections to existing lines of the sewer system, and
report monthly to Borough Council the condition of the water supply system
and the sewage system, together with any recommendations for the
collection of delinquent water and sewer rentals and for extensions, repairs
or improvements to said systems, and he shall perform such other and
further duties as may be prescribed from time to time by Borough Council.
§ 95-4. Compensation of Supervisor.
The said Supervisor shall receive such compensation for his services as
shall be fixed from time to time by Borough Council.
§ 90-2 WATER DEPARTMENT AND SEWAGE § 95-4
95:123
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 98
ALARM DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 185.
§ 98-1. Definitions; word usage.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCIDENTAL FALSE ALARM — Any false alarm which is not an
intentional false alarm, as defined herein, or not when an intrusion,
crime, fire or other emergency has actually occurred.
ALARM — A communication to the Police Department or Fire
Department indicating that a crime, fire or other emergency situation
warranting immediate action by the Police Department has occurred or
is occurring.
ALARM DEVICE — A mechanical device designed to automatically
transmit an alarm by wire, telephone, radio or other means directly to
the Police or Fire Department; to a person who is instructed to notify
the Police or Fire Department of the alarm; or to activate a bell or
sounding device to be heard outside a building which is intended to
alert the Police or Fire Department or others to the existence of a crime,
fire or other emergency situation warranting police action.
DIRECT ALARM DEVICE — An alarm device, other than a telephone
dialer alarm device, designed to transmit an alarm directly to the Police
or Fire Department.
FALSE ALARM — An alarm to which the Police or Fire Department
responds resulting from the activation of an alarm device when a crime,
fire or other emergency warranting immediate action by the Police or
Fire Department has not in fact occurred.
INDIRECT ALARM DEVICE — An alarm device designed to transmit
an alarm to a person who is instructed to notify the Police or Fire
Department of the alarm.
INTENTIONAL FALSE ALARM — A false alarm resulting from the
intentional activation of an alarm device by an individual under
circumstances where that individual has no reasonable basis to believe
that a crime, fire or other emergency warranting immediate action by
the Police or Fire Department has occurred or is occurring.
§ 95-4 CATASAUQUA CODE § 98-1
95:124
§ 98-2. Registration and service fees.
§ 98-3. Permits required.
PERMIT HOLDER — A person to whom the Borough has issued an
alarm device permit.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership, incorporated
association or other similar entity.
TELEPHONE DIALER ALARM DEVICE — An alarm device designed to
automatically transmit a recorded message over regular telephone lines
directly to the Police Department or Fire Department or to a person
who is instructed to notify the Police or Fire Department of the alarm.
B. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural; the plural shall
include the singular; and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
A. The Council of the Borough of Catasauqua may, by resolution, establish
reasonable registration fees for installations permitted hereafter.
B. Each property owner or lessee utilizing any alarm (except public
institutions) shall be charged a fee for service by the Borough of
Catasauqua for the fourth, and each subsequent, false alarm which
occurs in any six-month period. Public institutions utilizing any alarm
shall be charged a fee for service for the sixth, and each subsequent,
false alarm which occurs in any consecutive six-month period. The user
fees shall be assessed as follows:
(1) The base fee for service shall be $75.
(2) The supplemental fee for service if a fire company call-out results
shall be $300.
(3) If any property owner desires to appeal from the imposition of any
fee for service, the appeal shall be directed, in writing, to the Chief
of Police within 30 days of the date the fee is assessed or imposed.
(4) If any property owner seeks to appeal the issuance of a citation, the
appeal shall be directed to the District Justice 31-1-05.
A. It shall be unlawful for a property owner, lessee of property or a person
otherwise occupying a premises within the Borough to put an alarm
device into operation on his premises or to allow an alarm device to be
put into operation on his premises without first obtaining an alarm
device permit from the Borough of Catasauqua. It shall also be unlawful
for a property owner, lessee of property or a person otherwise
occupying a premises outside of the Borough to put into operation on
his premises an alarm device which results in notification to the
Borough's Police or Fire Department should this alarm be activated or
to allow such an alarm device to be put into operation on his premises
§ 98-1 WATER DEPARTMENT AND SEWAGE § 98-3
95:125
without first obtaining an alarm device permit from the Borough of
Catasauqua.
B. Application for alarm device permit.
(1) In order to apply for an alarm device permit, a person must submit
an application to the Borough stating:
(a) His name;
(b) His home and business addresses and the telephone number of
each;
(c) The location at which the alarm device will be installed and
operated;
(d) The names, addresses and telephone numbers of at least two
individuals who have keys to the premises at which the alarm
device is located and who are authorized to enter the premises
at any time, but who do not reside at the premises at which the
alarm device is located; and
(e) A general written description of the device other than
schematics.
(2) If the device is to be leased or rented from, or is to be serviced
pursuant to a service agreement by, a person other than the person
making application for an alarm device permit, the name, address
and telephone number of that person must be stated in the
application.
(3) In addition, each person submitting an application for an alarm
device permit shall submit a signed statement in the following
form, which the Borough shall furnish to any person wishing to
apply for an alarm device permit:
"I (We), the undersigned applicant(s) for an alarm device permit,
intending to be legally bound hereby, agree with the Borough that
neither I (we), nor anyone claiming by, through or under me (us),
shall make any claim against the Borough, its officials or agents,
for any damages caused to the premises at which the alarm
device, which is the subject of this application, is or will be
located, if such damage is caused by a forced entry to said
premises by employees of the Borough in order to answer an
alarm from said alarm device at a time when said premises is or
appears to be unattended or when in the discretion of said
employees the circumstances appear to warrant a forced entry."
C. A person applying for an alarm device permit for a telephone dialer
alarm device, local sounding device, or an indirect alarm device shall
submit the required fee along with his application. The fee shall be fixed
from time to time by resolution of the Borough.
§ 98-3 CATASAUQUA CODE § 98-3
95:126
D. The Borough of Catasauqua shall, within 14 weekdays from receipt of
an application for an alarm device permit, either grant an alarm device
permit to the applicant or notify the applicant in writing that his
application has been denied and the reason or reasons why it has been
denied.
E. An application for an alarm device permit may only be denied for the
following reasons:
(1) The application submitted by the applicant does not comply with
Subsection B or C of this section.
(2) The applicant's alarm device does not conform to the operational
standards set forth in § 98-3 of this chapter.
F. Notwithstanding the language contained in Subsection A of this
section, it shall not be unlawful for a person to continue to operate an
alarm device on his premises without an alarm device permit for a
period of 90 days after the effective date of this chapter; provided that
said alarm device was in operation on the effective date of this chapter.
G. The Borough shall have the power to revoke an alarm device permit. An
alarm device permit shall be revoked by notifying the permit holder in
writing that his alarm device permit has been revoked and the reason or
reasons why it has been revoked. Said written notice shall be:
(1) Delivered personally to the permit holder, in which case the
revocation shall be effective immediately upon delivery; or
(2) Mailed by certified mail, postage prepaid, to the permit holder at
his last known address, in which case the revocation shall be
effective three days after mailing.
H. An alarm device permit may only be revoked for the following reasons:
(1) Failure of an alarm device to conform to the operational standards
set forth in § 98-3 of this chapter.
(2) Failure of a permit holder to pay a false alarm charge assessed to
him by the Police Department under the provisions of § 98-4 of this
chapter within 30 days of the mailing to him of a notice of the
assessment of a false alarm charge.
(3) The occurrence of more than three false alarms from an alarm
device during any twelve-month period.
(4) The occurrence of an intentional false alarm caused by the permit
holder or by an individual over the age of 15 who resides on the
premises where the alarm device is located.
I. A person who has had his alarm device permit revoked under
Subsections G and H of this section may reapply for an alarm device
permit 45 days after the effective date of such revocation; provided,
§ 98-3 WATER DEPARTMENT AND SEWAGE § 98-3
95:127
§ 98-4. Operational standards.
however, that if a person's alarm device permit was revoked for
nonpayment of a false alarm charge, the Borough of Catasauqua shall
deny said application unless said charge has been paid.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a person who has had his alarm device
permit twice revoked on the basis of an occurrence of an intentional
false alarm may not reapply for an alarm device permit for one year
from the effective date of the second revocation.
A. If an alarm device is designed to transmit a recorded message, the
duration of such recorded message shall not exceed 30 seconds. The
contents of the recorded message shall be intelligible and in a format
approved by the Borough.
B. An alarm device need not contain a delay service which causes a delay
to occur between the time the alarm device receives a triggering
stimulus and the time the alarm device transmits an alarm.
C. An alarm device must allow the permit holder to abort the alarm
signals.
D. If an alarm device is designed to cause a bell, siren or sound-making
device to be activated on or near the premises on which the alarm
device is installed at the time it gives an alarm, said alarm device shall
be designed to deactivate the bell, siren or other sound-making device
after 30 minutes of operation. Preexisting units must be modified for a
30 minute device, unless said unit cannot be modified without
replacement.
E. All alarm devices shall meet the applicable standards of the
Underwriters Laboratories and/or the National Fire Protection
Association, and/or other recognized industry standards, and shall be
permitted under this chapter if in conformity thereto. An alarm device
which does not meet any of the above standards or for which there is no
recognized industry standard shall require the applicant for a permit to
submit evidence of the reliability or suitability of the alarm device. Any
permit issued for such an alarm device which does not conform to the
recognized standard shall be conditionally subject to satisfactory
performance of said alarm device after installation. The applicant for a
permit may be required to submit subsequent evidence of the reliability
and suitability of the alarm device.
F. The sensory mechanism used in connection with an alarm device must
be adjusted to suppress false indications of fire or intrusion, so that the
alarm device will not be activated by impulses due to transient pressure
change in water pipes, short flashes of light, wind noises such as the
rattling or vibrating of doors or windows, vehicular noise adjacent to
the premises, or other forces unrelated to genuine alarm situations.
§ 98-3 CATASAUQUA CODE § 98-4
95:128
§ 98-5. False alarms.
§ 98-6. Testing.
No person shall conduct or test any alarm device without first obtaining
permission from the Police Department. Where the equipment is keyed
through an intermediary, no such permission is necessary unless the alarm
or signal is to be relayed to the central receiving station.
G. The alarm device must be maintained by the permit holder in good
repair to assure reliability of operation.
A. Intentional false alarms. No permit holder or person shall create an
intentional false alarm.
B. Accidental false alarms. Any person or permit holder causing accidental
false alarms for any reason shall pay to the Borough of Catasauqua a
charge for each and every false alarm to which the Police and/or Fire
Department responds, in each calendar year, as follows:
(1) Alarms sounded after first month of installation:
(a) First alarm: no charge.
(b) Fine for second alarm for a twelve-month period: $25.
(c) All other alarms per twelve-month period: Minimum fine of
$100; maximum fine of $300.
C. When a false alarm occurs, the Borough of Catasauqua, within 10 days
from the date of the false alarm, shall notify the permit holder of the
alarm device from which the false alarm emanated or other person
causing said false alarm that a false alarm charge is due and the
amount thereof. Such notice shall be in writing and mailed to the permit
holder or person causing said false alarm at his last known address by
regular mail, postage prepaid. Failure of the Borough to mail notice of
assessment of a false alarm charge within 10 days from the occurrence
of a false alarm shall preclude the Borough from assessing a false alarm
charge for said false alarm.
D. A false alarm charge shall be due and payable at the office of the
Borough of Catasauqua 30 days from the date of the mailing of the
notice of assessment of the charge.
E. Failure of a permit holder to pay a false alarm charge on or before the
date due shall subject such permit holder to revocation of his alarm
device permit under § 98-3H of this chapter.
F. Failure of a person causing a false alarm, other than a permit holder, to
pay a false alarm charge on or before the date due shall constitute a
violation of this chapter and shall subject said person to the penalties
set forth in § 98-10 hereof.
§ 98-4 WATER DEPARTMENT AND SEWAGE § 98-7
95:129
§ 98-7. Liability of municipality.
The issuance of any permit shall not constitute acceptance by the Borough
of Catasauqua of any liability to maintain any equipment, to answer alarms,
nor otherwise render the Borough of Catasauqua liable to any person for
any loss or damage relating to the alarm system or procedure.
§ 98-8. Administration; enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of this chapter shall be functions of the
Borough of Catasauqua and shall include the following:
§ 98-9. Right to appeal.
Whenever, under the provisions of this chapter, the Borough of Catasauqua
is empowered to make a decision with respect to the installation, operation
or maintenance of any alarm device, or with respect to the denial or
revocation of any permit relating thereto, any applicant for a permit or
permit holder aggrieved by such decision may, within 10 days following the
decision, file a written appeal therefrom with the Code Hearing Board of the
Borough of Catasauqua, whereupon the Code Hearing Board shall promptly
conduct a hearing and affirm, modify or reverse the decision appealed from.
The decision of the Code Hearing Board may be appealed as provided under
the Local Agency Law.20
§ 98-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord. No.
1288]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not more
than $300, and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. Any
person found guilty of violating an ordinance shall be assessed court costs
A. Authority to accept or reject a permit application or revoke a permit
because of a misrepresentation or false statement contained in any
application for a permit, failure to correct any deficiencies in equipment
or operation of an alarm device after receipt of due notice from the
Borough, or not meeting other conditions and specifications of this
chapter.
B. Authority to order the disconnection of an alarm device until such
device is made to comply with operational standards set forth herein,
but only when evidence of failure to comply with said standards
imposes a burden upon the Borough as a result of false alarms.
C. Authority, at reasonable times and upon written notice, to enter upon
any premises within the Borough to inspect the installation and
operation of an alarm device.
20.See 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 105.
§ 98-7 CATASAUQUA CODE § 98-10
95:130
and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement
proceedings.
§ 98-11. Effective Date.
This chapter shall become effective on November 1, 2006.
Chapter 100
AMUSEMENTS AND AMUSEMENT DEVICES
§ 98-10 WATER DEPARTMENT AND SEWAGE § 98-11
95:131

ARTICLE I
Amusement Licenses
[Adopted 8-7-1940 by Ord. No. 322 (Ch. XI, Part 1A, of the 1962
Code)]
§ 100-1. License required for certain amusements.
No person, firm or corporation shall be permitted to open, conduct or
operate any show, exhibition or amusement of the classes hereinafter
enumerated for profit within the limits of the Borough of Catasauqua,
Pennsylvania, without first obtaining a license therefor from the Mayor of
said Borough in the following form:
$ Catasauqua, Pa. . . . . . . . .
has paid to me for the use
of the Borough of Catasauqua
to conduct a
within said Borough for a period of
and no longer.
§ 100-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord. No.
1288]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall open, conduct or operate any
show, exhibition or amusement of the classes hereinafter enumerated within
the limits of said Borough without having previously obtained a license as
aforesaid, or who on demand shall refuse to show his or their license to said
Mayor, or any police officer of said Borough, shall be deemed an offender,
or offenders, against this article and on conviction of such offense before
said Mayor, or any District Justice of said Borough, shall pay the sum of
$20 in addition to the sum hereafter required as and for the license fee,
to be recovered for the use of and paid to the said Borough, with costs, as
similar fines and penalties are now collected and paid, and in default of the
immediate payment of said sum of $20 with costs, the person or persons
so in default shall be by said Mayor or District Justice committed to the
Lehigh County Jail for a period of not exceeding 30 days. Any person found
guilty of violating an ordinance shall be assessed court costs and reasonable
attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings.
§ 100-3. License to be exhibited to police.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police, or any other police officer of said
Borough, to demand the license required by this article of any person, firm
or corporation who may open, conduct or operate any show, exhibition or
amusement of the classes hereinafter enumerated and inform him, or them,
of the requirements hereof, and in case the person, firm or corporation
so opening, conducting or operating any show, exhibition or amusement,
§ 100-1 WATER DEPARTMENT AND SEWAGE § 100-3
95:133
as aforesaid, refuse to show his or their license, or persist in opening,
conducting and operating, any show, exhibition or amusement, as aforesaid
without having previously obtained a license therefor, it shall be the duty of
said Chief of Police, or any other police officer, to give information thereof
to said Mayor.
§ 100-4. License fees for certain amusements. [Amended 11-7-2005
by Ord. No. 1190]
The sums or rates as set from time to time by resolution of Borough
Council21 shall be paid in advance for every license for the following
amusements:
§ 100-5. License fees for bowling alleys, pool tables, skating rinks
and shooting galleries. [Amended 5-7-1962 by Ord. No. 463;
11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 1190]
All persons, firms and corporations conducting, operating or managing
any amusement of the classes hereinafter enumerated shall pay an annual
license fee as set from time to time by resolution of Borough Council:22
A. For every performance of a circus or other equestrian performance.
B. For every menagerie or exhibit of animals.
C. For moving-picture shows.
D. For every theatrical performance or other public exhibition, except for
moving-picture shows as aforesaid, provided that no license shall be
required for musical concerts or for lectures or exhibitions on literary
or scientific subjects.
E. For street carnivals or exhibitions in the nature thereof, provided that
no license shall be required for carnivals for local purposes conducted
with local talent.
F. For any exhibition at which, or in connection with which, medicines or
other goods, wares and merchandise are sold, or advertised for sale.
A. Bowling alleys.
B. Billiard and pool tables, and other gaming tables not prohibited by law.
C. Skating rinks.
D. Shooting galleries.
21.Editor's Note: See Ch. A285, Fees.
22.Editor's Note: See Ch. A285, Fees.
§ 100-3 CATASAUQUA CODE § 100-6
95:134
§ 100-6. Prorating of annual license fee. [Amended 5-7-1962 by
Ord. No. 463]
The annual license fees prescribed in § 100-5 hereof may be prorated for
periods of less than one year, but in no event shall a permit or license be
issued for less than 1/4 of the annual license fee.
§ 100-7. Licenses for dance halls, ballrooms and public dances.
[Amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 1190]
A. All dance halls maintained and conducted in connection with regularly
established instruction in dancing and exclusively used in such
connection shall pay an annual license fee as set from time to time by
resolution of Borough Council.23
B. All other dance halls and ballrooms shall pay an annual license fee as
set from time to time by resolution of Borough Council.
C. A license shall be required to hold a public dance or public ball by any
person, persons, society, club or clubs; the fee for such license, which
shall be paid at the time of the issuing thereof, shall be as set from time
to time by resolution of Borough Council, provided, however, that no
such license shall be required for public dances conducted for charity
and not for a profit.
23.Editor's Note: See Ch. A285, Fees.
§ 100-6 WATER DEPARTMENT AND SEWAGE § 100-7
95:135

ARTICLE II
Coin-Operated Amusement Devices
[Adopted 1-9-1990 by Ord. No. 952 (Ch. XI, Part 1D, of the 1962
Code)]
§ 100-8. Intent.
The subject matter of this article is regulation, licensing and fines for the
operation of machines operated as games of skill for amusement by patrons
who pay money to use said machines in the Borough of Catasauqua. These
coin-operated machines include, but are not limited to, pinball machines,
music devices such as juke boxes, electronically operated shuffleboard,
bowling, video games, electronically operated tennis, billiards and other
games of amusement.
§ 100-9. License required.
§ 100-10. License applications.
The applications for the aforementioned license shall be filed in writing with
the Borough Secretary on a form to be provided by the Borough and shall
specify:
A. It is the purpose of this article that after the effective date of this
article, it shall be unlawful for any person, persons, corporations,
companies or firms to have, keep, lease or maintain for purposes of
operation any aforementioned coin-operated amusement machines
without first having obtained the proper license from the Borough
Secretary.
B. This license shall be posted at all times by affixing same in a
conspicuous place so as to be easily seen and read by all parties who
visit the premises wherein the machines are operated.
A. Name and address of the applicant, and if a firm, corporation or
association, the principal officers thereof and their addresses;
B. Name and address of the owner of the machines or the business who
leases or distributes for the purpose of operation by another if it be
different from the applicant;
C. Address of the premises where the licensed devices are to be operated,
together with the general nature of the business carried on at such
place;
D. The number of devices to be licensed along with the general description
of the devices to be licensed; and
E. Fee that is paid and the effective date of the application, which shall be
from whatever date the applicant starts the business of that year until
December 31 of that year.
§ 100-8 WATER DEPARTMENT AND SEWAGE § 100-11
95:137
§ 100-11. License fee; transferability.
§ 100-12. Prizes and gambling prohibited.
It shall be prohibited to offer any prize or any other award to any person
playing a coin-operated amusement device; furthermore, it shall be
prohibited to permit any said machine to be used for any gambling purpose.
§ 100-13. Inspections.
The Borough Manager or his designee shall make periodic inspections of all
premises where machines of amusement and games of skill for amusement
are operated for the purpose of enforcing this article.
§ 100-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord. No.
1288]
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$1,000 and/or to undergo imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days.
Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. Any
person found guilty of violating an ordinance shall be assessed court costs
and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement
proceedings.
A. No license shall be issued under this article for any coin-operated
amusement device until the annual fee shall have been paid to the
Borough Secretary. This annual license fee for each machine shall be as
established from time to time by resolution of Borough Council.24 For
the purposes of yearly renewal, the fee shall be paid on or before
January 31 of each year.
B. However, should any device or machine be installed after July 1 of any
year and application is made after that date, then the license fee of that
machine(s) shall be 1/2 or 50% of the annual license fee provided for in
this section.
C. This license shall not be transferable from one applicant to another. A
new owner, proprietor, or operator shall be required to secure a new
license and pay the fees thereof. However, he shall not be required to
secure a new or different license when one machine is replaced by
another as long as the total number of machines remains the same.
24.Editor's Note: See Ch. A285, Fees.
§ 100-11 CATASAUQUA CODE § 100-14
95:138
Chapter 105
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Firearms — See Ch. 140.
Noise — See Ch. 185.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 195.
§ 100-14 WATER DEPARTMENT AND SEWAGE § 100-14
95:139

ARTICLE I
Eradication of Unowned Pigeons
[Adopted 7-6-1964 by Ord. No. 527 (Ch. II, Part 1, of the 1962
Code)]
§ 105-1. Authority to provide for destruction or killing of unowned
pigeons.
Whenever it shall be made to appear to the Mayor and the police and the
Sanitary Committee of the Borough of Catasauqua that unowned pigeons
constitute a nuisance in and about the streets, parks or other public
property within the Borough of Catasauqua, it shall be lawful for the Mayor
and Police Department to provide for the destruction or killing of such
unowned pigeons by any humane means.
§ 105-2. Conditions for entry upon private property.
Members of the Police Department or persons duly authorized by the Police
Department may, upon request of the owners of private property, enter
upon such property to eradicate unowned pigeons constituting a nuisance
thereon in such manner as shall be directed by the Chief of Police of the
Borough of Catasauqua, provided that such request be accompanied by a
release of liability to the Borough of Catasauqua, its agents, servants and
employees for injury to persons and damage to property which may occur
in the eradication of unowned pigeons, in such form as may be required by
the Police Department of the Borough of Catasauqua.
§ 105-3. Use of firearms and air rifles.
A. The Chief of Police and members of the Police Department of the
Borough of Catasauqua are hereby authorized to use firearms and air
rifles for the purpose of eradicating unowned pigeons under the
authority of this article; and may authorize property owners and adult
citizens of the Borough to use firearms and air rifles for that purpose in
proper cases under the direct supervision of the Chief of Police or a
member of the Police Department designated by the Chief of Police
upon proof of financial responsibility in the form of a certificate of
public liability and property damage insurance in such form and
amount as shall be deemed necessary by said Chief of Police to
indemnify the Borough of Catasauqua against loss or damage.
B. The shooting of firearms and air rifles within the geographical limits of
the Borough of Catasauqua for the purpose and in the manner
authorized by this article shall not constitute a violation of Ordinance
473, approved May 7, 1962, of the Borough of Catasauqua.25
25.Editor's Note: See Ch. 140, Firearms.
§ 105-1 WATER DEPARTMENT AND SEWAGE § 105-4
95:141
§ 105-4. Unauthorized entry on private property or discharge of
firearms or air rifles.
Nothing herein contained shall purport to authorize the entry upon private
property or the discharge of firearms or air rifles thereon without specific
request of the owner or occupant thereof as provided in § 105-2 hereof.
§ 105-4 CATASAUQUA CODE § 105-4
95:142
ARTICLE II
Regulations for the Keeping of Pigeons
[Adopted 3-4-1985 by Ord. No. 883 (Ch. II, Part 2, of the 1962
Code)]
§ 105-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following shall have the meanings indicated,
unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
CARRIER PIGEON — Homing and racing pigeons which have the name of
the owner stamped upon the wing or tail, or are banded upon the leg with
the name or initials of the owner or with an identification or registration
number stamped on the band.
LOFT — Any structure in which carrier pigeons are housed.
RACING PIGEON — Any pigeon registered with any national pigeon racing
organization.
§ 105-6. Permit requirements.
§ 105-7. Issuance of permit authorizes loft construction.
Any person to whom the Animal Control Officer has issued a carrier pigeon
permit may erect and maintain a loft of carrier or racing pigeons in the
Borough of Catasauqua.
A. The Animal Control Officer shall issue a carrier pigeon permit to the
owner of any carrier pigeons if:
(1) Identification marks stamped on each carrier pigeon or band are
recorded with the Borough of Catasauqua;
(2) The loft is found on inspection to be in compliance with regulations
prescribed by the Borough of Catasauqua and is maintained in a
clean, orderly condition and kept in good repair; and
(3) The construction of a loft complies with the Borough of
Catasauqua's building code regulations.
B. The requirements of the Borough of Catasauqua's Zoning Ordinance26
relating to restrictions on the location of stables and poultry enclosures
shall not apply to a loft for which a permit has been issued.
C. The owner of any carrier pigeons shall pay an annual fee for a carrier
pigeon permit as determined by the Borough of Catasauqua pursuant to
resolution27 and no permit as required by this article shall be issued
until the prescribed fee shall have been paid. The Borough of
Catasauqua shall keep a record of all permits issued under this article.
26.Editor's Note: See Ch. 280, Zoning.
27.Editor's Note: See Ch. A285, Fees.
§ 105-5 WATER DEPARTMENT AND SEWAGE § 105-8
95:143
§ 105-8. Exercise and training.
Any owner of carrier pigeons, to whom the Animal Control Officer has
issued a carrier pigeon permit, or person acting for him, having in his
charge or possession and under his restraint and control carrier pigeons,
shall be allowed to fly the pigeons for necessary exercise and training, but
not more at any one time than 25 pairs.
§ 105-9. Inspection of pigeons and lofts.
Any owner of carrier pigeons to whom the Board has issued a carrier pigeon
permit shall permit employees or officials of the Borough of Catasauqua
and the Board to enter upon their property for the purpose of making an
inspection of pigeons and lofts at reasonable times.
§ 105-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord. No.
1288]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not
exceeding $300; and/or undergo imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90
days. Each day that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a
separate offense. Any person found guilty of violating an ordinance shall
be assessed court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the
Borough in the enforcement proceedings.
§ 105-8 CATASAUQUA CODE § 105-10
95:144
ARTICLE III
Regulations for the Keeping of Animals
[Adopted 3-4-1985 by Ord. No. 884 (Ch. II, Part 3, of the 1962
Code)]
§ 105-11. Definitions and word usage.
§ 105-12. Certain animals prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any pigs, hogs or swine at any
place within the Borough of Catasauqua.
§ 105-13. Keeping of animals regulated.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any domesticated animals, except
household pets, except as provided in this section:
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from a context
form:
ANIMAL — Any domestic animal or fowl, any wild animal or any
household pet.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL — Any animal normally or ordinarily domesticated
or raised in this area and climate as livestock or for work or breeding
purposes, or normally or ordinarily kept as a household pet.
HOUSEHOLD PET — Any dog, cat or other domestic animal normally
and ordinarily kept in or permitted to be at large in the dwelling of its
owner.
LARGE ANIMAL — Any wild or domestic animal of the bovine, equine
or sheep family.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation.
SMALL ANIMAL — Any wild or domestic animals such as a rabbit, hare,
guinea pig, rat, mouse or chinchilla; and any wild or domestic fowl such
as a chicken, turkey, goose, duck or pigeon (excepting homing pigeons).
WILD ANIMAL — Any animal, including bird, fowl, reptile not normally
or ordinarily raised in this area and climate as livestock or for work or
breeding purposes; or are not capable of being kept as a household pet.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
A. Large animals shall be confined in quarters no part of which shall be
closer than 100 feet from the exterior limits of any dwelling or of any
property line.
§ 105-11 WATER DEPARTMENT AND SEWAGE § 105-13
95:145
§ 105-14. Household pets.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any household pet, except as
provided in this section:
B. Small animals shall be kept confined in quarters no part of which shall
be closer than 25 feet from the exterior limits of any dwelling or of any
property line.
C. The keeper of every such animal shall confine the same in an enclosure
sufficient to prevent such animal from running at large, and such
enclosure shall be of a size conducive to good sanitary practices and
adequate and sanitary drainage facilities shall be provided.
D. Every keeper of any animal shall cause the litter and droppings
therefrom to be collected daily in a container or receptacle that when
closed shall be ratproof and flytight, and after every such collection
shall cause such container or receptacle to be kept closed. At least
twice a week, every such keeper shall cause all litter and droppings so
collected to be disposed of in such a manner as not to permit the
presence of fly larva.
E. Every keeper of any animal shall cause all feed provided therefor to be
stored and kept in a ratproof and flytight building, box, container or
receptacle.
A. No person shall keep in an individual dwelling or on one individual lot of
land more than three household pets. Further, such owner shall be
required to follow such procedures and practices as to sanitation to
insure that no public nuisance shall be created or maintained and no
threat to the health of persons living elsewhere and in such dwelling
shall be created.
B. If any such pet or pets shall be kept in an enclosure outside such
dwelling, the provisions of § 105-13 of this article, insofar as the same
applies to small animals shall be applicable to the keeping of such
household pet.
C. It shall be unlawful for the owner, custodian or keeper of any dog or cat
to allow such dog or cat to run at large at any time, either upon any of
the streets, alleys or public grounds in the Borough of Catasauqua or
upon the property of anyone other than the owner, custodian or keeper
of such dog or cat unless leashed and under the immediate control of
such owner, custodian or keeper.
D. It shall be the immediate responsibility of the owner, custodian or
keeper of the dog or cat to clean up the feces discharged by the dog or
cat on any public recreation grounds, sidewalks, streets or private
property other than the owner's private property.
§ 105-13 CATASAUQUA CODE § 105-15
95:146
§ 105-15. Seizure and impounding of dogs and cats found at large;
redemption.
It shall be the duty of any police officer or animal control officer of the
Borough of Catasauqua who witnesses any dog or cat running at large in
conflict with the provisions of the appropriate sections of this article or who
receives information of any dog or cat so running at large to seize such dog
or cat and to convey it to the place designated by the Borough Council as
a pound. Notice of such seizure shall be sent to the owner of such dog or
cat, if known, in the manner prescribed by law and such dog or cat may
be redeemed by the owner thereof within the time specified by law, upon
payment of the charges incurred by reason of such detention. Rates of such
charges shall be determined from time to time by Borough Council.
§ 105-16. Disposition of unclaimed dogs and cats.
In the event that a dog or cat is not claimed within five days, the dog or cat
shall be transferred to a public animal protection agency.
§ 105-17. Office of Animal Control Officer established; duties;
compensation.
In order to assist the Borough Police Department, the position of Animal
Control Officer is established. It shall be the duty of this Officer to catch
and impound dogs or cats running at large, to provide for their care while
in the custody of the Borough and to enforce the provisions of this article
including arrest. The method of payment of such Officer shall be determined
from time to time by the Borough Council and the Borough Manager shall
be vested with the responsibility of hiring a competent Officer.
§ 105-18. Prosecution under state law.
Any violation of this article which would also violate any state law should be
prosecuted under that state law and not under this article.
§ 105-19. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord. No.
1288]
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $300; and/or
to undergo imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. Each day that
a violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate offense. Any
person found guilty of violating an ordinance shall be assessed court costs
and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement
proceedings.
§ 105-15 WATER DEPARTMENT AND SEWAGE § 105-19
95:147

ARTICLE IV
Required Examinations
[Adopted 11-4-1985 by Ord. No. 895 (Ch. II, Part 4, of the 1962
Code)]
§ 105-20. Conditions requiring examinations.
§ 105-21. Compliance; written report required; violations and
penalties.
§ 105-22. Seizure and confiscation of animal.
A. If any household pet bites, scratches or injures any person or other
animal, the Police Department or Animal Control Officer shall
determine if sufficient facts exist to order that the animal be taken to a
veterinarian to be tested for rabies or other infectious disease.
B. Any police officer or Animal Control Officer may order the examination
by a veterinarian within five days after written notice of the same.
A. A person so ordered to take his animal to the veterinarian for an
examination must, within the aforesaid five days, present a written
statement from the veterinarian to the police officer or the Animal
Control Officer that the animal has been examined and is free from
rabies or other infectious disease.
B. If a person so ordered to take his animal to the veterinarian fails to do
so within five days and/or fails to obtain written verification of the
disease free status of the animal and present the same to the police
officer or Animal Control Officer within the five-day time frame, then
that party shall be guilty of a summary offense. A summary offense shall
be punishable by a fine up to $300 and/or 90 days in jail. Any person
found guilty of violating an ordinance shall be assessed court costs and
reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement
proceedings. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1288]
A. If a party after written notice fails to take his animal to a veterinarian
within five days, a police officer or the Animal Control Officer may seize
and/or confiscate the animal and take the same to a veterinarian of his
choice for the examination at the expense of the owner.
B. An owner who has had his animal seized or confiscated may reclaim the
animal upon payment of all costs and expenses within 10 days after
being given notice of the same. If the person fails to make payment
within the time frame set forth above, then the animal shall become the
sole property of the Borough of Catasauqua. Written notice of this
forfeiture shall be given to the former owner 10 days before forfeiture.
§ 105-20 WATER DEPARTMENT AND SEWAGE § 105-22
95:149
Chapter 108
(RESERVED)
Chapter 110
BICYCLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 195.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 230.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 260.
§ 110-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BICYCLE — A device having two tandem wheels of a diameter not less than
16 inches and propelled by human power or a tricycle having three wheels
of a diameter not less than 16 inches and propelled by human power.
§ 110-2. Registration requirements; fees.
No person who resides within this municipality shall ride a bicycle or
operate it upon any street or public place within this Borough unless said
bicycle has been properly registered and tagged in accordance with the
following regulations:
A. Every owner or operator of any bicycle within the Borough of
Catasauqua shall make application for the registration of said bicycle to
the Chief of Police or his designate, on a form provided for that purpose.
B. Registrations of bicycles shall be serially numbered and kept on file by
the Chief of Police on a form in his office as a public record.
C. The Chief of Police shall then issue an identification tag or plate serially
numbered to correspond to the bicycle registration. This identification
tag or plate must then be affixed to the rear mudguard or frame of the
bicycle in such a position as to be plainly visible from the rear. A
registration card shall be issued to the owner of each properly
registered bicycle.
D. Bicycles registered under the provisions hereof shall be registered
during the month of September 1974, and during the month of
September thereafter.
E. Registrations shall expire biannually on the first day of October and no
extension of this time shall be provided except for reason upon order by
the Borough Council or the Mayor. A charge as set from time to time by
§ 105-22 CATASAUQUA CODE § 110-2
95:150
§ 110-3. Examination of applicant.
Before issuing a bicycle registration the applicant shall be required to
demonstrate personally in such a manner as the Chief of Police shall direct
that he or she is capable of riding a bicycle; further, such applicant shall
satisfactorily pass an examination to determine his knowledge of safe riding
rules and practices as the Chief of Police shall prescribe.
resolution of Borough Council28 shall be made for registration and
tagging of each bicycle. Reregistration can be made within 30 days
prior to the expiration date and on the dates announced thereafter by
the Chief of Police. A charge as set from time to time by resolution
of Borough Council shall be made for reregistration at other than the
dates announced thereafter by the Chief of Police.29
F. Any individual acquiring a new bicycle prior to the next registration
date and not formerly registered in the Borough of Catasauqua, shall,
within 30 days from said acquisitions register the same with the Police
Department for a fee as set from time to time by resolution of Borough
Council. This registration shall expire two years from the following
September, and thereafter registration shall be conducted regularly in
the month of September.30
G. The Chief of Police shall keep a record of:
(1) The number of each registration.
(2) The date of registration and the date of each inspection.
(3) The name, age, address, and phone number of the person to whom
it is issued.
(4) The make, color, serial numbers and general description of each
bicycle frame.
(5) A record of bicycle fees collected.
(6) The name, address and phone number of the father, mother, or
guardian of children under 18 years of age.
H. Within 15 days after any bicycle registered hereunder shall have
changed ownership or been dismantled or disposed of, such information
shall be reported to the Police Department by the person in whose name
the registration was made.
I. It shall be unlawful for any person willfully or maliciously to remove,
destroys mutilate or alter the identification tag or plate, frame number
of a bicycle or the registration card issued to the owner thereof.
28.Editor's Note: See Ch. A285, Fees.
29.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 110-2 WATER DEPARTMENT AND SEWAGE § 110-4
95:151
§ 110-4. Operation. [Amended 10-6-1980 by Ord. No. 811]
A bicycle shall be operated only on the roadway as near as possible to
within five feet of the right-hand curb or edge of said roadway except
when passing a parked or standing vehicle or making a left-hand turn at
an intersection. Bicycles whose wheel diameter is 16 inches and over shall
not be operated on the sidewalks unless equipped with training wheels
or operator is learning under responsible supervision. The operator of
a bicycle shall obey all official traffic signals and other control devices
applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
§ 110-5. Inspection.
The Chief of Police, or his designate, shall inspect each bicycle presented
for registration, and shall report to the Chief of Police any bicycle found
to be in an unsafe mechanical condition or lacking the equipment specified
as necessary under the terms of this chapter. The Police Department shall
A. The operator of a bicycle emerging from a driveway or building shall
yield the right of way to all pedestrians on the sidewalk and to all
vehicles on the roadway.
B. The operator of a bicycle shall not carry any other person upon the
handlebar, frame or any part of the bicycle. This provision shall not be
construed to prohibit the use of bicycles built to be operated by two or
more persons.
C. The operator of a bicycle shall not indulge in any abnormal or trick
riding, and shall keep at least one hand on the handlebar at all times
while in use.
D. Operators of bicycles shall not ride in any manner other than single file
except on paths or parts of roadway set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles.
E. Operators of bicycles shall not hitch onto any moving vehicle upon a
roadway.
F. The operator of a bicycle shall park same upon the sidewalk using a
kickstand; or in a rack to support a bicycle; or against a building, except
windows or glass doors thereof, in such a manner as to afford the least
obstruction to pedestrians.
G. Each owner shall be required to permit only skilled operators to ride
their bicycles upon the streets of the Borough of Catasauqua.
H. The operator shall drive in the proper direction on one-way streets.
I. The operator shall use the proper hand signals for turning right or left.
J. Operators of bicycles shall not ride on the Catasauqua playgrounds,
except on roads and the parking lot, to and from a bicycle rack.
§ 110-4 CATASAUQUA CODE § 110-5
95:152
refuse to register such bicycle until and unless it is brought into
conformance with the requirements of this chapter.
§ 110-6. Equipment.
Every bicycle operated upon a street or public place at any time, during
the period one hour after sunset to one hour before sunrise, and at any
other time when there is not sufficient light under normal atmospheric
conditions to render clearly discernible persons and vehicles on the street
or public places at a distance of 250 feet ahead, shall be equipped with a
lighted lamp, on the front thereof, and shall also be equipped with a red
reflector or lamp on the rear, exhibiting or reflecting a red light visible,
under like conditions from a distance of at least 200 feet to the rear of
such bicycle. Said reflector or lamp on the rear shall be at least 1 1/2
inches in diameter; every bicycle shall also be equipped with brakes in
good operating condition; and all mechanical parts of the bicycle shall be in
working condition.
§ 110-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-7-1984 by Ord. No.
868; 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1288]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof before any District Justice, be sentenced to pay
a fine of not less than $15 nor more than $300 for each violation plus
costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such fines and costs, to
imprisonment in the Lehigh County prison for a period of not more than 30
days. Any person found guilty of violating an ordinance shall be assessed
court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in the
enforcement proceedings.
Chapter 115
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health — See Ch. 42. Uniform codes — See Ch. 130.
§ 115-1. Unlawful conditions. [Amended 7-6-1992 by Ord. No. 988]
No person or persons, firm or corporation, owning or occupying any
property within the Borough of Catasauqua, shall permit any grass or weeds
or any vegetation whatsoever, not edible or planted for some useful or
ornamental purpose, to grow or remain upon such premises so as to exceed
the height set forth in Subsection A of this section, or to throw off any
unpleasant or noxious odor, or to cause a stinging sensation, or to conceal
any filthy deposit or to create or produce pollen. Any grass, weeds or
other vegetation growing upon any premises in the Borough in violation
§ 110-5 WATER DEPARTMENT AND SEWAGE § 115-1
95:153
of any provisions of this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance and
detrimental to the health, safety, cleanliness and comfort of the inhabitants
of the Borough.
§ 115-2. Responsibility for removing or trimming grass and weeds.
[Amended 7-6-1992 by Ord. No. 988]
Whenever any property, including separate parcels or tracts combined in
single ownership, exceeds two acres, the responsibility for removing,
trimming or cutting shall extend for a distance of 20 feet from each property
line towards the interior of the property.
§ 115-3. Authority for Borough to do work at expense of owner or
occupant. [Amended 5-7-1984 by Ord. No. 867]
The Borough Council, or any officer or employee of the Borough designated
by the Council for such purpose, is hereby authorized to give notice, by
personal service or by United States Mail, to the owner or occupier, as
the case may be, of any premises in the Borough whereon grass, weeds
or other vegetation is growing or remaining in violation of the provisions
of the first section of this ordinance, directing and requiring such owner
or occupant to remove, trim or cut such grass, weeds or vegetation, so as
to conform to the requirements of this ordinance, within five days after
issuance of such notice. In case any person or persons, firm or corporation
shall neglect, fail or refuse to comply with such notice within the period of
time stated therein, the Borough authorities may remove, trim or cut such
grass, weeds or other vegetation as the case may be with 10% additional
thereon, together with any additional penalties authorized by law, to be
collected by the Borough from such person or persons, firm, or corporation
in the manner provided by law.
§ 115-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-6-1992 by Ord. No.
988; 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1288]
Any person or persons, firm or corporation who or which shall violate
or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof before the Mayor or any District Justice of the Borough,
be sentenced to pay a fine of no less than $100 and no more than $300 and
costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to
imprisonment in the County Jail for not more than 10 days. Provided, each
day's violation shall constitute a separate offense, and notice to the offender
shall not be necessary in order to constitute an offense. Any person found
guilty of violating an ordinance shall be assessed court costs and reasonable
attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings.
A. Maximum height limitations.
(1) Grass: six inches.
(2) Weeds: 12 inches.
§ 115-1 CATASAUQUA CODE § 115-4
95:154
Chapter 120
BUILDINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform codes — See Ch. 130.
§ 115-4 WATER DEPARTMENT AND SEWAGE § 115-4
95:155

ARTICLE I
Numbering of Buildings
[Adopted 5-7-1962 by Ord. No. 472 (Ch. IV, Part 2, of the 1962
Code)]
§ 120-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING — Any structure used or intended to be used as a dwelling or
place of business or industry, but shall not include any public building or
any structure built as a place of worship, or any accessory building located
on a lot where there is also a main building.
§ 120-2. Official building numbering plan.
A plan for the numbering of buildings upon all the streets and alleys of
the Borough of Catasauqua shall be prepared by the Borough Engineer,
and, when approved by the Borough Council, shall comprise the building
numbering plan for the Borough. Such plan may be altered or added to from
time to time, with approval of the Borough Council, as necessitated to meet
changing conditions.
§ 120-3. Numbers to be affixed and maintained.
It shall be the duty of the owner of every building in the Borough to affix the
number assigned to such building by the official building numbering plan
for the Borough of Catasauqua upon such building or upon a permanent
standard, base or support located between the building and the street
upon which the building faces. Each digit of such number shall be of such
size, material and color as to be visible, plainly and distinctly, from the
street, and every such number shall at all times be maintained by the
property owner in complete and legible form. Provided, in case of buildings
occupied by other than the owner thereof, the occupant, rather than the
owner, shall be responsible for maintaining numbers upon such buildings as
hereby required. Provided further, failure to affix or thereafter to maintain
the correct and complete number upon or in front of any building shall
constitute a violation of this article.
§ 120-4. Numbers obtainable from Borough Secretary.
The owner or occupant of any building located in the Borough, or of any lot
upon which a building may hereafter be constructed, may obtain the correct
number for such building, without charge, upon application to the Borough
Secretary therefor.
§ 120-1 WATER DEPARTMENT AND SEWAGE § 120-5
95:157
§ 120-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord. No.
1288]
The owner or occupant of any property in the Borough who shall violate
any of the provisions of this article shall, for each and every such violation,
upon conviction thereof before the Mayor or any District Justice of the
Borough, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $10 and costs of
prosecution. Provided, each week's continuance of a violation of any of
the provisions of this article, after conviction thereof, shall constitute a
separate violation. Any person found guilty of violating an ordinance shall
be assessed court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the
Borough in the enforcement proceedings.
§ 120-5 CATASAUQUA CODE § 120-5
95:158
ARTICLE II
Knox-Boxes®
[Adopted 5-2-2016 by Ord. No. 132931]
§ 120-6. Purpose.
§ 120-7. Installation required.
A. The purpose of this article is to protect and promote health, safety, and
welfare of the residents of the Borough and particularly commercial
businesses.
B. An ordinance is necessary to require certain commercial and
residential buildings to install Knox-Boxes®.
C. The benefits of installing Knox-Boxes® include providing immediate
emergency access to firefighters leading to increasing Fire Department
efficiency; preventing costly forced entry damage and allowing
undamaged doors to be resecured after the emergency; and protecting
property, inventory, equipment and supplies as well as firefighters
against possible injury.
A. Knox-Box® required for new commercial buildings. All new commercial
buildings shall have installed a Knox-Box®, of an Underwriters'
Laboratories (UL) type and size approved by the Borough Fire Chief, in
a location specified by the Borough Code Enforcement Office, prior to
issuance of the permit to occupy.
B. Knox-Box® required for existing commercial buildings with
improvements. All existing commercial buildings constructing
improvements that require Planning Board approval shall have installed
a Knox-Box®, of an Underwriters' Laboratories (UL) type and size
approved by the Borough Fire Chief, in a location specified by the
Borough Code Enforcement Office, prior to the issuance of the
construction permit.
C. Knox-Box® required for existing commercial buildings. All existing
commercial buildings equipped with automatic fire-detection and/or
suppression systems shall have installed a Knox-Box®, of an
Underwriters' Laboratories (UL) type and size approved by the Borough
Fire Chief, in a location specified by the Borough Code Enforcement
Office, within six months of the effective date of this article.
D. Knox-Box® required for multifamily residential structures. All
multifamily residential structures that have restricted access through
locked doors and have a common corridor for access to the living units
shall have installed a Knox-Box®, of an Underwriters' Laboratories
(UL) type and size approved by the Borough Fire Chief, in a location
31.Editor's Note: This ordinance also changed the title of this chapter from "Numbering of
Buildings" to "Buildings."
§ 120-6 WATER DEPARTMENT AND SEWAGE § 120-7
95:159
§ 120-8. Contents.
All Knox-Boxes® shall contain labeled keys, easily identified in the field, to
provide access into the property and/or building and to any located areas
within the said building as the Borough Fire Chief may direct.
§ 120-9. Locked gates or driveways.
Any locked gates or driveways which allow access to a commercial business
are required to place a Fire Department access lock on the said access point
to allow immediate emergency access to the commercial property. All locks
are to be approved by the Borough Fire Chief.
§ 120-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this article, upon
conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of up to $1,000 for each
offense and the cost of prosecution and, in the event of default of payment
of each fine and cost, shall be subject to imprisonment for not more than
90 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues shall constitute
a separate offense. Any person found guilty of violating this article shall be
assessed court costs and reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Borough
in the enforcement proceedings.
specified by the Borough Code Enforcement Office, within six months
of the effective date of this article.
§ 120-7 CATASAUQUA CODE § 120-10
95:160
Chapter 125
CODE ENFORCEMENT
§ 125-1. Establishment of Office of Code Enforcement.
§ 125-2. Duties and powers of Code Enforcement Officer.
A. Creation of Office of Code Enforcement. There is hereby created by the
Council of the municipality an office of the municipality to be known as
the "Office of Code Enforcement." Said office shall have the
responsibility for administering and enforcing the provisions of this
chapter and of those other codes and/or ordinances of the municipality
(hereinafter referred to as the "applicable codes and ordinances")
which designate said Office of Code Enforcement as their official
administration and enforcement agency.
B. Appointment of Code Enforcement Officer. There shall be appointed by
the Manager of the municipality a Code Enforcement Officer who shall
be in charge of the Office of Code Enforcement of the municipality. The
Code Enforcement Officer shall supervise such other employees or
assistants as shall be necessary for the administration and execution of
the responsibilities of said office, as appointed by the Manager.
C. Relief from personal liability. The Code Enforcement Officer or other
official or employee shall not, while acting for the municipality, render
himself liable personally because of any act or omission as required or
permitted in the discharge of his official duties. Any suit instituted
against such Code Enforcement Officer, official or employee, because of
any act performed by him in the lawful discharge of his duties, shall be
defended by the Solicitor of the municipality and in no case will said
Officer, official or employee be liable for costs in any action, suit or
proceeding.
D. Official record. An official record shall be kept of all business and
activities of the Office of Code Enforcement and all such records shall
be open to the public for inspection at all appropriate times.
A. Enforcement by Code Enforcement Officer. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall enforce and administer all of the provisions of this chapter
and of those other applicable codes and ordinances which establish the
Office of Code Enforcement as their official administration and
enforcement agency.
B. Duties of Code Enforcement Officer. The duties of the Code
Enforcement Officer shall include the receipt of applications, the
issuance of permits, notices, certificates and orders, the making of
inspections, to determine conformance with applicable codes and
ordinances, the undertaking of research and investigations, the
establishment of appropriate rules, the keeping of records, the issuance
of written annual reports and such other activities as may be required.
§ 120-10 CODE ENFORCEMENT § 125-2
125:161
Chapter 130
CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 115.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 120.
Code enforcement — See Ch. 125.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 145.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
235.
Zoning — See Ch. 280.
C. Right of entry. In the discharge of his duties the Code Enforcement
Officer or his authorized representative shall, upon showing proper
identification, have the authority to enter, at any reasonable hour, any
structure or premises in the municipality to enforce the provisions of
this chapter and of those other applicable codes and ordinances. The
assistance and cooperation of all other municipality officials, including
Police and Fire Departments, shall be available to the Code
Enforcement Officer to assist in the performance of his duties and in
securing right of entry. The owner, operator or occupant or other
person in charge of any structure or premises shall give the Code
Enforcement Officer free access thereto and it shall be unlawful to
refuse or impede entrance of the Code Enforcement Officer to said
structure or premises for the purpose of making any required
inspection. If any such owner, operator or other occupant or other
person in charge refuses or impedes any required or lawful inspection,
the municipality may seek, in a court of competent jurisdiction, an order
that such owner, occupant or person in charge shall cease and desist
with such interference.
§ 125-2 CATASAUQUA CODE § 125-2
125:162
ARTICLE I
Property Maintenance Code
[Adopted 6-6-2016 by Ord. No. 133032]
§ 130-1. Adoption of standards.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of
the Borough Manager of the Borough of Catasauqua, being marked and
designated as the International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition,
as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted
as the Property Maintenance Code of the Borough of Catasauqua, in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, for regulating and governing the
conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by
providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other
physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe,
sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings
and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of
such existing structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of
permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance
Code on file in the office of the Borough of Catasauqua are hereby referred
to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 130-2 of
this article.
§ 130-2. Modification of standards.
The following sections of the International Property Maintenance Code,
2012 Edition, are hereby revised as follows:
A. In Section 101.1, insert: "Borough of Catasauqua."
B. In Section 103.5, insert: "as adopted by resolution of Borough Council
from time to time."
C. Modify Section 104.2 to add the following after the last sentence: "The
Borough Manager may approve the use of such persons if the expense
does not exceed $500."
D. Delete Section 106.3 in its entirety.
E. Amend Section 106.4 in its entirety to read: "Any person who shall
violate a provision of this code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any
of the requirements thereof, shall be subject to a fine of up to $1,000
per day. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been
served shall be deemed a separate offense. The Borough shall have the
right to institute an appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to enjoin
a violation of any provision of the International Property Maintenance
32.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Property Maintenance Code,
adopted 6-5-1995 by Ord. No. 1033 (Ch. IV, Part 4, of the 1962 Code), as amended in its
entirety 5-1-2006 by Ord. No. 1196.
§ 130-1 CODE ENFORCEMENT § 130-2
125:163
§ 130-3. Administration and enforcement; definitions.
§ 130-4. Construal of provisions; validity; title; conflicts.
Code, 2012 Edition, and seek civil penalty as provided above as part of
the injunctive relief, together with attorney's fees and costs."
F. In Section 112.4, insert: "$300" and "$1,000."
G. In Section 302.4, insert: "six inches."
H. In Section 304.14, insert: "April 1" and "October 31" in the appropriate
locations.
I. In Section 602.3, insert: "October 1" and "April 30" in the appropriate
locations.
J. In Section 602.4, insert: "October 1" and "April 30" in the appropriate
locations.
A. Office of Code Enforcement. The administration of this article and of
the International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition, shall be
carried out by the Office of Code Enforcement of the Borough of
Catasauqua in accordance with the procedures established by Chapter
125 of the Code of Ordinances of the Borough of Catasauqua and by the
International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition, hereby
adopted.
B. The following terms, as used in the International Property Maintenance
Code, 2003 Edition, shall have the following meanings:
BOARD OF APPEALS — The Code Hearing Board.
CODE OFFICIAL — The Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of
Catasauqua.
CORPORATE COUNSEL — The Solicitor of the Borough of Catasauqua.
DEPARTMENT OF PROPERTY MAINTENANCE INSPECTION — The
Office of Code Enforcement of the Borough of Catasauqua.
A. There shall be nothing in this article, or in the Property Maintenance
Code hereby adopted that shall be construed to affect any suit or
proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability
incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under
any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in § 130-2 of this article;
nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost,
impaired or affected by this article.
B. Validity. The invalidity of any section or provision of this article or of the
code hereby adopted shall not invalidate any other sections or
provisions thereof.
§ 130-2 CATASAUQUA CODE § 130-4
125:164
§ 130-4.1. Enforcement personnel.
The Code Enforcement Officer, Building Inspector and/or the Building Code
Official are hereby appointed to enforce the terms of this article.
C. Short title. This article, together with the International Property Code,
2012 Edition, adopted herein, shall be known and considered to be the
"Property Maintenance Code of the Borough."
D. Conflict of ordinances or resolutions. Any ordinance or resolution, or
part of ordinance or resolution, in conflict with this article is hereby
repealed insofar as the same affects this article, except that where a
section of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition,
conflicts with the provisions of Chapter 125 of the Code of Ordinances
of the Borough of Catasauqua, establishing the Office of Code
Enforcement, the provisions of the Chapter 125 shall take precedence
over this code section.
§ 130-4 CODE ENFORCEMENT § 130-4.1
125:165

ARTICLE II
Mechanical Code
[Adopted 6-5-1995 by Ord. No. 1035 (Ch. IV, Part 8, of the 1962
Code)]
§ 130-5. Adoption of Mechanical Code.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of Catasauqua, being marked and
designated the "BOCA National Mechanical Code, Eighth Edition, 1993," as
published by the Building Officials and Code Administrators International,
Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the Mechanical Code for the Borough
of Catasauqua in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, for the control of
buildings and structures as herein provided, and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties conditions and items of said BOCA
National Mechanical Code, are hereby referred to, adopted and make a
part hereof as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 130-6 of this article.
§ 130-6. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
A. Section M-101.1 - Insert: "Borough of Catasauqua."
B. Section M-105.1 - Modify to read: "Code Official shall also be known as
the Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of Catasauqua."
C. Section M-105.3 - Modify in its entirety to read: "Organization: The
Code Official may seek the assistance of technical experts, inspectors
and other persons for the administration of this code after request to
and approval by Council. The Borough Manager may approve the use of
such persons if the expense does not exceed $500."
D. Section M-106.6 - Modify in its entirety to read as follows: "Rule Making
Authority: The Code Official shall have the authority as necessary in the
interest of public health, safety and general welfare to adopt and
promulgate rules and regulations related to the administrative
functions of the Code Office."
E. Section M-113.2 - Modify to read: "Periodic Inspections: The fees for all
periodic inspections shall be in accordance with a Schedule of Fees
adopted by resolution of Borough Council."
F. Section M-113.3 - Modify to read: "Fee Schedule: The fees for all
mechanical work and applications to the Code Hearing Board shall be
paid in accordance with the Schedule of Fees adopted by resolution of
Council."
G. Section M-116.4 - Insert: "Summary Offense," "a fine of not less than
$100 and not more than $1,000," and "90 days," in appropriate
locations.
§ 130-5 CODE ENFORCEMENT § 130-6
125:167
§ 130-7. Administration and enforcement; definitions.
§ 130-8. General provisions.
H. Section M-117.2 - Insert "$100" and "$1,000.
I. Section M-121.1 - Delete in its entirety and replace with the following
language: "The Catasauqua Code Hearing Board as established by
Ordinance No. 645 (Chapter 1, Section 165, of the Codification of
Ordinances),33 and the procedures set forth therein shall serve as
means of appeal from a decision of the Code Official."
J. Sections M-121.2.1 through M-121.7 - Delete entirely.
A. Office of Code Enforcement. The administration of this article and of
the BOCA National Mechanical Code, 1993, Eighth Edition, shall be
carried out by the Office of Code Enforcement of the Borough of
Catasauqua in accordance with the procedures established by
Ordinance No. 64534 and by the BOCA National Mechanical Code, 1993,
Eighth Edition, hereby adopted.
B. The following terms as used in the BOCA National Mechanical Code,
1993, Eighth Edition, shall have the following meanings:
BOARD OF APPEALS — The Code Hearing Board.
BUILDING OFFICIAL — The Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough
of Catasauqua.
CORPORATE COUNSEL — The Solicitor of the Borough of Catasauqua.
DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING INSPECTION — The Office of Code
Enforcement of the Borough of Catasauqua.
C. Permits and certificates. A permit shall be required prior to the
initiation of all building construction and other related activities as
specified in the BOCA National Mechanical Code, 1993, Eighth Edition,
adopted herein. A certificate of use and occupancy and/or other
certificates as specified in the said code shall be required upon
completion of all work which is completed in accordance with the
permits issued. Such permits and certificates shall be issued in
accordance with the provisions of this article, the BOCA National
Mechanical Code, 1993, Eighth Edition, adopted herein, and Ordinance
No. 645, the Code Enforcement Ordinance of the Borough of
Catasauqua.35
A. Saving clause. There shall be nothing in this article or the Mechanical
Code hereby adopted which shall be construed to affect any suit or
proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired or liability
33.Editor's Note: See now Art. V, Uniform Construction Code, of this chapter.
34.Editor's Note: See Ch. 125, Code Enforcement.
35.Editor's Note: See Ch. 125, Code Enforcement.
§ 130-6 CATASAUQUA CODE § 130-8
125:168
incurred or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under
any act or ordinance hereby repealed; nor shall any just or legal right
or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this article.
B. Validity. The invalidity of any section or provision of this article or of the
code hereby adopted shall not invalidate any other sections or
provisions thereof.
C. Short title. This article, together with the BOCA National Mechanical
Code, 1993, Eighth Edition, adopted herein, shall be known and
considered to be the "Mechanical Code of the Borough of Catasauqua."
D. Conflict of ordinances or resolutions. Any ordinance or resolution, or
part of ordinance or resolution, in conflict with this article is hereby
repealed insofar as the same affects this article, except that, where a
section of the BOCA National Mechanical Code, 1993 Edition, conflicts
with the provisions of Ordinance No. 645, the Code Enforcement
Ordinance of the Borough,36 the provisions of Ordinance No. 645 shall
take precedence over the code section.
36.Editor's Note: See Ch. 125, Code Enforcement.
§ 130-8 CODE ENFORCEMENT § 130-8
125:169

ARTICLE III
Electrical Code
[Adopted 6-5-1995 by Ord. No. 1036 (Ch. IV, Part 3, of the 1962
Code)]
§ 130-9. Adoption of Electrical Code.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of Catasauqua, being marked
and designated as the "NFPA National Electrical Code, 1993 Edition," as
published by the National Fire Protection Association, be and hereby is
adopted as the Electrical Code of the Borough of Catasauqua,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, for the control of buildings, structures and
premises as herein provided, and each and all of the regulations provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said NFPA National Electrical Code are
hereby referred to, adopted and make a part hereof as if fully set out in
this article, with the additions, insertions and deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in § 130-10 of this article.
§ 130-10. Additions, deletions, insertions and changes.
The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
§ 130-11. Administration and enforcement; definitions.
A. Section 90-2(B) - Add the following exemptions:
(5) Minor repair work.
(6) The connection of portable electrical equipment.
B. Section 90-10 - Add new section:
Electrical Permits.
(a) The Code Enforcement Officer shall require that all applicants
for permits for electrical work as required under this Electrical
Code or any other building or related code of the Borough of
Catasauqua shall furnish proof that an application for inspection of
the proposed electrical work, wiring or apparatus has been made to
an approved electrical inspection and/or underwriting organization
that is licensed to perform such inspection in the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
(b) Permit Fees: Fees for permits, and applications for appeals shall be
in accordance with the Schedule of Fees adopted by resolution of
Borough Council. The payment of all inspection fees and charges
of an electrical inspection organization shall be borne by the
applicant.
A. Office of Code Enforcement. The administration of this article and the
NFPA National Electrical Code, 1993 Edition, shall be carried out by the
Office of Code Enforcement of the Borough of Catasauqua in
§ 130-9 CODE ENFORCEMENT § 130-11
125:171
§ 130-12. General provisions.
accordance with the procedures established by Ordinance No. 64537
and by the NFPA National Electrical Code, 1993 Edition, hereby
adopted.
B. The following terms as used in the NFPA National Electrical Code, 1993
Edition, shall have the following meanings:
BOARD OF APPEALS — The Code Hearing Board.
BUILDING OFFICIAL — The Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough
of Catasauqua.
CORPORATE COUNSEL — The Solicitor of the Borough of Catasauqua.
DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING INSPECTION — The Office of Code
Enforcement of the Borough of Catasauqua.
C. Permits and certificates. A permit shall be required prior to the
initiation of all building construction and other related activities as
specified in the NFPA National Electrical Code, 1993, Ninth Edition,
adopted herein. A certificate of use and occupancy and other
certificates as specified in the said code shall be required upon
completion of all work which is completed in accordance with the
permits issued. Such permits and certificates shall be issued in
accordance with the provisions of this article, the NFPA National
Electrical Code, 1993 Edition, adopted herein and Ordinance No. 645,
the Code Enforcement Ordinance of the Borough of Catasauqua.38
A. Saving clause. There shall be nothing in this article or in the National
Electrical Code hereby adopted which shall be construed to affect any
suit or proceedings impending in any court, or any rights acquired or
liability incurred or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing,
under any act or ordinance hereby repealed; nor shall any just or legal
right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this
article.
B. Validity. The invalidity of any section or provision of this article or of the
code hereby adopted shall not invalidate any other sections or
provisions thereof.
C. Short title. This article, together with the NFPA National Electrical
Code, 1993 Edition, adopted herein, shall be known and considered to
be the "Electrical Code of the Borough of Catasauqua."
D. Conflict of ordinances or resolutions. Any ordinance or resolution, or
part of ordinance or resolution, in conflict with this article is hereby
repealed insofar as the same affects this article, except that, where a
section of the NFPA National Electrical Code, 1993 Edition, conflicts
37.Editor's Note: See Ch. 125, Code Enforcement.
38.Editor's Note: See Ch. 125, Code Enforcement.
§ 130-11 CATASAUQUA CODE § 130-12
125:172
with the provisions of Ordinance No. 645, the Code Enforcement
Ordinance of the Borough,39 the provisions of Ordinance No. 645 shall
take precedence over the code section.
39.Editor's Note: See Ch. 125, Code Enforcement.
§ 130-12 CODE ENFORCEMENT § 130-12
125:173

ARTICLE IV
Fire Prevention Code
[Adopted 6-6-2016 by Ord. No. 133140]
§ 130-13. Adoption of Fire Prevention Code.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of Catasauqua being marked and
designated as the International Fire Code, 2009 Edition, including Appendix
Chapters E through J (see International Fire Code Section 101.2.1, 2009
Edition), as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby
adopted as the Fire Code of the Borough of Catasauqua in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, regulating and governing the safeguarding
of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the
storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices,
and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of
buildings and premises and herein provided; providing for the issuance of
permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Fire Code on file in the
office of the Borough of Catasauqua are hereby referred to, adopted, and
made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 130-14 of this
article.
§ 130-14. Additions, deletions, insertions and changes.
The following sections of the 2009 International Fire Code are hereby
revised:
A. In Section 101.1, insert: "Borough of Catasauqua."
B. Amend Section 103.1 in its entirety to read: "Office of Code
Enforcement. The administration of this and of the International Fire
Code 2009 shall be carried out by the Office of Code Enforcement of the
Borough of Catasauqua in accordance with the provisions established
by Ordinance No. 645, Chapter 125, of the Code of Ordinances, and by
the International Fire Code 2009, hereby adopted."
C. Amend Section 103.3 in its entirety to read: "The Building Official and/
or the Fire Code Official may seek assistance of technical experts,
inspectors and other persons for the administration of this code after
request to and approval by Borough Council. The Borough Manager
may approve the use of such persons if the expense does not exceed
$500."
D. Amend Section 105.6.30. Amend the exceptions to the general
requirement to read as follows: "Exceptions: a) recreational fires; and
40.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Article IV, Fire Prevention Code,
adopted 6-5-1995 by Ord. No. 1037 (Ch. VI, Part 1, of the 1962 Code).
§ 130-13 CODE ENFORCEMENT § 130-14
125:175
§ 130-15. Geographic limits.
The geographic limits referred to in certain sections of the 2009
International Fire Code are hereby established as follows:
b) bonfires where approval for the same has been received from the
Fire Chief."
E. Amend Section 105.6.31 to add the following: "Exception: The
requirement to obtain an operational permit to remove paint with a
torch shall be applicable only to contractors for hire and shall not apply
to working on their own property."
F. Section 105.6.32 relating to the use of candles is deleted in its entirety.
G. Delete Section 108.3 in its entirety.
H. In Section 109.3, insert: "Summary offense; $1,000, less than $100; 90
days."
I. In Section 111.4, insert: "$100" and "$1,000."
J. Amend Section 202, General Definitions, as follows:
BOARD OF APPEALS — The Code Hearing Board of the Borough of
Catasauqua. (See Section 130-15 of the Code.)
BUILDING OFFICIAL — The Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough
of Catasauqua.
CHIEF APPOINTING AUTHORITY — The Council of the Borough of
Catasauqua.
CORPORATE COUNCIL — The Solicitor of the Borough of Catasauqua.
DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING INSPECTION — The Office of Code
Enforcement of the Borough of Catasauqua, as established by
Ordinance No. 645 (Chapter 125 of the Code).
FIRE CODE OFFICIAL — The Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough
of Catasauqua or other designated authority, appointed by Borough
Council and charged with the enforcement of the code, or a duly
authorized representative.
K. Section 2601.2 relating to permits for welding, shall be deleted in its
entirety.
L. Amend Section 3804.2 to add the following subsection:
3804.2.1 Maximum Aboveground Capacity. Nothwithstanding any
other provisions of this Section 3804, the aggregate capacity of any
aboveground installation shall not exceed a water capacity of 200
gallons (757 l) for residential properties and 1,000 gallons (3785 l) for
nonresidential properties.
§ 130-14 CATASAUQUA CODE § 130-15
125:176
§ 130-16. (Reserved)
A. Section 3404.2.9.6.1 (geographic limits in which the storage of Class I
and Class II liquids in aboveground tanks outside of buildings is
prohibited): prohibit in all residential zoning districts.
B. Section 3406.2.4.4 (geographic limits in which the storage of Class I
and Class II liquids in aboveground tanks is prohibited): prohibit in all
residential zoning districts.
C. Section 3506.2 (geographic limits in which the storage of flammable
cryogenic fluids in stationary containers is prohibited): allow only in the
Industrial Zoning District.
D. Section 3804.2 (geographic limits in which the storage of liquefied
petroleum gas is restricted for the protection of heavily populated or
congested areas): prohibit in R-2 Medium Density and R-3 High Density
Zoning Districts.
§ 130-15 CODE ENFORCEMENT § 130-16
125:177

ARTICLE V
Uniform Construction Code
[Adopted 6-7-2004 by Ord. No. 1167]
§ 130-17. Election to administer and enforce.
The Borough of Catasauqua hereby elects to administer and enforce the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999,
35 P.S. §§ 7210.101-7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its
regulations.
§ 130-18. Adoption of standards by reference.
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters
401-405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference as the municipal building code of the Borough of
Catasauqua.
§ 130-19. Methods of administration and enforcement; exemptions.
A. The administration and enforcement of the code within the Borough of
Catasauqua shall be undertaken in any of the following ways as
determined by the Council of the Borough of Catasauqua from time to
time by resolution:
(1) By the designation of an employee of the Borough to serve as the
municipal code official to act on behalf of the Borough of
Catasauqua;
(2) By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of the Borough of Catasauqua;
(3) By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of this Act through an
intermunicipal agreement;
(4) By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this Act on behalf of the
Borough of Catasauqua;
(5) By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department
of Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement
of structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and
utility and miscellaneous use structures.
B. Carports, detached private garages, greenhouses, and sheds that have
a building area of less than 300 square feet and that are accessory to
detached one-family dwellings are exempt from the requirements of the
Uniform Construction Code. [Added 4-6-2015 by Ord. No. 1312]
§ 130-17 CODE ENFORCEMENT § 130-20
125:179
§ 130-20. Board of Appeals.
A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the Council of
the Borough of Catasauqua in conformity with the requirements of the
relevant provisions of the code, as amended from time to time, and for the
purposes set forth therein. If at any time enforcement and administration
is undertaken jointly with one or more other municipalities, said Board
of Appeals shall be established by joint action of the participating
municipalities.
§ 130-21. Effect on prior ordinances.
The prior building ordinances of the Borough of Catasauqua are hereby
affected by this article as follows:
§ 130-22. Fees.
Fees assessable by the Borough of Catasauqua for the administration and
enforcement undertaken pursuant to this article and the code shall be
established by Borough Council by resolution from time to time.
§ 130-23. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord. No.
1288]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or the underlying
code, or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof, shall be
charged with a summary offence and, upon conviction therefor, be subject
to a fine or penalty of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 or by
imprisonment not exceeding 60 days, or both such fine and imprisonment.
Any person found guilty of violating an ordinance shall be assessed court
costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in the
enforcement proceedings.
A. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were
adopted by the Borough of Catasauqua on or before July 1, 1999, and
which equal or exceed the requirements of the code shall continue in
full force and effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or
exceed the minimum requirements of the code, as amended from time
to time.
B. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this article and whose requirements are
less than the minimum requirements of the code are hereby amended to
conform with the comparable provisions of the code.
C. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of the Borough of
Catasauqua not governed by the code shall remain in full force and
effect.
§ 130-20 CATASAUQUA CODE § 130-23
125:180
Chapter 138
FAIR HOUSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Apartment licensing — See Ch. 108. Moving permits — See Ch. 180.
§ 138-1. Policy.
It shall be the public policy of the Borough of Catasauqua to prohibit
discrimination because of race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin,
place of birth, age or sex, in employment, housing and places of public
accommodation, resort, recreation or amusement.
§ 138-2. Scope.
This chapter applies to discriminatory practices, including but not limited
to discrimination in housing which occur within the territorial limits of
the Borough of Catasauqua and to housing accommodations and places of
public accommodation located within the territorial limits of the Borough.
§ 138-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
DISCRIMINATE and DISCRIMINATION — Includes any difference in
treatment based on race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, place of
birth, age or sex.
HOUSING ACCOMMODATION —
LABOR ORGANIZATION — Any organization which assists for the purpose
in whole or part of collective bargaining or of dealing with employers
concerning grievances, terms or conditions of employment, or of other
mutual aid of protection in relation to employment.
LENDING INSTITUTION — Any bank, insurance company, savings and
loan association, or any other person regularly engaged in the business of
lending money or guaranteeing loans.
OWNER — Includes the owner, co-owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee,
assignee, manager, agent, or any other person having an equitable or
A building, structure or portion thereof which is used or occupied, or
is intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied, as a home,
residence or sleeping place by a person, by a family or by a group of
persons living together; or
A.
A parcel of real property or lot available for the construction of a
housing accommodation.
B.
§ 130-23 CODE ENFORCEMENT § 138-3
125:181
security interest in any housing accommodation, including the Borough of
Catasauqua and its departments, boards, commissions and authorities.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, labor organization
or other organization or association, including those acting in a fiduciary
or representative capacity, whether appointed by a court or otherwise.
The term "person," as applied to partnerships or other organizations or
associations, includes their members, and as applied to corporations
includes their officers.
REAL ESTATE BROKER — Any natural person, partnership, corporation or
other association which for a fee or other valuable consideration manages,
sells, purchases, exchanges or rents or negotiates, or offers or attempts to
negotiate the sale, purchase, exchange or rental of, the real property of
another, or holds itself out as engaged in the business of managing, selling,
purchasing, exchanging or renting the real property of another, or collects
rent for the use of the real property of another, and includes real estate
salesmen or agents or any other person employed by a real estate broker to
perform or to assist in the performance of his business.
§ 138-4. Unlawful housing practices.
It shall be an unlawful housing practice except as otherwise provided in this
section:
A. For any owner, real estate broker or any other person to refuse to
negotiate for the sale, lease, sublease, rental, assignment or other
transfer of the title, leasehold, or other interest in any housing
accommodation to any person, or to represent that any housing
accommodation is not available for any inspection, sale, lease, sublease,
rental, assignment or other transfer when in fact it is so available, or
otherwise to deny or withhold any housing accommodation from any
person because of race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, place
of birth, age or sex, or to discriminate against, segregate or assign
quotas to any person or group of persons in connection with the sale,
lease, sublease, rental, assignment or other transfer of the title,
leasehold, or other interest in any housing accommodation or housing
accommodations.
B. For any person, including any owner or real estate broker, to include in
the terms, conditions or privileges of any sale, lease, sublease, rental,
assignment or other transfer of any housing accommodation any clause,
condition or restriction discriminating against, or requiring any other
person to discriminate against, any person in the use of occupancy of
such housing accommodation because of race, color, religion, ancestry,
national origin, place of birth, age or sex.
C. For any person, including any owner or real estate broker, to
discriminate in the furnishing of any facilities or services for any
housing accommodation because of race, color, religion, ancestry,
national origin, place of birth, age or sex.
§ 138-3 CATASAUQUA CODE § 138-4
125:182
D. For any person, including any owner or real estate broker, to publish,
circulate, issue or display, or cause to be published, circulated, issued
or displayed, any communication, notice, advertisement or sign of any
kind relating to the sale, rental, lease, sublease, assignment, transfer or
listing of any housing accommodation or accommodations which
indicates any preference, limitation, specification or discrimination
based on race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, place of birth,
age or sex.
E. For any person, including any bank, banking organization, mortgage
company, insurance company or other financial or lending institution,
or any agent or employe thereof, to whom application is made for
financial assistance for the purchase, lease, acquisition, construction,
rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of any housing accommodation or
housing accommodations:
(1) To discriminate against any person or group of persons because of
race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, place of birth, age or
sex of such person or group of persons or of the prospective
occupant or tenants of such housing accommodation in the
granting, withholding, extending, modifying, or renewing, or in the
rates, terms, conditions or privileges of any such financial
assistance or in the extension of services In connection therewith;
or
(2) To use any form of application for such financial assistance or make
any record of inquiry in connection with application for such
financial assistance which indicates, directly or indirectly, any
limitation, specification or discrimination.
F. For any real estate broker or real estate salesman or agent, or any other
person for business or economic purposes, to induce, directly or
indirectly, or to attempt to induce directly or indirectly the sale or rental
or the listing for sale or rental, of a housing accommodation by
representing that a change has occurred or will or may occur with
respect to the racial, religious or ethnic composition of the street,
block, neighborhood or area in which said housing accommodation is
located.
G. For any person, whether or not a real estate broker, real estate
salesman or agent, owner or lending institution to aid, incite, compel,
coerce or participate in the doing of any act declared to be an unlawful
housing practice under this chapter, or to obstruct or prevent
enforcement or compliance with the provisions of this chapter, or to
attempt directly or indirectly to commit any act declared by this chapter
to be an unlawful housing practice.
H. Nothing in this chapter shall bar any religious or sectarian institution or
organization, or any charitable or educational organization which is
operated, supervised or controlled by or in connection with a religious
or sectarian organization or any bona fide private or fraternal
§ 138-4 CODE ENFORCEMENT § 138-4
125:183
§ 138-5. Obstruction of fair practices.
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether or not within the named
classifications set forth in this chapter, to aid, incite, compel, coerce or
participate in the doing of any act declared to be an unlawful practice
under this chapter, or to obstruct or prevent enforcement of compliance
with the provisions of this chapter or to attempt directly or indirectly to be
an unlawful practice.
§ 138-6. Enforcement by Housing Officer.
A Housing Officer shall be appointed by Borough Council and shall serve
at their will. The Housing Officer shall be empowered to investigate
complaints of violations under this chapter. If the Housing Officer
determines that a violation of any provision of this chapter has occurred, he
may issue a cease and desist order. In the event the respondent refused or
fails to comply with any order of the Housing Officer or violates any of the
provisions of this chapter, the Housing Officer shall certify the case and the
entire record of its proceedings to the Borough Solicitor, who shall invoke
the aid of an appropriate court to secure enforcement of compliance with
the order or to impose the penalties set forth in § 138-7 or both.
§ 138-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord. No.
1288]
Any person who shall be found in violation of any provision of this chapter
relating to unlawful practices, or any rule or regulation pertaining thereto
adopted by the Borough Council, or any order of the Housing Officer, shall
be subject to a fine of not more than $300 and in default of payment of the
fine and costs shall be subject to imprisonment for a period not exceeding
90 days. Any person found guilty of violating an ordinance shall be assessed
court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in the
enforcement proceedings.
§ 138-8. Short title.
This chapter may be cited as the "Catasauqua Fair Housing Ordinance."
organization from limiting admission to or giving preference to persons
of the same religion or sect, or to members of such private or fraternal
organization, or from making such selection as is calculated by such
organization to promote the religious or sectarian principles or the
aims, purposes or fraternal principles for which it is established or
maintained.
§ 138-4 CATASAUQUA CODE § 138-8
125:184
Chapter 140
FIREARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 105.
§ 140-1. Use of firearms, air rifles and bows and arrows restricted.
No person shall, except in necessary defense of person or property, fire
or discharge any gun or any firearm or any air rifle, or shoot or use any
bow and arrow, at any place within the Borough of Catasauqua except at
an approved range, under supervision of an adult. Provided, an "approved
range" shall be a place for which a license for shooting firearms, air rifles or
bows and arrows shall be granted by the Mayor, and no such license shall
be granted until the Mayor is satisfied that the location and facilities of such
range, and the supervision provided, are such as will present a minimum of
danger to the public and the participants and a minimum of annoyance to
the public.
§ 140-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord. No.
1288]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof before the Mayor or any District Justice of the Borough,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $50 and costs of prosecution,
and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment in the
County Jail for not more than 10 days. Any person found guilty of violating
an ordinance shall be assessed court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees
incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings.
Chapter 145
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform codes — See Ch. 130.
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 165.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 225.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
235.
Wellhead protection — See Ch. 275.
Zoning — See Ch. 280.
§ 138-8 CODE ENFORCEMENT § 140-2
125:185

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 145-1. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to:
§ 145-2. Applicability.
§ 145-3. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be
in effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 145-4. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units, and its residents, by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or
development anywhere within the Borough of Catasauqua unless a
building permit has been obtained from the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. A building permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing
buildings or structures.
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur;
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as
ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not
imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas, or that land
uses permitted within such areas, will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of
Catasauqua or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages
§ 145-1 CODE ENFORCEMENT § 145-4
125:187
that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
§ 145-4 CATASAUQUA CODE § 145-4
125:188
ARTICLE II
Administration
§ 145-5. Building permits required.
Building permits shall be required before any construction or development
is undertaken within any area of the Borough of Catasauqua.
§ 145-6. Application procedures and requirements.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a building permit only after it
has been determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this and all other applicable
codes and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall review the application for the permit to determine if all
other necessary government permits required by state and federal laws
have been obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania
Sewage Facilities Act (Act 1966-537, as amended);41 the Pennsylvania
Dam Safety and Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended);42 the
Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);43 and the
U.S. Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be
issued until this determination has been made.
C. No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be made
to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which may be
affected by such action have been notified by the Borough of
Catasauqua and until all required permits or approvals have been first
obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection, Bureau of
Dams, Waterways and Wetlands. In addition, the Federal Insurance
Administrator and Pennsylvania Department of Community and
Economic Development shall be notified by the Borough of Catasauqua
prior to any alteration or relocation of any watercourse.
A. Application for such a building permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Code Enforcement Officer on forms supplied by the Borough of
Catasauqua. Such application shall contain the following:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
(3) Name and address of contractor.
(4) Site location.
41.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
42.Editor's Note: 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
43.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 145-5 CODE ENFORCEMENT § 145-6
125:189
(5) Listing of other permits required.
(6) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost.
(7) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for building
permits shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail
and clarity to enable the Code Enforcement Officer to determine that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances;
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage; and
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information (e.g., any or all of the technical information
contained in § 145-27) as may be required by the Code Enforcement
Officer to make the above determination:
(1) A completed building permit application form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale, and date;
(b) Topographic contour lines, if available;
(c) All property and lot lines, including dimensions, and the size of
the site expressed in acres or square feet;
(d) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and land development;
(e) The location of all existing streets, drives, and other access
ways; and
(f) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water including
direction and velocities.
§ 145-6 CATASAUQUA CODE § 145-6
125:190
§ 145-7. Review by County Conservation District.
A copy of all applications and plans for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
shall be submitted by the Code Enforcement Officer to the County
Conservation District for review and comment prior to the issuance of a
building permit. The recommendations of the Conservation District shall be
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale, showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929;
(b) The elevation of the one-hundred-year flood;
(c) If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with a one-hundred-year flood; and
(d) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures.
(4) The following data and documentation:
(a) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the one-hundred-year flood.
(b) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 145-23F, Storage, and § 145-24, Development which may
endanger human life, including:
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§ 145-23F and 145-24 which are
intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in § 145-24
during a one-hundred-year flood.
(c) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development."
(d) Where any excavation of grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection, to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
§ 145-6 CODE ENFORCEMENT § 145-7
125:191
considered by the Code Enforcement Officer for possible incorporation into
the proposed plan.
§ 145-8. Review of application by others.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
may be submitted by the Code Enforcement Officer to any other appropriate
agencies and/or individuals (e.g., planning commission, municipal engineer,
etc.) for review and comment.
§ 145-9. Changes.
After the issuance of a building permit by the Code Enforcement Officer,
no changes of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of
the plans, specifications or other documents submitted with the application
without the written consent or approval of the Code Enforcement Officer.
Requests for any such change shall be in writing, and shall be submitted by
the applicant to Code Enforcement Officer for consideration.
§ 145-10. Placards.
In addition to the building permit, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
issue a placard which shall be displayed on the premises during the time
construction is in progress. This placard shall show the number of the
building permit, the date of its issuance, and be signed by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
§ 145-11. Start of construction.
§ 145-12. Inspection and revocation.
A. Work on the proposed construction and/or development shall begin
within six months and shall be completed within 12 months after the
date of issuance of the building permit or the permit shall expire unless
a time extension is granted, in writing, by the Code Enforcement
Officer. Construction and/or development shall be considered to have
started with the preparation of land, land clearing, grading, filling,
excavation of basement, footings, piers, or foundations, erection of
temporary forms, the installation of piling under proposed subsurface
footings, or the installation of sewer, gas and water pipes, or electrical
or other service lines from the street.
B. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted
by the applicant, which sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause of the
Code Enforcement Officer to approve such a request.
A. During the construction period, the Code Enforcement Officer or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
§ 145-7 CATASAUQUA CODE § 145-12
125:192
§ 145-13. Fees.
Applications for a building permit shall be accompanied by a fee set by
Borough Council by resolution from time to time.44
§ 145-14. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
ordinances. He shall make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as are necessary.
B. In the discharge of his duties, the Code Enforcement Officer shall have
the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or development
in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of proper
credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
C. In the event the Code Enforcement Officer discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
revoke the building permit and report such fact to Borough Council for
whatever action it considers necessary.
D. A record of all such inspections and violations of this chapter shall be
maintained.
A. Notices. Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this
chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall give notice of such alleged violation as
hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(3) Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for the
performance of any act it requires;
(4) Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been property served upon such owner or agent
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required by the laws of this state;
(5) Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to
44.Editor's Note: See Ch. A285, Fees.
§ 145-12 CODE ENFORCEMENT § 145-14
125:193
§ 145-15. Appeals.
comply with any notice, order of direction of the Code Enforcement
Officer or any other authorized employee of the municipality shall
be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall pay a fine to the
Borough of Catasauqua of not less than $100 nor more than $600,
plus costs of prosecution. In default of such payment, such person shall
be imprisoned in county prison for a period not to exceed 10 days.
Each day during which any violation of this chapter continues shall
constitute a separate offense. In addition to the above penalties all
other actions are hereby reserved, including an action in equity for the
proper enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty
for any violation of, or noncompliance with, this chapter shall not
excuse the violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue and all
such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and
noncompliances with a reasonable time. Any development initiated or
any structure of building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered,
or relocated in noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by
Borough Council to be a public nuisance and abatable as such. Any
person found guilty of violating an ordinance shall be assessed court
costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in the
enforcement proceedings. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1288]
A. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Code
Enforcement Officer concerning the administration of the provisions of
this chapter may appeal to the Code Hearing Board of the Borough of
Catasauqua. Such appeal must be filed, in writing, within 30 days after
the decision, determination or action of the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. Upon receipt of such appeal the Code Hearing Board shall set a time
and place, in accordance with their regulations, for the purpose of
considering the appeal. Notice of the time and place at which the
appeal will be considered shall be given to all parties.
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Code Hearing Board may
seek relief therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this
commonwealth, including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management
Act.45
45.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 145-14 CATASAUQUA CODE § 145-15
125:194
ARTICLE III
Floodplain Areas
§ 145-16. Identification of floodplain areas.
The identified floodplain area shall be those areas of the Borough of
Catasauqua, which are subject to the one-hundred-year flood, as identified
in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated November 7, 2001, and the
accompanying maps prepared for the Borough of Catasauqua by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), or the most recent revision
thereof.
§ 145-17. Description of floodplain areas.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
§ 145-18. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by Borough
Council where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or
person documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any such
A. FW (Floodway Area): the areas identified as "Floodway" in the AE Zone
in the Flood Insurance Study prepared by the FEMA. The term shall
also include floodway areas which have been identified in other
available studies or sources of information for those floodplain areas
where no floodway has been identified in the Flood Insurance Study.
B. FF (Flood-Fringe Area): the remaining portions of the one-hundred-year
floodplain in those areas identified as an AE Zone in the Flood
Insurance Study, where a floodway has been delineated. The basis for
the outermost boundary of this area shall be the one-hundred-year flood
elevations as shown in the flood profiles contained in the Flood
Insurance Study.
C. FA (General Floodplain Area): the areas identified as Zone A in the FIS
for which no one-hundred-year flood elevations have been provided.
When available, information from other federal, state, and other
acceptable sources shall be used to determine the one-hundred-year
elevation, as well as a floodway area, if possible. When no other
information is available, the one-hundred-year elevation shall be
determined by using a point on the boundary of the identified floodplain
area which is nearest the construction site in question. In lieu of the
above, the municipality may require the applicant to determine the
elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques.
Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who
shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently
accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc.,
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by the Borough of Catasauqua.
§ 145-16 CODE ENFORCEMENT § 145-18
125:195
change, approval must be obtained from the Federal Insurance
Administration (FIA).
§ 145-19. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the Borough of Catasauqua Planning
Commission and any party aggrieved by this decision or determination may
appeal to Borough Council. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
§ 145-18 CATASAUQUA CODE § 145-19
125:196
ARTICLE IV
Technical Provisions
§ 145-20. General standards.
§ 145-21. Special requirements for FW and FA areas.
§ 145-22. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
A. No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be made
to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which may be
affected by such action have been notified by the municipality, and until
all required permits or approvals have been first obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection, Bureau of Dams, Waterways
and Wetlands. In addition, the Federal Emergency Management Agency
and Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic
Development shall be notified prior to any alteration or relocation of
any watercourse.
B. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area, shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.
A. With any FW (Floodway Area), the following provisions apply:
(1) Any new construction, development, use, activity, or encroachment
that would cause any increase in flood heights shall be prohibited.
(2) No new construction or development shall be allowed, unless a
permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection, Bureau of Dams, Waterways and Wetlands.
B. Within any FA (General Floodplain Area), the following provisions
apply:
(1) No new construction or development shall be located within the
area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any
watercourse.
(2) Any new construction or development, which would cause any
increase in flood heights, shall be prohibited within any floodway
area.
A. Residential structures. Within any identified floodplain area, any new
construction or substantial improvement of a residential structure shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the
regulatory flood elevation.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) Within any identified floodplain area, any new construction or
substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have
§ 145-20 CODE ENFORCEMENT § 145-22
125:197
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above,
the regulatory flood elevation, or be designed and constructed
so that the space enclosed by such structure shall remain either
completely or essentially dry during any flood up to that height.
(2) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, having a lowest floor
which is not elevated to at least 1 1/2 feet above the one-hundredyear
flood elevation, shall be floodproofed in a completely or
essentially dry manner in accordance with the W1 or W2 space
classification standards contained in the publication entitled
"Flood-Proofing Regulations" published by the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers (June 1972, as amended March 1992) or with some other
equivalent standard. All plans and specifications for such
floodproofing shall be accompanied by a statement certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect which states that the
proposed design and methods of construction are in conformance
with the above referenced standards.
C. Space below the lowest floor.
(1) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (including basement) is
prohibited.
(2) Partially enclosed space below the lowest floor (including
basement) which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle,
building access, or incidental storage in an area other than a
basement, shall be designed and constructed to allow for the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters for the purpose of
equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior walls. The term "partially
enclosed space" also includes crawl spaces. Designs for meeting
this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
D. Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
(1) The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation,
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles, or to the storage of
tools, material, and equipment related to the principal use or
activity.
§ 145-22 CATASAUQUA CODE § 145-22
125:198
§ 145-23. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
(2) Floor area shall not exceed 600 square feet.
(3) The structure will have a low damage potential.
(4) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(5) Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be at least 1 1/2 feet above the
one-hundred-year flood elevation.
(6) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances, such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
(7) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(8) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation or
movement and shall be designed to automatically provide for the
entry and exit of floodwater for the purpose of equalizing
hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
(1) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all
points;
(2) Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills shall
not be permitted;
(3) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance
to erosion, scouring, or settling;
(4) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to and
approved by the Code Enforcement Officer; and
§ 145-22 CODE ENFORCEMENT § 145-23
125:199
(5) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent
properties.
B. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall insure proper drainage along streets, and provide positive
drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to
prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(1) All new or replacement water and sanitary sewer facilities and
systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(3) No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within any
identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all state
and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or
contamination from it, during a flood.
D. Other utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than
one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or, in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and
not listed in § 145-24, Development which may endanger human life,
shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation and/or flood
proofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
H. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
§ 145-23 CATASAUQUA CODE § 145-23
125:200
§ 145-24. Development which may endanger human life.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain without causing structural
damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a "marine" or "water-resistant" variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are "water-resistant"
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other "water-resistant"
material.
J. Paints and adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of "marine" or "water-resistant" quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a "marine" or "water-resistant" variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) shall be
finished with a "marine" or "water-resistant" paint or other
finishing material.
K. Electrical components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
one-hundred-year flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
L. Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and ventilating
units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or
apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to
prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges
from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made
for the drainage of these systems in the event that flood water
infiltration occurs.
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, and
the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially
improved structure which will be used for the production or storage of
any of the following dangerous materials or substances; or will be used
§ 145-23 CODE ENFORCEMENT § 145-24
125:201
for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than 550
gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous
materials or substances on the premises; or will involve the production,
storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substances; shall be
subject to the provisions of this section, in addition to all other
applicable provisions. The following list of materials and substances are
considered dangerous to human life:
(1) Acetone.
(2) Ammonia.
(3) Benzene.
(4) Calcium carbide.
(5) Carbon disulfide.
(6) Celluloid.
(7) Chlorine.
(8) Hydrochloric acid.
(9) Hydrocyanic acid.
(10) Magnesium.
(11) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(12) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel, oil, etc.).
(13) Phosphorus.
(14) Potassium.
(15) Sodium.
(16) Sulphur and sulphur products.
(17) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides).
(18)Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
B. Within any FW (Floodway Area), any structure of the kind described in
Subsection A, above, shall be prohibited.
C. Within any FA (General Floodplain Area), any new or substantially
improved structure of the kind described in Subsection A, above, shall
be prohibited within the area measure 50 feet landward from the top-ofbank
of any watercourse.
D. Where permitted within any floodplain area, any new or substantially
improved structure of the kind described in Subsection A, above, shall
be elevated or designed and constructed to remain completely dry up to
§ 145-24 CATASAUQUA CODE § 145-24
125:202
§ 145-25. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
at least 1 1/2 feet above the one-hundred-year flood and, designed to
prevent pollution from the structure or activity during the course of
a one-hundred-year flood. Any such structure, or part thereof, that
will be built below the regulatory flood elevation shall be designed
and constructed in accordance with the standards for completely dry
floodproofing contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing Regulations
(U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972, as amended March 1992), or
with some other equivalent watertight standard.
A. Within any FW (Floodway Area), manufactured homes shall be
prohibited.
B. Within any FA (General Floodplain Area), manufactured homes shall be
prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-ofbank
of any watercourse.
C. Where permitted within any floodplain area, all manufactured homes,
and any improvements thereto, shall be:
(1) Placed on a permanent foundation.
(2) Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is 1 1/2
feet or more above the elevation of the one-hundred-year flood.
(3) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
§ 145-24 CODE ENFORCEMENT § 145-25
125:203

ARTICLE V
Activities Requiring Special Permits
§ 145-26. General provisions.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, the following activities shall be
prohibited within any identified floodplain area unless a special permit has
been issued by the Borough of Catasauqua:
§ 145-27. Application requirements for special permits.
A. The commencement of any of the following activities, or the
construction enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
(1) Hospitals.
(2) Nursing homes.
(3) Jails or prisons.
B. The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision.
A. A written request including a completed building permit application
form.
B. A small scale map showing the vicinity in which the proposed site is
located.
C. A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one inch
being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(1) North arrow, scale and date;
(2) Topography based upon the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of
1929, showing existing and proposed contours at intervals of two
feet;
(3) All property and lot lines including dimensions, and the size of the
site expressed in acres or square feet;
(4) The location of all existing streets, drives, other access ways, and
parking areas, with information concerning widths, pavement types
and construction, and elevations;
(5) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
buildings, structures and other public or private facilities,
including railroad tracks and facilities, and any other natural and
§ 145-26 CODE ENFORCEMENT § 145-27
125:205
man-made features affecting, or affected by, the proposed activity
or development;
(6) The location of the floodplain boundary line, information and spot
elevations concerning the one-hundred-year flood elevations, and
information concerning the flow of water including direction and
velocities;
(7) The location of all proposed buildings, structures, utilities, and any
other improvements; and
(8) Any other information which the municipality considers necessary
for adequate review of the application.
D. Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements,
clearly and legibly drawn at suitable scale, showing the following:
(1) Sufficiently detailed architectural or engineering drawings,
including floor plans, sections, and exterior building elevations, as
appropriate;
(2) For any proposed building, the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) and, as required, the elevation of any other
floor;
(3) Complete information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces, and other factors associated
with the one-hundred-year flood;
(4) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures;
(5) Cross section drawings for all proposed streets, drives, other
accessways, and parking areas, showing all rights-of-way and
pavement widths;
(6) Profile drawings for all proposed streets, drives, and vehicular
accessways including existing and proposed grades; and
(7) Plans and profiles of all proposed sanitary and storm sewer
systems, water supply systems, and any other utilities and
facilities.
E. The following data and documentation:
(1) Certification from the applicant that the site upon which the
activity or development is proposed is an existing separate and
single parcel, owned by the applicant or the client he represents;
(2) Certification from a registered professional engineer, architect, or
landscape architect that the proposed construction has been
adequately designed to protect against damage from the onehundred-
year flood;
§ 145-27 CATASAUQUA CODE § 145-27
125:206
§ 145-28. Application review procedures.
Upon receipt of an application for a special permit by the Code Enforcement
Officer of the Borough of Catasauqua the following procedures shall apply
in addition to those of Article II:
(3) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, landscape architect, or other qualified person, which
contains a complete and accurate description of the nature and
extent of pollution that might possibly occur from the development
during the course of a one-hundred-year flood, including a
statement concerning the effects such pollution may have on
human life;
(4) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect, which contains a complete and
accurate description of the effects the proposed development will
have on one-hundred-year flood elevations and flows;
(5) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect, which contains a complete and
accurate description of the kinds and amounts of any loose buoyant
materials or debris that may possibly exist or be located on the site
below the one-hundred-year flood elevation and the effects such
materials and debris may have on one-hundred-year flood
elevations and flows;
(6) The appropriate component of the Department of Environmental
Protection's "Planning Module for Land Development;"
(7) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the
requirements of the Department of Environmental Protection to
implement and maintain erosion and sedimentation control;
(8) Any other applicable permits such as, but not limited to, a permit
for any activity regulated by the Department of Environmental
Protection under Section 302 of Act 1978-166; and
(9) An evacuation plan which fully explains the manner in which the
site will be safely evacuated before or during the course of a onehundred-
year flood.
A. Within three working days following receipt of the application, a
complete copy of the application and all accompanying documentation
shall be forwarded to the Lehigh Valley Planning Commission by
registered or certified mail for its review and recommendations. Copies
of the application shall also be forwarded to the Catasauqua Planning
Commission and the Borough Engineer for review and comment.
B. If an application is received that is incomplete, the Borough, through
the office of the Code Enforcement Officer, shall notify the applicant in
writing, stating in what respect the application is deficient.
§ 145-27 CODE ENFORCEMENT § 145-28
125:207
§ 145-29. Special technical requirements.
C. If the Borough decides to disapprove an application, it shall notify the
applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the disapproval.
D. If the Borough approves an application, it shall file written notification,
together with the application and all pertinent information, with the
Department of Community and Economic Development, by registered
or certified mail, with five working days after the date of approval.
E. Before issuing the special permit, the Borough shall allow the
Department of Community and Economic Development 30 days after
receipt of the notification by the Department, to review the application
and decision made by the Code Enforcement Officer for the Borough of
Catasauqua.
F. If the Borough, or the Code Enforcement Officer, does not receive any
communication from the Department of Community and Economic
Development during the thirty-day review period, it may issue a special
permit to the applicant.
G. If the Department of Community and Economic Development should
decide to disapprove an application, it shall notify the Borough of
Catasauqua and the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the
disapproval, and the Borough shall not issue the special permit.
A. In addition to the requirements of Article IV of this chapter, the
following minimum requirements shall also apply to any proposed
development requiring a special permit. If there is any conflict between
any of the following requirements and those in Article IV of this chapter
or in any other code, ordinance, or regulation, the more restrictive
provision shall apply.
B. No application for a special permit shall be approved unless it can be
determined that the structure or activity will be located, constructed
and maintained in a manner which will:
(1) Fully protect the health and safety of the general public and any
occupants of the structure. At a minimum, all new structures shall
be designed, located, and constructed so that:
(a) The structure will survive inundation by waters of the onehundred-
year flood without any lateral movement or damage to
either the structure itself, or to any of its equipment or
contents below the one-hundred-year flood elevation.
(b) The lowest floor (including basement) elevation will be at least
1 1/2 feet above the one-hundred-year flood elevation.
(c) The occupants of the structure can remain inside for an
indefinite period of time and be safely evacuated at any time
during the one-hundred-year flood.
§ 145-28 CATASAUQUA CODE § 145-29
125:208
(2) Prevent any significant possibility of pollution, increased flood
levels or flows, or debris endangering life and property.
C. All hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who
shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently
accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc.,
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by the Borough of Catasauqua and the Department of
Community and Economic Development.
§ 145-29 CODE ENFORCEMENT § 145-29
125:209

ARTICLE VI
Existing Structures
§ 145-30. Existing structures in identified floodplain areas.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements
to be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement
is made to any existing structure, the provisions of § 145-31 shall apply.
§ 145-31. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to
an existing structure located within any identified floodplain area:
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any floodway area that would cause any increase in the elevation
of the one-hundred-year flood.
B. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any area that would, together with all other existing and
anticipated development, increase the one-hundred-year flood elevation
more than one foot at any point.
C. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement, of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of 50% or more of
its market value, shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall
be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
D. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than 50% of
its market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest
extent possible.
§ 145-30 CODE ENFORCEMENT § 145-31
125:211

ARTICLE VII
Variances
§ 145-32. Authority to grant variances.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in
an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowners,
the Borough of Catasauqua may, upon request, grant relief from the strict
application of the requirements.
§ 145-33. Variance procedures and conditions.
A. Requests for variances shall be considered by the Borough of
Catasauqua in accordance with the procedures contained § 145-15 and
the following:
(1) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any floodway area that would cause any
increase in the one-hundred-year flood elevation.
(2) Except for a possible modification of the 1 1/2 foot freeboard
requirement involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the
other requirements pertaining specifically to development
regulated by special permit (Article V) or to development which
may endanger human life (§ 145-24).
(3) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
(4) In granting any variance, the Borough of Catasauqua shall attach
whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers
necessary in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare,
and to achieve the objectives of this chapter.
(5) Whenever a variance is granted, the Borough of Catasauqua shall
notify the applicant in writing that:
(a) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(b) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
(6) In reviewing any request for a variance, the Borough of Catasauqua
shall consider, at a minimum, the following:
(a) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(b) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(c) That the granting of the variance will (i) neither result in an
unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public
§ 145-32 CODE ENFORCEMENT § 145-33
125:213
expense, (ii) nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize
the public, or conflict with any other applicable state or local
ordinances and regulations.
(7) A complete record of all variances requests and related actions
shall be maintained by the Borough of Catasauqua. In addition, a
report of all variances granted during the year shall be included in
the annual report to the Federal Insurance Administration.
B. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed as to have the capability of resisting the onehundred-
year flood.
§ 145-33 CATASAUQUA CODE § 145-33
125:214
ARTICLE VIII
Definitions
§ 145-34. Interpretation.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
§ 145-35. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
COMPLETELY DRY SPACE — A space which will remain totally dry during
flooding; the structure is designed and constructed to prevent the passage
of water and water vapor.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets, and other paving; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
ESSENTIALLY DRY SPACE — A space which will remain dry during
flooding, except for the passage of some water vapor or minor seepage; the
structure is substantially impermeable to the passage of water.
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The designated area of a floodplain required to carry and
discharge floodwaters of a given magnitude. For the purposes of this
§ 145-34 CODE ENFORCEMENT § 145-35
125:215
chapter, the floodway shall be capable of accommodating a flood of the onehundred-
year magnitude.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — The floodplain area specifically
identified in this chapter as being inundated by the one-hundred-year flood.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood resistant partially enclosed area,
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental storage,
in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest floor of
a building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that the
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of, streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
§ 145-35 CATASAUQUA CODE § 145-35
125:216
structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements
of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and
other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK — A parcel of land under single ownership,
which has been planned and improved for the placement of two or more
manufactured homes for nontransient use.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of
parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor
repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent,
or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting
public health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after June 2, 1980, and includes any subsequent
improvements thereto.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that, on the average, is likely to
occur once every 100 years (i.e., that has one-percent chance of occurring
each year, although the flood may occur in any year).
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
SPECIAL PERMIT — A special approval which is required for hospitals
nursing homes, jails, and new manufactured home parks and subdivisions
and substantial improvements to such existing parks, when such
development is located in all, or a designated portion of a floodplain.
A. Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck;
C.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
D.
§ 145-35 CODE ENFORCEMENT § 145-35
125:217
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached
to the ground including, but not limited to buildings, sheds, manufactured
homes, and other similar items. This term includes any man-made object
having an ascertainable stationary location on or in land or water whether
or not affixed to land.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other division
of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs,
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development. Provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the "start
of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure.
B.
§ 145-35 CATASAUQUA CODE § 145-35
125:218
Chapter 155
FRANCHISES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 230.
§ 145-35 FRANCHISES § 145-35
155:219

ARTICLE I
Cable Television Franchises
[Adopted 1-3-1983 by Ord. No. 847 (Ch. VII, Part 6, of the 1962
Code)]
§ 155-1. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases and words shall
have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context,
words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural
number include the singular number, and words in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Catasauqua located in Lehigh County,
Pennsylvania.
CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM or SYSTEM — A system of antennas, cables,
wires, lines, towers, waveguides, or other conductors, converters,
equipment or facilities, designed and constructed for the purpose of
producing, receiving, amplifying and distributing, audio, video and other
forms of electronic or electrical signals, located in the Borough.
COMPANY — Any operator of a cable television system.
GROSS SUBSCRIBER REVENUES — All revenues derived from charges
to subscribers located within the Borough. It shall include the revenue
derived from regular cable television reception service and any and all
other transmissions and programs sent over said cable for which payment
is received. As required by the Federal Communications Commission, gross
subscriber revenues shall not include any revenues received: (a) as
reimbursement of expense in the operation of any access channels; (b)
as advertising payments; (c) from the leasing of cable channels; (d) from
programs for which a per-channel or per-program charge is made; and (e)
from furnishing other communications and nonbroadcast services either
directly or as a carrier for another party or any other income derived
from the system. Gross subscriber revenues shall also not include revenues
received as installation charges and fees for reconnections, inspection,
repairs or modifications of any installations.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind, and the partners in partnerships and
officers of corporations.
§ 155-2. Qualifications of grantee and grant of authority.
A. A public hearing concerning the granting of the franchises shall be held
by Borough Council. Public notice of said hearing shall be given by
advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough of
Catasauqua not less than 14 nor more than 30 days prior to said
hearing. Said notice shall invite interested parties to participate in said
hearing and comment upon the legal, character, financial, technical and
other qualifications of the company to operate a cable television system
§ 155-1 FRANCHISES § 155-2
155:221
§ 155-3. Franchise term and renewal.
The franchise granted herein shall terminate 10 years from the date of this
grant. The Borough may renew this grant of franchise for an additional term
of 10 years upon application by the company made not less than 90 days
prior to expiration of the current franchise. If a renewal request is made by
the company, then the Borough Council shall hold a public hearing giving
notice in a newspaper of general circulation of the same concerning the past
performance of the company. The Borough shall review the maintenance log
required in § 155-6 of this article. After receiving public comment at the
above mentioned meeting and review of all pertinent documents, Borough
Council shall only renew this franchise with said company if the company's
performance has proven to be satisfactory.
§ 155-4. Payments to Borough.
in the Borough. Having received at said hearings all comments
regarding the qualifications of the applicant to receive this franchise,
the Borough may find that the company possesses the necessary legal,
technical, character, financial and other qualifications and that the
company's construction arrangements are adequate and feasible, and
that therefore the Borough may grant to the company a nonexclusive
franchise, right and privilege to construct, erect, operate, modify and
maintain, in, upon, along, across, above and over and under the
highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, public ways and public places
now laid out or dedicated and all extensions thereof, and additions
thereto, in the Borough, poles, wires, cables, underground conduits,
manholes and other television conductors and fixtures necessary for the
maintenance and operation in the Borough of a cable television system
for the purpose of distributing television and radio signals, and other
electronic impulses in order to furnish television and radio programs
and various communications and other electronic services to the public.
The right so granted includes the right to use and occupy said streets,
alleys, public ways and public places and all manner of easements for
the purposes herein set forth but does not include or purport to include
the right to utilize the private property, real or personal, of any other
person or firm. It is specifically understood that the company shall place
all aerial lines along Borough rights-of-way in such a manner as to be
as unobtrusive as possible. Company agrees to move lines which are
inappropriately placed upon request made by the Borough Manager. In
sections of the Borough which have underground utilities, no aerial line
shall be constructed to support a cable television system.
B. Franchises awarded under this article shall be granted by resolution of
Borough Council.
A. Each company making application for a cable television system
franchise shall pay an application fee as set by resolution of Borough
Council.46
§ 155-2 CATASAUQUA CODE § 155-4
155:222
§ 155-5. Records and reports.
The company shall keep full, true, accurate and current books of account,
which books and records shall be made available for inspection and copying
by an authorized representative of the Borough at all reasonable times.
§ 155-6. Local office; complaint procedures.
B. The company shall, during each year of operation under a franchise,
pay to the Borough an amount equal to 3% of the annual gross
subscriber revenues as heretofore defined. Said payment shall be
annual and shall be made the first day of March for the preceding
calendar year. Along with said payment, the company shall furnish the
Borough with an operating report showing the company's annual gross
subscriber revenues for the preceding year and providing such other
information to the Borough as it shall require to verify that the report of
the gross subscriber revenues is accurate.
C. If at any time a franchised company enters into an agreement with
another municipality which contains any terms or conditions that are
more favorable including, by way of example and not of limitation, the
payments made to that municipality, such more favorable terms and
conditions shall automatically extend to the Borough effective as of the
date of the agreement with said other municipality. It shall be the duty
of the company to promptly notify the Borough of any such agreement
and to supply a conformed copy thereof to the Borough. If any doubt
exists as to whether terms and conditions are, in fact, more favorable, it
shall nonetheless notify the Borough and supply it with a copy of such
agreement together with the company's written view on whether this
most favored nation provision applies.
A. During the term of a franchise and any renewal thereof, the company
shall maintain a local business office or agent for the purpose of
receiving and resolving all complaints regarding the quality of service,
equipment malfunctions, and similar matters. The provisions of this
section shall be deemed to be complied with if company maintains a
local business headquarters office within 25 airline miles of the
principal coordinates of the Borough, which office may be reached by a
local, toll-free telephone call, and provides the Borough Manager's
office with the name, address and phone number of a person who will
act as the company's agent to receive complaints regarding quality of
service, equipment malfunctions and similar matters. The local office
shall be open to receive inquiries or complaints from subscribers during
normal business hours, and in no event less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday. Any complaints from subscribers shall be
investigated and acted upon as soon as possible, but at least within
three business days of their receipt. The company shall keep a
maintenance service log which will indicate the nature of each service
46.Editor's Note: See Ch. A285, Fees.
§ 155-4 FRANCHISES § 155-6
155:223
§ 155-7. Quality of reception.
The company shall maintain a good cable signal at all times. The signal
strength shall be in compliance with the FCC Rules and Regulations and
shall have a signal to noise ratio per channel not less than 43 decibels.
§ 155-8. Liability and indemnification.
The company shall pay, and by its acceptance of a franchise expressly
agrees that it will pay, all damages and penalties which the Borough may
legally be required to pay as a result of the negligence of the company,
its agents, contractors, or subcontractors, in the installation, operation or
maintenance of the cable television system authorized herein. The company
shall further save harmless and defend the Borough from any liability for
acts done by the company pursuant to this agreement. The Borough shall
notify the company's representative within 15 days after the presentation
of any claim or demand to the Borough, either by suit or otherwise, made
against the Borough on account of any negligence or contract as aforesaid
on the part of the company. The company further agrees as follows:
complaint, the date and time it was received, the disposition of said
complaint and the time and date thereof. This log shall be made
available for periodic inspection by the Borough.
B. The company shall, by appropriate means such as a card or brochure,
as subscribers are connected or reconnected to the system, furnish
information concerning the procedures for making inquiries and/or
complaints, including the name, address and local telephone number of
the employee or employees or agent to whom such inquiries or
complaints are to be addressed. The Borough appoints its Manager or
his designated Borough employee as responsible for implementation of
the complaint procedures and continuing administration of the
franchise.
A. Company shall carry workmen's compensation insurance, with
statutory limits, and employer's liability insurance with limits of not less
than $100,000 which shall cover all operations to be performed by
company as a result of this article.
B. Company shall carry comprehensive general liability and
comprehensive automobile liability insurance with bodily injury and/or
death coverage of not less than $500,000 per occurrence, and property
damage limits of not less than $300,000. The Borough of Catasauqua
shall be included as a named insured under said company's insurance
policies stipulated above.
C. Company shall carry contractual liability insurance coverage for all
liability which company has contractually assumed hereunder,
including the indemnification obligations assumed by company in this
§ 155-8, the coverage under said policy to be the same as the limits set
forth in the preceding Subsection B of this section.
§ 155-6 CATASAUQUA CODE § 155-8
155:224
§ 155-9. System construction, maintenance and procedures.
D. Company's workmen's compensation, comprehensive general liability
and comprehensive automobile liability insurance and all other
insurance which company is obliged under the terms of this article to
carry shall be written by an insurance company authorized to do
business in Pennsylvania with capital and/or surplus of not less than
$3,000,000. Company agrees to furnish Borough with certified copies
or certificates of insurance of said policies, which shall provide that
insurance shall not be cancelled unless 10 days prior written notice
shall first be given to Borough. Borough shall be given a certified copy
of the policy written to provide the contractual liability coverage
required by Subsection C of this section.
A. Upon granting of a franchise to construct and maintain a community
television system in the Borough, the company may enter into contracts
with any public utility companies or any other owner or lessee of any
poles located within or without the Borough to whatever extent such
contract or contracts may be expedient and of advantage to the
company for use of poles and posts necessary for proper installation of
the system, obtain right-of-way permits from appropriate state, county
and federal officials necessary to cross highways or roads under their
respective jurisdictions to supply main trunk lines from the company's
receiving antennas, obtain permission from the Federal Aviation
Authority to erect and maintain antennas suitable to the needs of the
system and its subscribers and obtain whatever other permits a
borough, state or federal agency may require. In the construction,
installation and maintenance of its system, the company will use cable
and electronic devices, all of specialized and advanced design and type
which shall be in conformance with the standards of the cable industry
and in compliance with the rules and regulations issued by any
governmental authorities. Further, the company will employ personnel
with training, skill and experience in electronics and communications.
Material and/or personnel of this sort may not be available to the
company for its system in the event of war or other similar national
emergency.
B. The company's system, poles, wires and appurtenances shall be
located, erected and maintained so that none of them shall endanger or
interfere with the lives of persons, or interfere with any improvements
the Borough may deem proper to make, or hinder or obstruct the free
use of the streets, alleys, bridges, easements or public property. All
such wires and apparatus shall be strung in a neat and workmanlike
manner and, to the extent possible, shall follow existing lines of other
utilities so as to minimize the number of separate lines perceived by the
casual observer. Whenever specifically requested by a subscriber, lines
shall be underground. Nothing in this article shall supersede or be
interpreted as allowing the company to place aboveground lines in
areas of the community which are restricted to underground utilities
only.
§ 155-8 FRANCHISES § 155-9
155:225
C. No transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment
erected by the company within the Borough shall be so located as to
cause interference with the proper use of streets, alleys and other
public ways and places, nor to cause interference with the rights or
reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the said
streets, alleys or other public ways and places.
D. In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other
surfacing, the company shall, at its own cost and expense and in a
manner approved by the Borough, replace and restore all paving,
sidewalk, driveway or surface of any street, alley or yard disturbed, in
as good condition as before said work was commenced.
E. In the event that at any time during the period of this franchise, the
Borough shall lawfully elect to alter or change the grade of any street,
alley or other public way, the company, upon reasonable notice by the
Borough, shall remove, and relocate its poles, wires, cables,
underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its own expense.
F. The company shall not place poles or other fixtures where the same will
interfere with any gas, electric or telephone fixture, water hydrant or
main, or sewer main or appurtenance, and all such poles or other
fixtures placed in any street shall be placed at the outer edge of the
sidewalk and inside the curb line and those placed in alleys shall be
placed close to the line of the lot abutting on said alley, and then in such
manner as not to interfere with the usual travel on said streets, alleys
and public ways.
G. The company shall, on the request of any person holding a building
moving permit issued by the Borough, temporarily raise or lower its
wires to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary
removal, raising, or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person
requesting the same, and the company shall have the authority to
require such payment in advance. The company shall be given not less
than 48 hours' advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire
changes.
H. Subject to full compliance with the provisions of the Borough's shade
tree ordinance,47 the company shall have the authority to trim trees
located within the legal right-of-way of any streets, alleys, sidewalks
and public places of the Borough so as to prevent the branches of such
trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the company,
all trimming to be done under the supervision and direction of the
Borough and at the expense of the company. As a condition for granting
approval for the cutting of any trees, if such cutting could result in
liability on the part of the Borough, the Borough may require company
to provide, in advance, such security as the Borough may reasonably
require to save harmless the Borough from and indemnify the Borough
for any such liability and, in the event, company does hereby agree to
47.Editor's Note: See Ch. 245, Trees.
§ 155-9 CATASAUQUA CODE § 155-9
155:226
§ 155-10. Line extensions.
§ 155-11. Compliance with standards.
All facilities and equipment of company shall be constructed and maintained
in accordance with the requirements and specifications of the National
Electrical Safety Code and such applicable ordinances and regulations set
forth by the Borough and/or any other local, state or federal agencies.
§ 155-12. Company rules and regulations.
The company shall have the authority to promulgate such rules, regulations,
terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be
reasonably necessary to enable the company to exercise its rights and
perform its obligations under this franchise, and to assure an uninterrupted
service to each and all of its customers; provided, however, that such rules,
save harmless and indemnify Borough of and from any claims for
damages arising out of any such cutting, whether or not Borough has
requested security in advance.
I. The company shall provide, upon request and without charge, service to
any municipal buildings owned and operated by the Borough and to any
public school, volunteer fire company, and public library. This shall
mean only an energized cable to such building. The cost of any internal
wiring shall be borne by the institution.
A. It shall be the obligation of company to serve all residents of the
Borough except to the extent that density of homes, adverse terrain or
other factors render providing service impracticable, technically
infeasible or economically noncompensatory. For purposes of
determining compliance with the provisions of this section, and to
provide for a reasonable and nondiscriminatory policy governing
extensions of cable service within the Borough, which policy was
subject to public review in the public proceeding leading to the award
of this franchise, company shall extend service to new subscribers, at
the normal installation charge and monthly rate for customers of that
classification, under the following terms and conditions:
(1) Where the new subscriber or nearest subscriber of a group of new
subscribers is located within 200 feet of existing trunk cable; and
(2) Where the number of homes to be passed by any new extension
cable plant bears the same proportional ratio to the total amount of
new cable plant as the average number of homes passed per mile of
existing cable plant.
B. In the event the requirements of Subsection A(1) and (2) are not met,
the installation cost per subscriber shall be determined in accordance
with company's rate schedule in effect at the time, which rate schedule
shall be fair and reasonable in the circumstances.
§ 155-9 FRANCHISES § 155-12
155:227
regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions
hereof or of federal and state laws.
§ 155-13. Assignment or transfer restricted.
The company shall not sell or transfer its system to another, nor transfer
any rights under this franchise to another without prior written approval by
the Borough.
§ 155-14. Compliance with FCC rules and regulations.
The company shall, at all times, comply with the then current rules and
regulations governing CATV operations promulgated by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC). This shall include adherence by the
company to FCC rules regarding technical and engineering specifications
involved in the construction of the CATV system and signal carriage therein.
§ 155-15. Activities prohibited.
§ 155-16. Severability.
A. The company shall not allow its cable or other operations to interfere
with television reception of persons not served by the company, nor
shall the system interfere with, obstruct or hinder in any manner, the
operation of the various utilities serving the residents of the Borough.
B. Except for service to be supplied to the Borough itself and to schools in
the Borough, the company shall not, as to rates, charges, service
facilities, rules, regulations, or in any other respect, make or grant any
preference or advantage to any person, nor subject any person to any
prejudice or disadvantage; provided, however, that nothing in this
franchise shall be deemed to prohibit the establishment of a graduated
scale of charges and classified rate schedules to which any customer
coming within such classification would be entitled.
C. The company shall in no way utilize the rights and privileges given it by
this article to restrict the activities of other companies or to compete
unfairly with other companies or to engage in restraint of trade
involving it and other companies.
A. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate,
distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions hereof.
B. Should any provision of this franchise be inconsistent or at variance
with any rule, regulation or policy, in whole or in part, of the Federal
Communications Commission or any other agency having jurisdiction,
such provision shall be invalid, but the remaining provisions hereof
shall not be affected thereby.
§ 155-12 CATASAUQUA CODE § 155-16
155:228
Chapter 160
GARAGE SALES
§ 160-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as "the ordinance regulating and restricting
garage sales."
§ 160-2. Purpose.
Such rules and regulations as set up in this chapter are designed to control
and restrict garage sales in order to protect the public health, safety and
convenience and to restrict such sales to casual and/or occasional
occurrences only in keeping with the character of the neighborhood where
this activity is carried on and with the Zoning Ordinance of the Borough.48
The intent of this chapter is to eliminate repeated, perpetual, prolonged
and extended garage sales in residential areas. Such sales, if carried on
indefinitely or repetitively, tend to become retail businesses in residential
areas and zones, create a nuisance, and usually violate the zoning
regulations of the Borough. The provisions of this chapter arise from the
need to limit, regulate, restrict and control garage sales. It is not the intent
of this chapter to change or amend the zoning laws, transient business laws
and/or any other laws or ordinances of the Borough
§ 160-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CATASAUQUA — All residential dwellings located within any type of zone,
zoned area, zoning district, whether or not said areas or zones are
residential, business, commercial or otherwise, within the geographic
boundaries of the Borough of Catasauqua.
GARAGE SALE — The sale or offering for sale of five or more new, used
or secondhand items of personal property at any one residential premises
at any one time regardless if such sale or display is indoors or outdoors.
Includes all sales in residential areas entitled "garage sale," "yard sale,"
"tag sale," "porch sale," "lawn sale," "attic sale," "basement sale," "rummage
sale," "flea market sale" or any similar casual sale of tangible personal
property.
GOODS — Any goods, warehouse merchandise, or other personal property
capable of being the object of a sale regulated hereunder.
PERSONS — Individuals, partnerships, family groups, voluntary
associations and corporations. Charitable nonprofit institutions,
educational, cultural, or governmental institutions or organizations shall
48.Editor's Note: See Ch. 280, Zoning.
§ 155-16 FRANCHISES § 160-3
155:229
not be defined as persons under this chapter and thus this chapter shall
have no application to the same.
§ 160-4. Permit required; failure to obtain permit.
§ 160-5. Permit application, issuance, fee and duration.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a garage sale within the
geographic boundaries of the Borough of Catasauqua without first
obtaining a garage sale license from the Borough after filing an
application containing the information hereinafter specified.
B. Any person found to be conducting a garage sale without having
obtained a permit prior to the sale shall be charged an administrative
surcharge for failure to obtain a permit. This surcharge shall be in an
amount as set by Council from time to time. Failure to obtain the permit
and to pay the administrative surcharge within 15 days when directed
to do so shall constitute a violation of this chapter. [Added 8-4-2014
by Ord. No. 1305]
A. An applicant for a garage sale permit shall provide the following
information on a written application provided by the Borough
Secretary:
(1) The name and address of the applicant;
(2) The name or names of persons other than the applicants, if any,
who will be conducting the sale;
(3) The date of the proposed sale;
(4) The date and nature of the most recent past sale;
(5) The location of the sale site;
(6) A statement affirming that the goods to be sold belong to the
applicant or his household and that said goods have not been
purchased or obtained solely for the sale.
B. Any person who furnishes false information on an application for a
garage sale permit is in violation of this chapter and shall be subjected
to the penalties hereinafter set forth.
C. The permit fee for any permit to be issued in accordance with this
chapter shall be established by Borough Council by resolution and shall
be included in its schedule of fees.49
D. Issuance. Upon payment of the permit fee set forth above and upon
determination by the Secretary of the Borough that the application
meets all the requirements of this chapter, the Borough Secretary shall
issue the permit.
49.Editor's Note: See Ch. A285, Fees.
§ 160-3 CATASAUQUA CODE § 160-5
155:230
§ 160-6. Location.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to hold a garage sale on property other than
their own residential lot.
§ 160-7. Hours.
No garage sale shall be conducted between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 9:00
a.m.
§ 160-8. Encroachment on right-of-way.
§ 160-9. Signs.
Each party shall be allowed to place a sign no larger than two feet by two
feet on their residential property to identify the garage sale. Such signs
shall not be placed upon the property prior to 24 hours before the sale and
said sign must be removed from said property within 24 hours after said
sale.
§ 160-10. Enforcement. [Amended 8-4-2014 by Ord. No. 1305]
This chapter shall be enforced by the Catasauqua Police Department or the
Catasauqua Code Enforcement Department. It shall be the duty of the Police
Department and Code Enforcement Department to investigate any violation
of this chapter.
§ 160-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord. No.
1288; 8-4-2014 by Ord. No. 1305]
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed $300 and/or 90 days in
jail. Any person found guilty of violating an ordinance shall be assessed
court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in the
enforcement proceedings. It shall be the duty of the Police Officers or
of Code Enforcement Personnel of the Borough to report to the Borough
E. Duration. A permit issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter shall be
valid only for two consecutive days. No more than four permits shall be
issued per calendar year per residence, except no limitations shall
apply to a sale for the purpose of settling an estate. [Amended
8-4-2014 by Ord. No. 1305]
A. No garage sale shall encroach on a public right-of-way, sidewalk, street
or alley.
B. At all times, the applicant shall be responsible for the maintenance of
good order and decorum on the premises during the hours of such sale
or activity and shall be responsible for removing debris, garbage and
litter from the premises and from surrounding public places following
the sale.
§ 160-5 FRANCHISES § 160-11
155:231
Manager all violations of any provision of this chapter, indicating in each
case an address where the violation took place and any other facts which
might be necessary in order to secure clear understanding of the
circumstances attending to the violation.
Chapter 165
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
§ 165-1. Definitions.
All definitions in terms of this chapter shall be those definitions set forth
in the Hazardous Material Emergency Planning and Response Act, the Act
of December 7, 1990, P.L. 639, No. 165, § 101 et seq., or any subsequent
amendments thereto.
§ 165-2. Liability for costs.
A person who causes a release of hazardous material shall be liable for the
response costs incurred by the Borough of Catasauqua.
§ 165-3. Amount of costs recoverable.
The amount of costs recoverable shall be the same as set forth under the
Hazardous Material Emergency Planning and Response Act.
§ 165-4. Amount of costs incurred.
The costs incurred by the Borough of such accident as set forth in § 165-2,
above, shall be determined by the Borough Manager or his/her designee.
§ 165-5. Time of payment.
Such costs for all emergency services shall be paid directly to the Borough
within 30 days from the date on which the Borough issues an invoice for
such charges.
§ 165-6. Conflict with other ordinances.
Whenever the requirements of this chapter are in conflict with the
requirements of the codified ordinances of the Borough of Catasauqua, the
most restrictive, or those imposing the higher standards, shall govern.
Chapter 167
INSURANCE
§ 160-11 CATASAUQUA CODE § 165-6
165:232
ARTICLE I
Fire Insurance Claims Escrow
[Adopted 4-4-2011 by Ord. No. 1266]
§ 167-1. Designated officer.
The Borough Secretary or such official's designee is hereby appointed as
the designated officer who is authorized to carry out all responsibilities and
duties stated herein.
§ 167-2. Certificate and compliance required.
No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter the "insuring
agent") doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a
claim of a named insured for fire damage to a structure located within
the Borough (hereinafter "municipality") where the amount recoverable for
the fire loss to the structure under all policies exceeds $7,500, unless the
insuring agent is furnished by the municipal treasurer with a municipal
certificate pursuant to Section 508(b) of Act 98 of 1992,50 as amended,
and unless there is compliance with Section 508(c) of Act 98 of 1992,51 as
amended, and the provisions of this article.
§ 167-3. Claims payment procedure.
Where pursuant to Section 508(b)(1)(i) of Act 98 of 1992,52 as amended,
the municipal treasurer issues a certificate indicating that there are not
delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user charges against real
property, the insuring agent shall pay the claim of the named insured;
provided, however, that if the loss agreed upon by the named insured
and the insuring agent equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of
liability on all fire policies covering the building or structure, the following
procedures must be followed:
A. The insuring agent shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to the
designated officer of the municipality in the aggregate of $2,000 for
each $15,000 of a claim and for each fraction of that amount of a claim,
this section to be applied such that if the claim is $15,000 or less, the
amount transferred to the municipality shall be $2,000; or
B. If, at the time of a proof of loss agreed to between the named insured
and the insuring agent, the named insured has submitted a contractor's
signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or securing the
building or other structure, the insuring agent shall transfer to the
municipality from the insurance proceeds the amount specified in the
estimate.
50.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638(b).
51.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638(c).
52.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638(b)(1)(i).
§ 167-1 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 167-3
165:233
C. The transfer of proceeds shall be on pro rata basis by all companies,
associations or exchanges insuring the building or other structure.
D. After the transfer, the named insured shall submit a contractor's signed
estimate within 60 days of the costs of removing, repairing or securing
the building or other structure, and the designated officer shall return
the amount of the funds transferred to the municipality in excess of the
estimate to the named insured, if the municipality has not commenced
to remove, repair or secure the building or other structure.
E. Upon receipt of proceeds under this section, the municipality shall do
the following:
(1) The designated officer shall place the proceeds in a separate fund
to be used solely as security against the total costs of removing,
repairing or securing the building or structure which are incurred
by the municipality. Such costs shall include all reasonable and
customary engineering, legal or administrative costs incurred by
the municipality in connection with such removal, repair or
securing of the building or any proceedings related thereto; and
(2) It is the obligation of the insuring agent, when transferring the
proceeds, to provide the municipality with the name and address of
the named insured. Upon receipt of the transferred funds and the
name and address of the named insured, certify that the proceeds
have been received by the municipality and notify the named
insured that the procedures under this subsection shall be
followed; and
(3) When repairs, removal or securing of the building or other
structure have been completed in accordance with all applicable
regulations and orders of the municipality and the required proof of
such completion received by the designated officer, and if the
municipality has not incurred any costs for repairs, removal or
securing, the fund shall be returned to the named insured. If the
municipality has incurred costs for repairs, removal or securing of
the building or other structure, the costs shall be paid from the
fund, and if excess funds remain, the municipality shall transfer the
remaining funds to the named insured; and
(4) To the extent that interest is earned on proceeds held by the
municipality pursuant to this section, and not returned to the
named insured, such interest shall belong to the municipality. To
the extent that proceeds are returned to the named insured,
interest earned on such proceeds shall be distributed to the named
insured at the time that the proceeds are returned.
F. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of the
municipality to recover any deficiency. Furthermore, nothing in this
subsection shall be construed to prohibit the municipality and the
named insured from entering into an agreement that permits the
§ 167-3 CATASAUQUA CODE § 167-3
165:234
§ 167-4. Establishment of procedures and fees.
The Council of the Borough may, by resolution, adopt procedures and
regulations to implement Act 98 of 1992,53 as amended, and this article,
and may, by resolution, fix reasonable fees to be charged for municipal
activities or services provided pursuant to Act 98 of 1992, as amended, and
this article, including, but not limited to, issuance of certificates and bills,
performance of inspections and opening separate fund accounts.
§ 167-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord. No.
1288]
Any owner of property, any named insured or any insuring agent who
violates this article shall be subject to a penalty of up to $1,000 per
violation. Any person found guilty of violating an ordinance shall be
assessed court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the
Borough in the enforcement proceedings.
transfer of funds to the named insured if some other reasonable
disposition of the damaged property has been negotiated.
53.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 626 et seq.
§ 167-3 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 167-5
165:235
Chapter 170
JUNKYARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health — See Ch. 42.
Solid waste — See Ch. 220.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 255.
Zoning — See Ch. 280.
§ 170-1. Definitions.
The following words when used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings except in those instances where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
AUTOMOBILE JUNK OR GRAVE YARD — Any place not enclosed within four
walls and a roof where more than one automobile, which does not bear a
current Pennsylvania state inspection sticker and/or is not fit for immediate
highway use, is stored or disassembled.
JUNK — Any worn out or discarded material, whether usable or not,
especially old rope, chain, iron, copper or other metals, machinery of all
kinds or its parts, and abandoned or damaged automobiles or other
vehicles, whether power operated or otherwise, and whether or not in a
usable condition.
JUNK DEALER — Any person engaged in the business of collecting,
accumulating, buying, selling, storing, disassembling, treating or
processing of scrap metal automobiles not fit for highway use, second hand
building materials, rags, bottles, scrap paper or any junk as previously
defined.
JUNKYARD and SCRAPYARD — An automobile junk or grave yard, as
previously defined, and any place where scrap metal, secondhand building
materials, rags, bottles, scrap paper or any junk, as previously defined, is
collected, accumulated, stored, disassembled, treated or processed.
§ 170-2. Unlawful acts.
No junk, including, but not limited to, abandoned or damaged automobiles,
shall be thrown, placed, stored or deposited or caused to be thrown, placed,
stored or deposited by any person in any ravine, ditch or gutter or on any
road, street, avenue, public land, public alley, sidewalk or footpath in the
Borough, nor in any public place or private property, vacant or occupied,
within the limits of the Borough, except as provided by the terms of this
chapter and any amendments hereto.
§ 167-5 CATASAUQUA CODE § 170-3
170:236
§ 170-3. Junkyards and junk dealers regulated.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage or to continue to engage
in business as a junk dealer, or to establish or maintain, or continue to
operate a junkyard and scrapyard, within the limits of the Borough, except
as provided by the terms of this chapter and any amendments hereto.
§ 170-4. Permit required.
§ 170-5. Application for permit.
§ 170-6. Issuance of permit.
A. Any person engaged in or intending to engage in business as a junk
dealer, or operating, or maintaining, or intending to establish or
maintain a junkyard or scrapyard within the limits of the Borough, shall
obtain a permit from the Borough Secretary for which permit a fee in
accordance with the fee schedule is set forth by the Council shall be
paid to the use of the Borough.
B. The permit shall expire one year after the date of its issuance, but may
be renewed, under the provisions of this chapter for additional periods
of one year each.
A. The permit provided for in this chapter shall be issued by the Council
after written application shall have been made therefor by the person
desiring to be permitted. Such permit shall state the name of the person
to whom such permit is issued and a premises on which such business is
to be conducted, or such junkyard is to be maintained.
B. Such permit shall be posted conspicuously upon the premises permitted
thereunder.
C. The written application for the permit shall be accompanied by a form,
every question of which must be answered, which form will be supplied
by the Council.
D. Applicants shall also submit a plot of the premises used or to be used in
connection with such permit.
A. Upon receipt of an application by the Council, the Council may issue a
permit to the person applying therefor dependent upon examination of
the application and the appropriate factors pertaining to the operation.
Factors to be considered include, but are not limited to, whether or not
the proposed junkyard:
(1) Would have an adverse environmental impact on the natural,
scenic, historic or esthetic values of the Borough environment.
(2) Would seriously affect the safety and public welfare of the persons
within the Borough.
§ 170-3 JUNKYARDS § 170-6
170:237
§ 170-7. Permit fee.
The permit fee shall be paid immediately upon issuance or renewal of the
permit. The amount of the permit fee shall be calculated in accordance with
the fee schedule as set forth by Council.
§ 170-8. Transfer of permit.
§ 170-9. Transfer fee.
In the event that Council shall approve the transfer of a permit, the
transferee shall immediately pay to Borough a transfer fee in accordance
with the fee schedule set forth by Council.
§ 170-10. Regulations for operation.
Every person permitted under this chapter shall constantly maintain the
permitted premises in accordance with any special provisions imposed by
the Council and in the manner described by this section and any subsequent
regulations adopted by Council.
(3) Would seriously interfere with the use and enjoyment of other
properties in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already
permitted.
(4) Would substantially diminish and impair property values within the
neighborhood.
B. In the event the Council shall issue a permit, it may impose upon the
permit and the person applying therefor such other terms and
conditions as may be deemed necessary to carry out the spirit and
intent of this chapter.
C. A permit issued under the terms of this chapter shall in no way serve as
a substitute for, or waiver of, any permits which may be required by
other ordinances of the Borough.
A. No permit issued by the Council shall be transferable by the permittee
to any other person unless such a transfer is authorized by Council.
B. Any person desiring to transfer his permit shall notify the Council in
writing, which notification shall be accompanied by an application for a
permit, as described in § 170-5 of this chapter by the transferee.
A. From and after the effective date of this chapter, no junkyard or
scrapyard shall be established or maintained closer than 50 feet to any
street or any side property line. All junkyards or scrapyards must be
entirely enclosed within a solid wall, solid fence, or other barrier which
may be approved by Council. Such fence, wall or barrier shall not be
less than eight feet high. The fifty-foot setback area shall be kept clear
and vacant at all times. However, whenever such fence, wall or barrier
is visible from a public road, or from a residence, or from an adjoining
§ 170-6 CATASAUQUA CODE § 170-10
170:238
§ 170-11. Existing junkyards.
No junkyard or scrapyard in existence on the effective date of this chapter
shall be maintained, added to or extended unless in compliance with the
provisions of § 170-10 of this chapter as to said addition or extension.
§ 170-12. Compliance.
property a landscaped evergreen screen of trees and/or shrubs of four
feet or more at planting, and which are capable of attaining a
continuous height of eight feet or more, shall be planted along such
fence, wall or barrier, or section of same. The minimum acreage of any
such junkyard or scrapyard shall be 15 acres.
B. There shall be established and maintained in all junkyards and
scrapyards parallel aisles or roadways of not less than 12 feet in width
and not more than 500 feet apart. All aisles or roadways must be kept
clear and vacant at all times.
C. No flammable liquids shall be permitted to remain in any junked
container, whether the container is a separate item or is an integral part
of another item.
D. All rags, bottles and scrap paper must be kept within the walls of the
building constructed of fire resistant material and no garbage or other
organic wastes shall be stored in such premises.
E. Premises shall at all times be maintained so as not to constitute a
nuisance or a menace to the health of the community or residents
nearby.
F. The manner of storage and arrangement of junk, and the drainage
facilities of the premises, shall be such as to prevent the accumulation
of stagnant water upon the premises and to facilitate easy access for
fire-fighting purposes.
G. No person permitted under this chapter shall burn any motor vehicle or
its equivalent at any time. No oil, grease, tires, gasoline or other similar
materials that might be dangerous or tend to produce obnoxious smoke
or odors shall be burned within a junkyard at any time.
H. A person permitted under this chapter shall keep records fairly written
down in the English language at the time of the receipt of any junk.
Records shall include a description of each article received, the date
and hour received, and the person from whom such junk was received.
All junk received shall be kept and retained upon the licensed premises
for a period of 48 hours after the receipt, without disturbing or
reducing the size or altering the original form, shape, or condition until
said period has elapsed.
§ 170-10 JUNKYARDS § 170-12
170:239
Chapter 175
LOITERING
§ 175-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LOITERING — Remaining idle essentially in one location and shall include
the concepts of spending time idly, loafing or walking about aimlessly and
shall also include the colloquial expression "hanging around."
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access and shall
include any public street or public sidewalk, as well as the front of and
the area immediately adjacent to any school, parking lot, store, restaurant,
tavern or other place of business.
§ 175-2. Certain types of loitering prohibited.
No person shall loiter in a public place in such manner as to:
§ 175-3. Request to leave.
Whenever the presence of any person in any public place is causing or
is likely to cause any of the conditions enumerated in § 175-2, any police
officer may order that person to leave that place. Any person who shall
refuse to leave after being ordered to do so by a police officer shall be guilty
of a violation of this section.
A. Any person whose property is, at the effective date of this chapter, in
violation of any of the terms of this chapter, will have 90 days to bring
his property into compliance.
B. If, because of hardship, any person is unable to bring his property into
compliance within 90 days, such person shall notify the Council within
60 days of the effective date of this chapter of such hardship, and the
Council may, in its discretion, grant a reasonable extension of time to
comply with the terms hereof.
A. Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace.
B. Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the
comfort and repose of any person.
C. Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles.
D. Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in any public
place as defined in § 175-1. This subsection shall include the making of
unsolicited remarks of an offensive, disgusting or insulting nature or
which are calculated to annoy or disturb the person to, or in whose
hearing, they are made.
§ 170-12 CATASAUQUA CODE § 175-4
170:240
§ 175-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord. No.
1288]
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this chapter
shall be fined up to $300 for each offense and the cost of prosecution
and, in the event of default of payment of each fine and cost, shall be
subject to imprisonment for not more than 90 days. Any person found guilty
of violating an ordinance shall be assessed court costs and reasonable
attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings.
Chapter 180
MOVING PERMITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Apartment licensing — See Ch. 108. Fair housing — See Ch. 138.
§ 180-1. Permit required to move goods, equipment or machinery.
[Amended 2-4-2002 by Ord. No. 1134]
No person or persons, firm or corporation, shall move or cause to be moved
from anyplace within the Borough of Catasauqua to another place therein,
or to anyplace beyond the limits thereof, or from anyplace outside the
limits of the Borough of Catasauqua to anyplace within the Borough, any
household goods, personal goods, equipment, or machinery in bulk, without
first securing from the Borough Secretary of the Borough of Catasauqua,
Lehigh County, a permit for such moving or transportation.
§ 180-2. Application for permit.
Any person or persons, firm or corporation desiring a permit for the removal
or transportation of household goods, equipment or machinery in the
manner above described, shall make application to the Borough Secretary
of the Borough of Catasauqua. Lehigh County, Pennsylvania, setting forth
his, its or their name or names and address, and also getting forth the
names of the owners or reputed owners of the property to be moved, the
address and location from which the property is to be moved, and the new
address or location of the place to which the property is to be moved.
Any person or persons, firm or corporation shall, at the time of making
the application herein provided for, produce receipts or other evidence of
payment of all Borough taxes, water and sewerage rentals, and municipal
charges of any and every kind accrued against him, her, them or it up to and
including the date of application. No permit for moving or transportation
shall be issued by the Borough Secretary until the provisions of this section
have been complied with.
§ 175-4 JUNKYARDS § 180-3
170:241
§ 180-3. Issuance of permit; fee. [Amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1190]
The Borough Secretary of the Borough of Catasauqua, Lehigh County, shall,
upon due compliance with the requirements set forth in § 180-2 of this
chapter, issue a permit for which a charge as set from time to time by
resolution of Borough Council54 will be made, setting forth the name of
the permittee as well as the name or names of the owners of the goods,
equipment or machinery to be moved and the address from which the
goods, equipment or machinery are to be moved and the address to which
the goods, equipment or machinery are to be delivered.
§ 180-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-7-1962 by Ord. No.
468; 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1288]
Any person, persons, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this chapter or furnishing false information to the Borough Secretary, or
using any false name or address, shall, upon conviction thereof before the
Mayor or any District Justice of the Borough, be sentenced to pay a fine of
not more than $100 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of
such tine and costs, to imprisonment in the County Jail for not more than
10 days. Any person found guilty of violating an ordinance shall be assessed
court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in the
enforcement proceedings.
Chapter 185
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 105.
Parades — See Ch. 190.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 200.
Vehicles and traffic— See Ch. 260.
§ 185-1. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to the interpretation of the provisions
of this chapter:
COMMERCIAL DISTRICT —
The following:
An area where offices, clinics and the facilities needed to serve
them are located;
(1)
(2) An area with local shopping and service establishments;
A.
54.Editor's Note: See Ch. A285, Fees.
§ 180-3 CATASAUQUA CODE § 185-1
170:242
COMMERCIAL PURPOSE — Includes the use, operation or maintenance
of any sound-amplifying equipment for the purpose of advertising any
business, any goods or any services, or for the purpose of attracting the
attention of the public to, or advertising for or soliciting the patronage of
customers to or for any performance, show, entertainment, exhibition or
event, or for the purpose of demonstrating any such sound equipment.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES — Any and all activity incidental to the
erection, demolition, assembling, altering, installing or equipping of
buildings, structures, roads or appurtenances thereto, including land
clearing, grading, excavating and filling.
CONTINUOUS NOISE — A steady, fluctuating, or impulsive noise which
exists, essentially without interruption, for a period of 10 minutes or more,
with an accumulation of an hour or more over a period of eight hours.
DEVICE — Any mechanism which is intended to produce or which actually
produces sound when operated or handled.
DYNAMIC BRAKING DEVICE — A device used primarily on trucks for
the conversion of the motor from an internal combustion engine to an air
compressor for the purpose of braking without the use of wheel brakes.
EMERGENCY WORK — Work made necessary to restore property to a safe
condition following a public calamity or work required to protect persons or
property from an imminent exposure to danger or potential danger.
FLUCTUATING NOISE — The sound pressure level of a fluctuating noise
which varies more than six dB(A) during the period of observation when
measured with the slow meter characteristic of a sound level meter.
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT — An area in which enterprises and activities which
involve the manufacturing, processing or fabrication of any commodity are
located. "Industrial district" shall include, but not be limited to, any parcel
of land zoned as an industrial district, under the Zoning Ordinance of the
Borough.56
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle such as, but not limited to, a passenger
vehicle, truck, track-trailer, trailer or semi-trailer propelled or drawn by
A tourist-oriented area where hotels, motels and gasoline stations
are located;
(3)
A business strip along a main street containing offices, retail
businesses and commercial enterprises;
(4)
Other commercial enterprises and activities which do not involve
the manufacturing, processing or fabrication of any commodity.
(5)
Includes, but is not limited to, any parcel of land zoned commercial
under the Zoning Ordinance of the Borough.55
B.
55.Editor's Note: See Ch. 280, Zoning.
56.Editor's Note: See Ch. 280, Zoning.
§ 185-1 JUNKYARDS § 185-1
170:243
mechanical power and shall include motorcycles, snowmobiles, mini-bikes,
go-carts and any other vehicle which is self-propelled.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT — An area of single- or multiple-family dwellings
and shall include areas where multiple-unit dwellings, high-rise apartments
and high-density residential districts are located. "Residential district" shall
also include, but is not limited to, hospitals, nursing homes, homes for the
aged, schools, courts and similar institutional facilities.
SOUND LEVEL METER — An instrument or apparatus, including a
microphone, an amplifier, an output meter, and weighting networks, for the
measurement of sound pressure. The output meter reads sound pressure
level when properly calibrated, and the instrument is of Type 2 or better,
as specified in the American National Standards Institute Publication S1.4 -
1971.
§ 185-2. Unnecessary noise prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make or continue, or cause to
be made or continued, any unnecessary noise within the Borough.
§ 185-3. Radios, television sets, phonographs, and similar devices.
§ 185-4. Animals.
No person shall keep or maintain or permit the keeping of, on any premises
owned, occupied or controlled by such person, any animal or bird otherwise
permitted to be kept, which by frequent or habitual howling, barking,
meowing, squawking, or other noise unreasonably disturbs the peace and
quiet of any neighborhood or causes discomfort or annoyance to any person.
§ 185-5. Mufflers.
No person shall discharge into the open air the exhaust of any steam
engine, stationary internal combustion engine, air compressor equipment,
A. Use restricted. It shall be unlawful for any person to use, operate or
permit to be played, any radio receiving set, musical instrument,
television, phonograph, drum or other machine or device for the
production or reproduction of sound in such a manner as to cause to be
made or continued any unnecessary noise as heard without
measurement.
B. Prima facie violation. The operation of any such set, instrument,
television, phonograph, machine or device at any time in such manner
as to be plainly audible at either the property line, or 25 feet, in the case
of a vehicle on public rights-of-way, shall be prima facie evidence of a
violation of this section.
C. This section shall not apply to any person who is participating in a
school band or in a parade for which a permit has been issued by the
Borough, except during the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
§ 185-1 CATASAUQUA CODE § 185-5
170:244
motorboat, motor vehicle, or other power device, which is not equipped
with an adequate muffler in constant operation and properly maintained to
prevent any unnecessary noise, and no such muffler or exhaust system shall
be modified or used with a cutoff, bypass or similar device.
§ 185-6. Trucks.
Except by permission of the Borough Manager, the Chief of Police, the
Mayor and the Public Safety Committee, no person shall load any garbage,
trash on compactor truck, or any other truck, whereby the loading,
unloading or handling of boxes, crates, equipment or other objects is
conducted within a residential district nor within 300 feet of any hotel or
motel between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
§ 185-7. Exhausts.
A. The maximum permissible sound pressure levels of any continuous
source of sound shall be as herein established for the time period and
district listed in Table A of this section. This includes, but is not limited
to, sound from such activities as production, processing, cleaning,
servicing, testing, operating or repairing either vehicles, materials,
goods, products or devices. Sound pressure levels in excess of those
established for the districts of the Borough in times herewith listed,
shall constitute prima facie evidence that such sound is an unnecessary
noise. Sound pressure levels shall be measured at the approximate
location of the property line or the boundary of the public way, at a
height of at least four feet above the immediate surrounding surface, on
a sound level meter of standard design and operated on the "A"
weighting network.
Table A
Sound Pressure Level Limit
dB(A)
District
Day
(7:00 a.m. - 10:00
p.m.)
Night
(10:00 p.m. - 7:00
a.m.)
Residential 55 50
Commercial 60 55
Industrial, Special
Purpose and Airport
Commercial
80 75
B. When a noise source can be identified and its noise measured, in more
than one district, the sound pressure level limits of the most restrictive
district shall apply.
§ 185-5 JUNKYARDS § 185-7
170:245
§ 185-8. Construction.
§ 185-9. Hours of operation.
No person shall operate or permit to be operated on private property or on
the public way within any residential or commercial district(s) any power
equipment rated five horsepower or less and used for home or building
repair or grounds maintenance between the hours of 10:00 p.m. of one day
and 6:00 a.m. of the next day or operate or permit to be operated between
the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. any such power equipment which
emits a noise sound pressure level in excess of eighty decibels in the "A"
weighting network dB(A). Such power equipment shall include, but not be
limited to, lawn mowers, garden tools, snow removal equipment, electric or
chain saws or any other power equipment used fox home or building repair
or grounds maintenance. Noise sound pressure levels shall be measured at
a distance of 25 feet from the noise source.
§ 185-10. Power tools.
No person shall operate on any property within a residential or commercial
district or on any public way within a residential or commercial district, any
power equipment rated more than live horsepower, excluding construction
equipment used for construction activities, such as but not limited to, chain
saws, pavement breakers, log chippers, riding tractors, powered hand tools,
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. of one day and 7:00 a.m. of the next day
or within residential, commercial or industrial noise districts between the
hours, of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. which emits a noise level in excess of 88
C. The sound pressure level limits, and provisions hereof, applicable to
commercial districts shall also apply to any parcel of land zoned
agricultural district under the Zoning Ordinance of the Borough.57
D. The provisions of this section shall not apply to motor vehicles
operating on public rights-of-way; the loading of any tracks; domestic
power equipment and commercial power equipment. [Amended by
5-6-2002 by Ord. No. 1140]
A. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall engage in,
cause or permit any person to be engaged in, construction activities in
any residential or commercial district between the hours of 9:00 p.m. of
one day and 6:00 a.m. of the following day.
B. Construction projects shall be subject to the maximum permissible
noise level specified for industrial districts for the periods within which
construction is to be completed pursuant to any applicable building
permit.
C. Construction activities directly connected with the abatement of an
emergency are excluded from the provisions of this section.
57.Editor's Note: See Ch. 280, Zoning.
§ 185-7 CATASAUQUA CODE § 185-10
170:246
decibels, in the "A" weighting network dB(A). Noise sound pressure levels
shall be measured at a distance of 25 feet from the noise source.
§ 185-11. Sound amplifiers. [Amended by 5-6-2002 by Ord. No.
1140]
The commercial and noncommercial use of sound amplifying equipment
shall be subject to the following regulations:
§ 185-12. Warning signals.
No person shall sound any horn or signaling device on any truck,
automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle on any street or highway within
this municipality, except as a danger warning, and then only for a
reasonable period of time.
§ 185-13. Emergency work.
Noise caused in the performance of emergency work for the immediate
safety, health or welfare of the community or individuals of the community,
or to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity shall
not be subject to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 185-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord. No.
1288]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall
be fined up to $300 and, in default of payment of fine, be imprisoned up to
90 days for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed
on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. Any person
found guilty of violating an ordinance shall be assessed court costs and
reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement
proceedings.
A. Except by the permission of the Borough, sound amplifying equipment
shall be operated only between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of
each day.
B. The maximum sound emanating from sound amplifying equipment shall
not exceed the sound pressure levels established in § 185-1 as
measured at least 25 feet from the noise source.
C. In any event, the intensity of sound shall be so controlled that it will not
be unreasonably loud, raucous, annoying, disturbing or a nuisance to
any person or persons.
§ 185-10 JUNKYARDS § 185-14
170:247
Chapter 190
PARADES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 185.
§ 190-1. Permit required to hold parade; fee. [Amended 11-7-2005
by Ord. No. 1190]
No person or persons, association, organization, firm or corporation shall
hold or conduct a parade upon any of the streets in the Borough without
first, obtaining a permit therefor from the Mayor. The fee for such permit
shall be as set from time to time by resolution of Borough Council,58 which
shall be for the use of the Borough. Provided, the Mayor shall issue such
permit, free of charge, for any parade conducted by any nonprofit, patriotic
or community-service organization. Provided further, at his discretion, the
Mayor may refuse a permit when he believes that a contemplated parade
would be likely to lead to disorder or rioting.
§ 190-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord. No.
1288]
Any person or persons, association, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof before the Mayor
or any District Justice of the Borough, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $10 and costs of prosecution. Any person found guilty of violating
an ordinance shall be assessed court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees
incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings.
Chapter 195
PARKS AND RECREATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recreation Board — See Ch. 70.
Animals — See Ch. 105.
Bicycles — See Ch. 110.
Public property — See Ch. 205.
58.Editor's Note: See Ch. A285, Fees.
§ 185-14 CATASAUQUA CODE § 190-2
170:248
ARTICLE I
Tennis Courts
[Adopted 7-1-1974 by Ord. No. 703 (Ch. XX, Part 2, of the 1962
Code)]
§ 195-1. Tennis permit fees. [Amended 4-7-1975 by Res. No. 13-75;
4-4-1977 by Res. No. 8-77; 3-2-1981 by Res. No. 7-81; 11-7-2005 by
Ord. No. 1190]
The permit fees for tennis court privileges shall be as set from time to time
by resolution of Borough Council.59
§ 195-2. Rules of play for tennis courts. [Amended 6-1-1981 by Ord.
No. 822; 6-3-1985 by Ord. No. 888; 4-3-1989 by Ord. No. 943]
The rules of play for the tennis courts shall be as follows:
A. All players must have permits to use the courts from May 1 to
September 30 between the hours of 3:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m., Mondays
through Fridays, excepting holidays, and from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.,
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. Permits must be worn or carried by
the players, or be at courtside, when the players are using the courts.
B. Individuals and/or groups are limited to one hour of play only. After
completing play, resignup is permitted provided a court is then
available. The signup board shall be for the purpose of scheduling and
enforcing this subsection. Use of the board is as follows:
(1) The board is to be signed in chalk specifying the hour to be
reserved. Names and permit numbers must both appear.
(2) Signups can only be made on the day one wishes to play.
(3) A grace period of 10 minutes is allowed. Failure to appear within
the said 10 minutes shall forfeit the reservation for the court.
(4) Resignup is permitted only after completing play.
C. No guests are permitted to use the facilities during the hours set forth
in Subsection A above. During these hours all players are required to
have permits. Guests and non-permit-holders are permitted to play on
the courts from 7:00 a.m. until 3:00 p.m., Mondays through Fridays,
excepting holidays, when access to the courts is without charge.
D. Sneakers or other appropriate footwear must be worn on the courts at
all times.
E. Profanity or other unsportsmanlike conduct will not be tolerated. All
tennis courtesies shall be observed.
59.Editor's Note: See Ch. A285, Fees.
§ 195-1 JUNKYARDS § 195-2
170:249
§ 195-3. Use of courts by School District and organizations.
[Amended 9-8-1998 by Ord. No. 1085]
§ 195-4. Enforcement of provisions.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced through the Borough
Manager, who may designate the Catasauqua Tennis Advisory Committee
F. No tennis lessons shall be given for private profit. Anyone found doing
so shall have his or her permit revoked.
G. If a non-permit-holder is found to be on the court playing with a permit
holder, it is the permit holder who is responsible for the actions and who
will be considered in violation of this article and the rules of play for the
tennis courts. Any penalties shall accrue to the permit holder(s) on the
court with a person or persons who are not permit holders.
A. In the event that the Catasauqua Area School District wishes to use the
tennis court(s) for recreation or tennis instruction while school is in
session, the Borough Manager shall have the authority to grant
permission to use the court(s) during school hours. There shall be no
fee for the School District use of the court(s) during school hours.
B. In the event that any organization wishes to reserve the court(s) for its
exclusive use, applications shall be made to the Borough Manager
indicating the name of the organization wishing to reserve the court(s),
the time period for which the reservation is being made and the hours
during which the court(s) will be reserved. The Borough Manager shall
have authority to grant permission to the organization to reserve the
court(s) subject to their availability, submission of a certificate of
insurance in a minimum amount of $500,000 naming the Borough as an
additional insured and making it primary insurance, and a payment of a
reservation fee. The fee shall be set by Borough Council, by resolution,
from time to time.60
C. In receiving and considering requests for reservation of a court(s),
organizations based in the Borough will have the exclusive opportunity
to reserve the court(s) during November and December of the year
preceding the year for which the reservation is being made. From and
after January 1, reservations will be taken and considered on a firstcome,
first-served basis.
D. Any organization which has received approval to reserve a tennis court
or courts shall have the exclusive use of the court so reserved for a
period of time as set forth in the approval for a reservation of the court
or courts not exceeding three hours per day every day for the term of
the reservation. If set forth in the application, this will also include
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays.
60.Editor's Note: See Ch. A285, Fees.
§ 195-2 CATASAUQUA CODE § 195-4
170:250
or other competent persons with the responsibility for enforcing the
regulations specified herein.
§ 195-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-3-1985 by Ord. No.
888]
A. Any persons violating any of the provisions of this article can have their
tennis privileges revoked for a period up to one year by the Borough
Manager or his designate.
B. In the event of failure to comply with a decision of the Borough
Manager or his designate, the penalty for violating the provisions of this
article shall be revocation of tennis privileges for one year plus a fine up
to a maximum of $300, plus the costs of prosecution, and, in default of
payment of such fine, imprisonment in Lehigh County Prison for a
period of not more than 90 days.
C. Any person found guilty of violating an ordinance shall be assessed
court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in
the enforcement proceedings. [Added 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1288]
§ 195-4 JUNKYARDS § 195-5
170:251

ARTICLE II
Curfew at St. John Street Playground
[Adopted 7-6-1981 by Ord. No. 824 (Ch. V, Part 4, of the 1962
Code)]
§ 195-6. Effective date; imposition of curfew.
Effective July 6, 1981, there shall exist a curfew at the St. John Street
playground complex in the Borough of Catasauqua.
§ 195-7. Hours of curfew; boundaries of playground.
During the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., local time, no person or
persons other than those in the employ of the Borough of Catasauqua shall
be allowed on the premises of the playgrounds bounded by St. John Street,
Church Street, American Street, and the Catasauqua Area School District
property, excluding any land in private ownership.
§ 195-8. Duration.
This curfew shall remain in full force and effect until repealed by ordinance
of Council.
§ 195-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord. No.
1288]
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a
summary offense and may be fined up to $300 and/or imprisoned for up to
90 days. Any person found guilty of violating an ordinance shall be assessed
court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in the
enforcement proceedings.
§ 195-6 JUNKYARDS § 195-9
170:253

ARTICLE III
Playgrounds and Parks
[Adopted 6-3-1985 by Ord. No. 887 (Ch. XX, Part 3, of the 1962
Code)]
§ 195-10. Rules and regulations.
The following rules and regulations shall take effect immediately:
A. Littering is prohibited. Littering is defined as discarding any object or
material in a negligent or willful manner so as to cause disorder in
appearance of property.
B. No unauthorized person shall be permitted in any illuminated portion of
any municipal park after 10:30 p.m. [Amended 6-6-2005 by Ord. No.
1183]
(1) No unauthorized person shall be permitted in any nonilluminated,
unlit portion of any municipal park, playground or tot lot 30
minutes past sundown.
C. No unauthorized person or persons shall enter or disturb any of the
Borough's buildings or facilities at any of the Borough's parks,
playgrounds, or "tot lot" locations, including any such facilities for
which the Borough is responsible although not owning.
D. No bicycle or motorized vehicle, regardless of the diameter of the
wheel, shall be driven or used on park grounds except for vehicles used
by police officials in the normal course of their duties. Parking of
vehicles and bicycles is permitted in specifically designated areas only.
[Amended 6-3-2002 by Ord. No. 1142]
E. No disorderly conduct or causing a public nuisance shall be permitted.
F. No animals shall be allowed in any municipal park except for working
police dogs and Seeing Eye dogs leading blind persons.
G. No fireworks shall be permitted at any time.
H. All equipment and courts on the playgrounds or parks shall be used at
one's own risk.
I. No roller skates, scooters, skateboards, or other wheeled devices,
regardless of the diameter of the wheel (except for bicycles or
motorized vehicles as hereinbefore regulated), shall be driven, ridden,
or used on park grounds. Exceptions to this rule shall be made for
wheelchairs being operated or used by physically disabled patrons,
strollers and baby carriages when used in the manner for which they
were constructed and intended. Roller skates and skateboards shall be
permitted to be driven, ridden or used in designated skate parks only.
[Added 6-3-2002 by Ord. No. 1142; amended 1-5-2015 by Ord.
No. 1310]
§ 195-10 JUNKYARDS § 195-10
170:255
§ 195-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No.
913; 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1288; 7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 1334]
J. No charcoal grills are allowed in the park except those provided by the
Borough. [Added 7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 1334]
K. Grilling using propane tanks is prohibited. [Added 7-18-2016 by Ord.
No. 1334]
L. No amplified sound or music is permitted to be played at a level to be
disruptive to other persons enjoying the park. [Added 7-18-2016 by
Ord. No. 1334]
(1) Exceptions: Performances presented by, or sponsored by, the
Borough of Catasauqua are exempt from this regulation.
M. All concessionaires and/or vendors on the park premises must have a
permit and/or be authorized by the Borough in order to sell or promote
their products, food, goods or services. [Added 7-18-2016 by Ord.
No. 1334]
N. During all hours when the concession stand is open, except for patrons
of the concession stand purchasing food or consuming the same, no one
is permitted to use the area, or the picnic tables between the walkway
and the concession stand for a distance of 50 feet in each direction from
the window facing the walkway. [Added 7-18-2016 by Ord. No.
1334]
O. Picnic tables and/or benches are not permitted to be removed from
their original placement by the Borough. [Added 7-18-2016 by Ord.
No. 1334]
P. Whenever either of the two pavilions located near Church Street have
been rented, the area bounded by the bathhouse, the road into the
parking lot, Church Street and the Catasauqua Creek are for the
exclusive use of the persons or organizations which have rented either
of the two pavilions. [Added 7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 1334]
Q. No vehicle is permitted to drive onto the park grounds with the
exception of a permitted caterer. [Added 7-18-2016 by Ord. No.
1334]
(1) Exceptions: vehicles owned and operated by Borough of
Catasauqua employees or other vehicles in the performance of
tasks and/or the preparation for their performance as authorized by
the Borough.
A. The Mayor and Police Department, the Code Enforcement Officers of
the Borough, the Public Works Department, Park and Playground
Operator, and any other authorized law enforcement officer are
empowered to enforce this article.
§ 195-10 CATASAUQUA CODE § 195-11
170:256
§ 195-12. Playground pavilion rental. [Added 7-10-2000 by Res. No.
6-00]
B. Violation of these rules shall constitute an offense. Offenders shall be
subject to a civil penalty not exceeding $600 per violation, as well as
total costs and damages to all property and facilities. Each day the
violation continues shall be a separate violation. Any persons found
guilty of violating this article shall be assessed court costs and
reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement
proceedings.
A. The rules for playground/pavilion rentals are: [Amended 7-18-2016
by Ord. No. 1334]
(1) Fees for the use of the pavilion, band shell and swimming group
admissions are nonrefundable.
(2) The security deposit must be paid not less than 30 days prior to the
event or the reservation will be cancelled and the fee for the
reservation will be forfeited. Upon inspection of the facilities by the
Catasauqua Public Works Department, customarily the morning
after the event, and their determination that the facilities have
been left in a clean and acceptable manner, the deposit will be
refunded by mail to the person or organization who rented the
facility, generally within two weeks.
(3) The large pavilion can be rented no more than 364 days in advance
of the event. All rentals must be made in person at the Borough
office and are not considered complete until the fee is paid. The
Borough will not hold reservations.
(4) Restrooms are located adjacent to the large pavilion and by the
play climber.
(5) Responsible use of alcoholic beverages is permitted at the
pavilions. No one is permitted to walk around the playground or
park with opened containers of alcoholic beverages.
(a) Borough Council may exempt a specific event or events from
this prohibition by motion.
(6) The pavilion has electricity, water, and a grill. (You must bring your
own charcoal.)
(7) The park closes at 10:30 p.m., and cleanup is expected by each
group at their site.
(8) The park has a pickup game nonregulation baseball field, tennis,
volleyball, and basketball courts and playground facilities. This
permit does not give you exclusive rights to these fields.
§ 195-11 JUNKYARDS § 195-12
170:257
(9) Events that have caterers must complete and submit a separate
caterer application and permit form not less than two weeks before
the scheduled event.
(10) Upon payment of the group rate admission fee to the pool, based on
the number of participants indicated, special daily tickets will be
issued in the number requested. If additional participants attend
and wish to use the pool, they must pay the standard daily rates,
unless they are season ticket holders. Group rate admission tickets
must be made at least five days in advance of the reservation date.
(a) Group rate admission pool tickets will only be honored on the
date for which they are issued. There are no cash refunds. If
the pool is open at all during the day of the event, there is no
refund or rain check given. If the pool is not open at all on the
day of the event, the tickets can be returned to the Borough
office within seven days for rain checks that can be used on any
future date.
B. The rules for caterers to receive permission to so access the large
pavilion are:
(1) A written application must be submitted not less than two weeks
before the event.
(2) The number of vehicles and the registration (license) number for
the vehicles must be submitted with the application.
(3) A certificate of insurance with the Borough as an additional named
insured must be submitted with the application.
(4) An application fee, plus a fee per vehicle, as set from time to time
by resolution of Borough Council is required at the time the
application is submitted. [Amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1190]
(5) No application will be reviewed or considered until all of the
required elements are submitted. If they are not submitted at least
two weeks prior to the event, the application will not be considered
and any request will be denied.
(6) Caterers will be allowed to drive down to the pavilion once, at a
time not later than 11:00 a.m., to set up their equipment and will be
allowed only one time at which they can drive out. Arrangements
must be made with the Borough and/or the Catasauqua Police
Department to unlock and open the gates to provide access to the
pavilion and for exiting from the pavilion.
(7) The purpose of this permit is not to allow the caterer to drop off
equipment or supplies and park in the regular parking lot; it is
solely for those caterers who will be working out of their vehicles or
equipment at the pavilion.
§ 195-12 CATASAUQUA CODE § 195-12
170:258
ARTICLE IV
Municipal Swimming Pool
[Adopted 9-2-1997 by Ord. No. 1069 (Ch. XX, Secs. 8 to 10, of the
1962 Code)]
§ 195-13. Pool usage fees. [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 1190]
Fees for admission to and use of the Catasauqua Municipal Swimming Pool
shall be as set from time to time by resolution of Borough Council.
§ 195-14. Rules and regulations. [Amended 7-6-1999 by Res. No.
14-99; 5-1-2000 by Res. No. 5-00]
The following rules and regulations for patrons and users of the Catasauqua
Municipal Swimming Pool shall take effect immediately:
A. No refunds or rainchecks will be issued if the pool closes before the
scheduled time or if a patron is asked to leave the facility.
B. Absolutely no diving anywhere in the pool.
C. No running or pushing on the deck.
D. No jumping from the peninsula.
E. Lap swimmers only in the lap area.
F. Appropriate bathing attire required in all areas of the pool.
G. No regular diapers are permitted in the pool. Appropriate protection,
such as "Little Swimmers," must be worn. The pool must be emptied
after "accidents" to clean and ensure sanitary swimming conditions as
determined by the pool manager, often one hour or longer. Repeat
offenders will be asked to leave.
H. Only U.S. Coast Guard approved flotation devices are allowed.
I. Appropriate behavior is required in all areas of the pool.
J. No toys in the pool.
K. Sponge or air-filled beach balls are allowed between the two divider
ropes, and only if their use is not disruptive to other bathers' enjoyment
of the pool.
L. All children under seven must be accompanied by an adult or properly
supervised at all times when in or around the pool.
M. No hanging on the divider ropes.
N. No profanity.
O. No spitting.
§ 195-13 JUNKYARDS § 195-14
170:259
§ 195-15. Revocation of pool privileges.
Violations of the rules and regulations in § 195-14 shall be cause for the
violator to be prohibited from swimming or otherwise enjoying the use of
the swimming pool and grounds for a length of time as deemed appropriate
by the pool manager, head lifeguard or other authorized lifeguard.
§ 195-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord. No.
1288; 7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 1334]
P. If the air temperature is 69° or lower at 5:00 p.m., or if at 6:00 p.m. the
lack of attendance warrants, the pool may be closed at the manager's
discretion.
Q. Food- and drink-related rules. No food or drinks may be brought into
the pool area. The Borough and the pool staff reserve the right to open
and inspect tote bags and other carry-in containers to ensure
compliance.
(1) No alcoholic beverages are allowed inside the pool perimeter
fence.
(2) No glass is allowed inside the pool perimeter fence.
(3) No eating, drinking or smoking in the pool or on the deck.
(4) All food should be eaten in the enclosed snack area.
R. Slide rules.
(1) One at a time down the slide.
(2) Feet first, face up only.
(3) Exit the water immediately after using the slide, no waiting for
others.
(4) One person per step in line for the slide. The slide line should form
down the steps, single file, and curve around behind the slide.
(5) All users must be at least 36 inches tall to ride the slide.
A. The Mayor and Police Department, the Code Enforcement Officers of
the Borough, the Public Works Department Park and Playground
Operator, Swimming Pool Manager and lifeguards, and any other law
enforcement officer are empowered to enforce this article.
B. Violation of these rules shall constitute an offenders. Offenders shall be
subject to a civil penalty not exceeding $600 per violation, as well as
total costs and damages to all property and facilities. Each day the
violation continues shall be a separate violation. Any persons found
guilty of violating this article shall be assessed court costs and
reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement
proceedings.
§ 195-14 CATASAUQUA CODE § 195-16
170:260
ARTICLE V
Skate Parks
[Adopted 1-5-2015 by Ord. No. 1310]
§ 195-17. Skate park rules.
The following rules and regulations shall take effect immediately:
§ 195-18. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-18-2016 by Ord. No.
1334]
A. Skating is restricted to the skating area.
B. All skaters must wear personal protective equipment and appropriate
footwear.
C. All protective gear and equipment must be designed for skateboard/inline
skating and be in good condition.
D. All skaters agree to act in an orderly, safe, and considerate manner
while on the premises and in the skating area.
E. The Borough reserves the right to request reckless or dangerous
skaters to leave the skating area and the premises immediately.
F. Only one skateboarder is permitted on a board at a time.
G. No bicycles are allowed on skate park.
H. No alcohol, tobacco products or drugs are permitted.
I. No food or drink in the skating area.
J. No children younger than 10 years of age will be allowed in the skating
area without adult supervision.
K. No children younger than six will be allowed in the skating area.
L. All equipment is used at your own risk.
A. The Mayor and Police Department, the Code Enforcement Officers of
the Borough, the Public Works Department Park and Playground
Operator, and any other authorized law enforcement officer are
empowered to enforce this article.
B. Violation of these rules shall constitute an offense. Offenders shall be
subject to a civil penalty not exceeding $600 per violation, as well as
total costs and damages to all property and facilities. Each day the
violation continues shall be a separate violation. Any persons found
guilty of violating this article shall be assessed court costs and
reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement
proceedings.
§ 195-17 JUNKYARDS § 195-18
170:261
Chapter 200
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 185.
§ 195-18 CATASAUQUA CODE § 195-18
170:262
ARTICLE I
Transient Retail Dealers
[Adopted 5-1-1933 by Ord. No. 306; amended in its entirety
5-7-1962 by Ord. No. 462 (Ch. XI, Part 4, of the 1962 Code)]
§ 200-1. Transient retail dealers to obtain licenses.
Any person, whether principal or agent, firm or corporation entering into
or beginning or desiring to enter into or begin a transient retail business
within the Borough of Catasauqua, for the sale of any goods, wares or
merchandise, and who hires a place or occupies any room, apartment store,
building or other structure or place whatever, for the exhibition and/or sale
of such goods, wares or merchandise, shall, before entering into or doing
such business, take out a license from the Borough Treasurer, Provided:
nothing herein contained shall apply:
§ 200-2. License fee; violations and penalties. [Amended 11-7-2005
by Ord. No. 1190; 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1288]
The fee for such license shall be as set from time to time by resolution
of Borough Council,61 to be paid to the Borough Treasurer for the use
of the Borough. Such license shall be renewed on the first day of each
month thereafter during the continuance of such business or sales made
thereunder. Any person or persons, firm or corporation failing, neglecting or
refusing to secure or renew such license, as herein required, shall be guilty
of a violation of this article, and, upon conviction thereof before the Mayor
or any District Justice of the Borough, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of
not more than $100 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of
such fine and costs, to imprisonment in the County Jail for not more than
30 days. Any person found guilty of violating an ordinance shall be assessed
court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in the
enforcement proceedings.
A. To farmers selling their own produce;
B. To the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, donated by the owners
thereof, the proceeds whereof are to be applied to any charitable or
philanthropic purpose; or
C. To any manufacturer or producer in the sale of bread and bakery
products, meat and meat products, or milk or milk products.
61.Editor's Note: See Ch. A285, Fees.
§ 200-1 JUNKYARDS § 200-2
170:263

ARTICLE II
Peddling and Soliciting
[Adopted 5-7-1962 by Ord. No. 479 (Ch. XI, Part 3, of the 1962
Code)]
§ 200-3. Definitions and interpretation.
§ 200-4. Peddlers to obtain licenses. [Amended 12-29-1980 by Ord.
No. 817; 8-5-1985 by Ord. No. 890]
No persons shall engage in peddling within the Borough of Catasauqua
without first having taken out a license, which shall be issued by the
Borough Secretary. The fee for such license, which shall be for the use of the
Borough, shall be set by resolution of Borough Council.62 No license issued
under this article shall be transferable from one person to another person.
§ 200-5. Peddlers to carry license at all times; exhibition upon
request.
Every peddler shall, at all times when engaged in peddling within the
Borough, carry such license upon his person, and shall exhibit such license
upon request, to all police officers, Borough officials and citizens.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PEDDLER — Any person who shall engage in peddling, as hereinabove
defined.
PEDDLING — As used in this part shall mean engaging in selling,
canvassing, soliciting or taking of orders, either by sample or
otherwise, for any goods, wares or merchandise, upon any of the streets
or sidewalks or from house to house within the Borough of Catasauqua.
Provided: the word "peddling" shall not apply:
PERSON — Any natural person, association, partnership, firm or
corporation.
(1) To farmers selling their own produce;
To the sale of goods, wares or merchandise, donated by the owners
thereof, the proceeds whereof are to be applied to any charitable
or philanthropic purpose; or
(2)
To any manufacturer or producer in the sale of bread and bakery
products, meat and meat products, or milk or milk products.
(3)
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
62.Editor's Note: See Ch. A285, Fees.
§ 200-3 JUNKYARDS § 200-6
170:265
§ 200-6. Hawking and crying of wares and use of noise-making
devices by peddlers prohibited.
No peddler shall hawk or cry his wares upon any of the streets or sidewalks
of the Borough, nor shall he use any loud-speaker or horn or other device
for announcing his presence, by which the public is annoyed.
§ 200-7. Prohibited acts of peddlers.
No peddler shall park any vehicle upon any of the streets or alleys of the
Borough in order to sort, rearrange or clean any of his goods, wares or
merchandise; nor may any peddler place or deposit any refuse upon any
of the streets or alleys; nor may any peddler maintain or keep a street or
curb market by parking any vehicle for longer than necessary in order to
sell therefrom to person residing in the immediate vicinity. No peddler shall
occupy any fixed location upon any of the streets, alleys or sidewalks of the
Borough for the purpose of peddling, with or without any stand or counter.
§ 200-8. Suspension of licenses.
The Mayor is hereby authorized to suspend any license issued under this
article when he deems such suspension to be beneficial to the public health,
safety or morals, or for violating any of the provisions of this article, or for
giving false information upon any application for a license hereunder.
§ 200-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord. No.
1288]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof before the Mayor or any District Justice of the Borough,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $50 and costs of prosecution,
and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment in the
County Jail for not more than 10 days. Any person found guilty of violating
an ordinance shall be assessed court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees
incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings.
§ 200-6 CATASAUQUA CODE § 200-9
170:266
Chapter 205
PUBLIC PROPERTY
§ 205-1. Tampering with or injury to certain property prohibited.
No person or persons shall destroy or injure in any way whatsoever, or
tamper with or deface any public property of the Borough of Catasauqua, or
any grass, walk, lamp, ornamental work, building, street light, fire hydrant
or water or gas stop box in or on any of the streets, alleys, parks or other
public grounds of the Borough.
§ 205-2. Tampering with stakes, monuments and other evidences of
lines and grades prohibited.
No person or persons shall in any manner interfere with or meddle with,
or pull, drive, change, alter or destroy any stake, post, monument or other
evidence of any elevation, grade, line, location, corner or angle in the
Borough of Catasauqua, now or hereafter made, placed or set, or caused to
be done by the authorities of the Borough in any survey of or in any street,
alley or public ground in the Borough, to evidence the elevation, line, grade,
location, corner or angle of any public street, alley, sidewalk, curb, gutter,
sewer or other public work, matter or thing.
§ 205-3. Tampering with warning lamps, signs and barricades
prohibited.
No person shall willfully or maliciously destroy or remove or deface or
obliterate or cover up any lamp, warning sign or barricade erected by the
authorities of the Borough or by any person, firm or corporation doing work
by permission of the authorities of the Borough on any of the streets, alleys,
sidewalks or bridges in the Borough, as a warning of danger.
§ 205-4. Removal of earth, stone and other material from streets,
alleys and public grounds unlawful.
No person or persons shall take any earth, stone or other material from any
of the streets, alleys, parks or other public grounds in the Borough.
§ 205-5. Certain activities not unlawful.
This chapter shall not apply to normal activities in connection with the
construction, maintenance and repair of streets, alleys, sidewalks and
public grounds and the structures and fixtures located therein, or to
incidental results of work thereon or therein under permit from or by
authority of the Borough.
§ 200-9 JUNKYARDS § 205-6
170:267
§ 205-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord. No.
1288]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof before the Mayor or any District Justice of the Borough,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $100 and costs of prosecution,
and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment in the
County Jail for not more than 30 days. Provided: the fact that a violator has
been penalized, after hearing, as herein provided, shall not preclude the
Borough or other injured party from taking proper legal action to recover
damages resulting from such violation. Any person found guilty of violating
an ordinance shall be assessed court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees
incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings.
Chapter 206
PUBLIC SAFETY RADIO AMPLIFICATION SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform Codes — See Ch. 130.
§ 206-1. Adequate radio coverage required.
Except as otherwise provided, no person shall maintain, own, erect or
construct any building or structure, or any part thereof, or cause the same
to be done that fails to support adequate radio coverage for Borough
police officers. For purpose of this chapter, "adequate radio coverage" shall
include all of the following:
§ 206-2. Amplification system allowed.
A. A minimum signal strength of 95 dBm available in 90% of the area of
each floor of the building for two-way portable transmissions when
transmitted to the closest Lehigh County Communications System site.
B. The frequency range to be supported shall be 154.830/158.850.
A. Buildings and structures shall be equipped with any of the following in
order to achieve the required adequate radio coverage: a radiating
cable system or an internal multiple-antenna system with FCC-type
accepted bidirectional VHF amplifiers as needed to encompass Lehigh
County VHF frequencies 154.830/158.850. The system shall be capable
of operating on an independent battery and/or generator system for a
period of at least 12 hours without external power input. The battery
system shall automatically charge in the presence of external power
input. There shall be no connectivity between the amplification system
and fire alarm system. This system shall be designed to operate in
conjunction with equipment utilized by the Lehigh County
§ 205-6 CATASAUQUA CODE § 206-2
170:268
§ 206-3. Testing procedures.
Communications Center and the Borough of Catasauqua Police
Department.
B. Any bidirectional amplifier unit shall be enclosed in a cabinet with
suitable access for servicing the unit. If installed in outdoor or
unprotected locations, the cabinet shall be weatherproof stainless steel
meeting NEMA standards for weatherproof installations.
C. The unit shall be installed in a secured environment to prevent
tampering. This requirement may be met by the use of a lock on the
cabinet or by installing the unit within a secured room. Only authorized
radio communications technicians are permitted to make adjustments
to these systems.
D. Borough Police shall have access to the equipment at all times. A Knox
Box is required for any building or structure that is required to have
radio amplification equipment under this chapter.
E. Each signal amplification system shall comply and be updated to
current industry technology standards, as adhered to and implemented
by Lehigh County, as they may change from time to time.
A. Acceptance test procedure.
(1) New construction.
(a) Upon completion of construction of the structure and at such
time as the commercial structure shall become fully
operational, it will be the building owner's responsibility to
have the communication system tested to ensure that two-way
coverage on each floor of the building is a minimum of 90% and
shall properly interface with the total county communication
design. Said test will be conducted within 30 days of issuance
of an occupancy permit. For multitenant buildings, this test
shall be conducted within 30 days of the occupancy of 50% of
the total building area or at such time as deemed necessary by
the Borough.
(b) Each floor of the building shall be divided into a grid of 12
equal areas. A maximum of two nonadjacent areas will be
allowed to fail the test. In the event that three of the areas fail
the test, in order to be more statistically accurate, the floor
may be divided into 24 equal areas. A maximum of four
nonadjacent areas will be allowed to fail the test.
(c) After the second area test, if the building continues to fail, it
will be the building owner's responsibility to have an
amplification system installed to meet the coverage
requirement of 90%.
§ 206-2 JUNKYARDS § 206-3
170:269
(d) The test shall be conducted using a Motorola MT 2000, or
equivalent, portable radio, talking through the Lehigh County
Communications System. A spot located approximately in the
center of a grid area will be selected for the test, then the radio
will be keyed to verify two-way communications to and from
the outside of the building through the Lehigh County
Communications System. Once the spot has been selected,
prospecting for a better spot within the grid area will not be
permitted.
(e) If the newly constructed and fully operational building fails the
test, it will be the building owner's responsibility to bring the
building or structure into compliance with this chapter at the
owner's sole expense within 90 days from the date such work is
contracted and within 180 days of the date of the
determination of noncompliance of the building or structure
with this chapter.
(f) The gain values of all amplifiers shall be measured and the test
measurement results shall be kept on file with the building
owner so that the measurements can be verified each year
during the annual tests. In the event that the measurement
results become lost, the building owner will be required to
rerun the acceptance test to reestablish the gain values.
(2) Existing structures. Upon notification from the Borough Police, the
Borough will initiate, at its expense, a radio system test to ensure
the two-way coverage on each floor of the building is a minimum of
90%. The test shall be conducted using a Motorola MT 2000, or
equivalent, portable radio, talking through the Lehigh County
Communications System. If the existing building fails the test, the
Borough will transmit the results of the test to the building owner.
It will be the building owner's responsibility to bring the building or
structure into compliance with this chapter at the owner's sole
expense within 90 days from the date such work is contracted and
within 180 days of the date of the determination of noncompliance
of the building or structure with this chapter.
B. Annual test for new construction and existing structures. When an inbuilding
radio system is required, it shall be the building owner's
responsibility to have all active components of the system, such as
amplifiers and power supplies and backup batteries, tested a minimum
of once every 12 months. The annual test results shall be supplied to the
Borough within 18 months next following the original technical
certification. Amplifiers shall be tested to ensure that the gain is the
same as it was upon initial installation and acceptance. Backup
amplifiers shall be tested to ensure that the gain is the same as it was
upon initial installation and acceptance. Backup batteries and power
supplies shall be tested under load of a period of one hour to verify that
they will properly operate during an actual power outage. If within the
one-hour test period, and in the opinion of the testing technician, the
§ 206-3 CATASAUQUA CODE § 206-3
170:270
§ 206-4. Qualifications of testing personnel.
Personnel conducting radio system tests shall be qualified to perform the
work. All tests shall be documented and signed by a person in possession
of a current technician certification. All test records shall be retained on
the inspected premises by the building owner and a copy submitted to the
Borough.
§ 206-5. System designs; technical certificate of compliance.
The building owner shall submit to the Borough a design for any required
amplification system to achieve the required adequate radio coverage. The
Borough shall transmit to the county the design for review by its technical
advisor or his/her designee. Should the design, as submitted comply with
the county design criteria for the building or structure, the county shall
issue a conditional approval of the design, as submitted. After installation
of the amplification system in the building or structure, the communication
interface shall be tested and, if found to be in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, a technical certificate of compliance shall be
issued. The county or its designee and the Borough shall each signify their
respective approval and consent to the issuance of the technical certificate
of compliance. The technical certificate of compliance shall be issued by the
Borough, provided that all fees exacted therefor are paid in full.
§ 206-6. Exemptions.
This chapter shall not apply to residential buildings in the use group R-3
pursuant to the Borough of Catasauqua Building Code (the Uniform
Construction Code, as amended). Parking structures and stairwells are
included in the definition of "building," but elevators may be excluded.
§ 206-7. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
battery exhibits symptoms of failure, the test shall be extended for
additional one-hour periods until the integrity of the battery can be
determined. All other active components shall be checked to determine
that they are operating within the manufacturers' specifications for the
intended purpose.
A. When any required police communication enhancement system is
installed and becomes inadequate or inoperative, thus affecting the
safety of a building, structure or the occupants therein, the Borough
shall order the system, unit or device to be repaired or upgraded as
necessary and returned to service within 60 days. It shall be the
responsibility of the building owner or occupant to make repairs,
alterations or additions to maintain operability of the system.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
a fine not to exceed $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, including
attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough; provided, further, that each
day's violation of any provision of this chapter after the expiration of the
§ 206-3 JUNKYARDS § 206-7
170:271
Chapter 207
RENTAL PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 115.
Code enforcement — See Ch. 125.
Uniform codes — See Ch. 130.
Fair housing — See Ch. 138.
Moving permits — See Ch. 180.
Zoning — See Ch. 280.
Fees — See Ch. A285.
§ 207-1. Legislative findings.
The Borough Council (hereinafter the "Council") hereby finds that:
one-hundred-eighty-day notice of noncompliance period shall constitute
a separate offense, and the violation of each section hereof shall
constitute a separate offense.
C. Should any person refuse, neglect or fail to comply with any provision of
this chapter or with any notice given in conformity with or pursuant to
the provisions hereof, the Borough, through its own agents, contractors
and/or employees, may cause the system, unit or device to be repaired
or upgraded as necessary at the owner's sole expense. The cost and
expense thereof shall be certified to the Borough Solicitor, who shall
enter the same as a lien against the property in the Court of Common
Pleas and shall proceed to collect the same in like manner as other
municipal claims are by law collectible. An action of assumpsit may be
brought to recover the same in the name of the Borough from the
owner.
D. It has been determined by the Borough that the construction and
maintenance of any building or structure, or part thereof, that
interferes with the Borough Police Department and county operational
telecommunications networks constitutes a nuisance, per se, because it
threatens the health, safety and welfare of the residents and visitors to
the Borough of Catasauqua. In addition to any other remedies or
enforcement procedures provided herein, the Borough of Catasauqua
may seek an injunction to restrain such a nuisance.
E. The Mayor or his or her designee is charged with the enforcement of
this chapter.
A. There is a greater incidence and greater severity of violations of various
Borough codes at residential rental properties than at owner- occupied
residential properties; and
§ 206-7 CATASAUQUA CODE § 207-1
170:272
§ 207-2. Purpose and intent.
B. There is a greater incidence of problems with the maintenance and
upkeep of residential rental properties than at owner-occupied
residential properties; and
C. There is a greater incidence of problems with the maintenance and
upkeep of residential rental properties where owners or their
representatives do not reside within or near the Borough of Catasauqua
(hereinafter "Borough"); and
D. There is a greater incidence of disturbances which adversely affect the
peace and quiet of the neighborhood at residential rental properties
than at owner-occupied residential properties; and
E. A systematic license and inspection process can avoid life-threatening
problems, including, but not limited to, lack of functioning smoke
detectors, faulty mechanical equipment, inadequate or unsafe electrical
equipment and substandard living and health conditions; and
F. A system of inspection and licensing with respect to residential rental
units will assist in maintaining the accuracy of tax records; and
G. With respect to boardinghouses, because of shorter lease terms and the
transient nature of the same, the above considerations are of equal, if
not increased importance and relevancy to the operation of
boardinghouses in the Borough; and
H. The regulation and licensing of all residential rental units, apartment
houses, boardinghouse units and boardinghouses represent a lawful
and necessary exercise of the police power under the Borough Code in
order to preserve and protect the public health, safety and general
welfare.
A. This chapter is intended to and shall serve the following purposes:
(1) To assist the Borough in protecting and promoting the health,
safety and welfare of its residents;
(2) To establish rights and obligations of owners and occupants
relating to the rental of certain residential units in the Borough and
to insure that owners and occupants properly maintain rental
housing within the Borough;
(3) To ensure that owners, managers, occupants and their guests share
responsibilities to comply with relevant building ordinances and
other codes, to prevent overcrowding and to avoid nuisances
affecting neighbors;
(4) To provide for a system of inspections and the issuance and
renewal of licenses; and
(5) To establish procedures and penalties for violations.
§ 207-1 JUNKYARDS § 207-2
170:273
§ 207-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the
following meanings.
ACTIVE WORKING FIRE — An actual fire which occurs inside a residential
structure and which results in a response to the property by a fire
department. The scope of any inspection hereunder which results from an
active working fire call shall be at the discretion of the Borough.[Added
12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 1275]
ADDENDUM — A contractual agreement between an owner and an
occupant which sets forth the obligations of persons under this chapter and
in a form approved by the Code Enforcement Officer.
BOARDINGHOUSE — [Amended 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 1275]
B. All owners, managers and occupants of premises hereunder shall
comply with all provisions of the Pennsylvania Landlord-Tenant Act,63 as
amended (hereinafter "Act"), and nothing contained in this chapter
shall alter or abrogate the requirements of the Act. Any requirement of
this chapter inconsistent with the Act shall be deemed repealed.
C. This chapter shall not limit the ability of an owner to evict occupants in
compliance with state law for reasons other than violations of this
chapter.
D. To the extent that this chapter refers to and/or incorporates other laws,
ordinances, rules and/or regulations, where necessary to the regulation
of activity under this chapter and for the purpose of enforcing this
chapter wherever this chapter and/or such laws, ordinances, rules or
regulations conflict, the more restrictive provisions shall apply.
E. This chapter shall not be construed as diminishing or relieving the
responsibility of occupants or guests for their conduct or activity under
any private cause of action, civil or criminal enforcement proceeding or
criminal law or requiring an owner to indemnify or defend an occupant
or guest when any such action or proceeding is brought against the
occupant or guest based upon the conduct or activity of the occupant or
guest. Nothing herein is intended to impose any additional civil/
criminal liability upon owners other than that which is imposed by
existing law.
A residential use in which:
Room(s) that do not meet the definition of a lawful dwelling unit
are rented for habitation; or
(1)
A dwelling unit includes greater than the permitted maximum
number of unrelated persons.
(2)
A.
63.Editor's Note: See 68 P.S. § 250.101 et seq.
§ 207-2 CATASAUQUA CODE § 207-3
170:274
BOROUGH — The Borough of Catasauqua, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania.
BUSINESS DAYS — Days and hours in which the offices of the Borough of
Catasauqua are open for public business.
CODE — Any law, regulation, ordinance or code adopted, enacted, and/
or in effect in and for the Borough of Catasauqua relating in any way
to the fitness for habitation or the construction, maintenance, operation,
occupancy, vermin or rodent control or any public health matters or the use
or appearance of any premises, dwelling or dwelling unit.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — A duly appointed Borough official
having the duty to enforce this chapter, the Zoning Ordinance, the Uniform
Construction Code65 and any other property maintenance code or ordinance
relating to the condition or use of property in the Borough, and any
assistants, deputies or police officers duly appointed.
COMMON AREA — In multi-unit buildings, interior and exterior space
which is not part of an individual regulated rental unit and which is shared
among occupants of the dwelling. Common areas shall be considered part
of the premises for purposes of this chapter.
DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT —
A boardinghouse shall not include a use that meets the Zoning
Ordinance definitions of hotel, dormitory, motel, life care center,
personal care center, bed-and-breakfast inn, group home or nursing
home.64 A college fraternity house, sorority house or personal day
care center not meeting the Zoning Ordinance definition with respect
to licensing, and all used as residences, shall be considered types of
boardinghouses. A boardinghouse may either involve or not involve
the providing of meals to residents, but shall not include a restaurant
open to the public unless the use also meets the requirements for a
restaurant. A boardinghouse shall primarily serve persons residing on
site for five or more consecutive days.
B.
A form of conduct, action, incident or behavior perpetrated, caused or
permitted by an owner, occupant or guest of a regulated rental unit
which:
Violates Borough ordinances and/or codes and is so loud, untimely
as to time of day, offensive and/or nuisance-causing, that it
unreasonably interferes with the peaceful enjoyment by other
persons of their premises and/or dwelling units or causes damage
to property that is owned by others; [Amended 12-19-2011 by
Ord. No. 1275]
(1)
Involves music or noise that is audible from a street, sidewalk
or dwelling from a minimum distance of 50 feet away from the
premises where the sound is originating;
(2)
A.
64.Editor's Note: See Ch. 280, Zoning, § 280-19, Definitions.
65.Editor's Note: See Ch. 280, Zoning, and Ch. 130, Codes, Uniform.
§ 207-3 JUNKYARDS § 207-3
170:275
DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT REPORT — A written report providing notice of
disruptive conduct, including, but not limited to, police reports, which is
prepared by a Code Enforcement Officer.[Amended 12-19-2011 by Ord.
No. 1275]
DWELLING — A building which includes one or more regulated rental units.
DWELLING UNIT — A residential living area for one household that is
used for living and sleeping purposes, and that may have its own cooking
facilities, and a bathroom with a toilet, bathtub and/or shower.
GUEST — A person on the premises of a regulated rental unit with the
actual or implied consent of an owner or occupant.
LANDLORD — An owner.
MANAGER — An adult individual or other legal entity designated by the
owner to operate a dwelling and to perform the obligations of the owner
under this chapter and any rental agreements with the occupant(s). The
manager shall be the agent of the owner for service of process and receiving
notices or demands under this chapter. The manager may reside in the
dwelling.
OCCUPANT — An individual who resides in a regulated rental unit.
OWNER — One or more persons in whom is vested all or part of the
legal title to the premises, or all or part of the beneficial ownership of the
premises.
(3) Is the subject of a criminal citation for disorderly conduct;
(4) Involves damage to the premises in excess of $500; or
Is the subject of a criminal citation under the Pennsylvania Crimes
Code or the Pennsylvania Liquor Code.66
(5)
In order for disruptive conduct to constitute an offense under this
chapter, a written report must be issued by a Code Enforcement Officer
or police officer and notice must be sent to an owner, occupant and/or
manager. [Amended 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 1275]
B.
Disruptive conduct shall not constitute contact made to the police by
the tenant or tenants for police or emergency assistance by or on
behalf of a victim of abuse as defined in 23 Pa.C.S.A. § 6102 (relating
to definition), a victim of a crime pursuant to 18 Pa.C.S.A. (relating
to crimes and offenses), or an individual in an emergency pursuant to
35 Pa.C.S.A. 35 § 8103 (relating to definitions) if the contact is made
to the police based upon the reasonable belief of the person making
the contact that intervention or emergency assistance is necessary
to prevent the perpetration or escalation of the abuse, crime or
emergency or if the intervention or emergency assistance was actually
needed in response to the abuse, crime or emergency. [Added
4-6-2015 by Ord. No. 1313]
C.
66.Editor's Note: See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4701 et seq., and 47 P.S. § 1-101 et seq., respectively.
§ 207-3 CATASAUQUA CODE § 207-3
170:276
OWNER-OCCUPIED DWELLING UNIT — A dwelling unit in which at least
one owner resides as his/her primary dwelling.
PERSON — A natural person, partnership, corporation, unincorporated
association, limited liability company, limited liability partnership, trust or
any other legal entity.
PREMISES — The land and all buildings, dwellings and structures located
thereon and on which one or more regulated rental units are located.
REGULATED RENTAL UNIT — A dwelling unit, including a boardinghouse
unit, that is occupied for residential purposes in consideration for the
payment of rent as defined herein and is not an owner-occupied dwelling
unit.
RENT — Consideration paid or given in return for occupancy of a regulated
rental unit. Rent may be in the form of money, barter or in-kind transfers
and the receipt thereof may be imputed in accordance with tax law.
RENTAL AGREEMENT — A written agreement between an owner and
tenant which is required to be supplemented by the addendum provided
for in this chapter or to otherwise contain the terms of the addendum and
which contains the terms and conditions relating to the use and occupancy
of a regulated rental unit.
RENTAL LICENSE — A license issued pursuant to this chapter to the owner
of a regulated rental unit under and which is required to lawfully rent that
unit.
REVOCATION — The loss of any permit or license granted hereunder.
SUSPENSION — The temporary loss of any permit or license granted
hereunder which is subject to reinstatement in accordance with the terms
of this chapter.
UNREGULATED RENTAL UNIT — A dwelling unit, including a
boardinghouse unit, which is occupied for residential purposes by a person
related by blood or marriage to the owner of the unit, and which unit is not
also occupied by the owner.[Added 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 1275]
UNRELATED PERSONS — Two or more persons who reside in a dwelling
unit and who are not related to each other through blood, adoption,
marriage or formal foster relationship.
§ 207-4. Duties of owner.
A. General.
(1) Every owner of a regulated rental unit shall keep and maintain in a
good and safe condition each such unit and the premises on which
it is located in compliance with all applicable Borough codes and
ordinances.
(2) Every owner shall be responsible for regulating the proper and
lawful use and maintenance of every premises so owned and shall
be responsible to act and to maintain the premises in order to
§ 207-3 JUNKYARDS § 207-4
170:277
minimize disruptive conduct by the inclusion of appropriate
contractual terms in a written rental agreement and through the
prompt and timely enforcement of such terms. Where no such
written rental agreement exists in writing or otherwise, the owner
shall obtain a fully executed addendum or acknowledgment in
accordance with this chapter.
(3) The owner shall obtain a rental license for every regulated rental
unit and unregulated rental unit owned in accordance with this
chapter. If a rental license is not secured by the owner within the
time established by this chapter, or if the rental license is
suspended or revoked, then, except as otherwise provided herein,
neither the regulated rental unit nor the unregulated rental unit
shall be rented for residential use. [Amended 12-19-2011 by
Ord. No. 1275]
(4) The owner shall not permit the number of occupants of a regulated
rental unit to exceed the maximum number allowed by Borough
ordinances and codes.
(5) The owner shall be responsible to minimize disruptive conduct and
behavior by occupants and guests in any common area of the
premises. The owner shall maintain acceptable physical conditions
in such common areas and shall ensure that the common areas are
in full compliance with this chapter and any other applicable
ordinances and codes of the Borough.
(6) The owner shall comply with all notification provisions of this
chapter.
(7) The owner shall notify the Borough, in writing, within five days of
the date when any tenant moves out of, or a new tenant moves into,
a unit for which a license is required hereunder. [Added
12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 1275]
(8) The owner of licensed property shall use and maintain the property
in accordance with all laws, ordinances, regulations, orders,
directives, standards, policies, recommendations, specifications
and instructions promulgated by any and all governmental
agencies, including the Borough. [Added 12-19-2011 by Ord. No.
1275]
B. Designation of manager.
(1) If the owner is not a full-time resident of the Borough or does not
reside within a radius of five miles from the premises, then the
owner shall designate a person to serve as manager who resides or
maintains a principal office for property management located
within such radius. If the owner is other than a natural person, then
a manager shall be employed or appointed who resides or
maintains a principal office for property management within such
radius. The radius set forth above may be expanded upon a
§ 207-4 CATASAUQUA CODE § 207-4
170:278
showing to the satisfaction of the Code Enforcement Officer that an
alternate location will meet the intent and purpose of this chapter
in that the alternate location will not preclude effective and timely
responses under this chapter.
(2) A manager designated pursuant to this section shall be the agent of
the owner for service of process and receipt of notices and
demands, and the manager shall, on behalf of the owner, perform
the obligations of the owner under the rental agreement and this
chapter.
(3) The legal name, mailing address, daytime physical address (not a
post office box) and daytime and evening telephone number(s) of
the person designated as the manager shall be provided in writing
by the owner to the Borough, and such information shall be kept
current and updated in accordance with this chapter.
(4) The owner shall provide a copy of Chapter 207, and any
amendments thereto, to the manager, and the manager shall sign,
on a form prescribed by the Borough, a written acknowledgement
of his or her representation of the owner and an acceptance of his
or her responsibilities pursuant thereto. The owner shall require
the manager to provide to the Borough all information required by
Subsection B(3) above and further require that all information
provided be updated as appropriate. [Added 12-19-2011 by Ord.
No. 1275]
C. Disclosure. The owner shall disclose to the occupant, in writing, on or
before the commencement of the occupancy, the name, address and
telephone number of the manager, or if a manager is not required, then
the name, address and telephone number of the owner.
D. Maintenance of premises.
(1) The owner shall maintain the premises in compliance with the
requirements of this chapter and all other ordinances and codes of
the Borough and shall regularly perform all routine maintenance,
including lawn mowing, weed control and ice and snow removal.
The owner shall promptly make any and all necessary repairs to the
premises.
(2) The above notwithstanding, the owner and occupant may agree
that the occupant is to perform specified repairs, maintenance and
alterations; however, any such agreement shall be in writing and
shall clearly set forth the obligations of the parties. Such an
agreement shall not be entered into for the purpose of evading the
respective obligations of the owner or occupant under this chapter,
and any such agreement shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
(3) The existence of an agreement between the owner and occupant
shall not relieve the owner of ultimate responsibility under this
§ 207-4 JUNKYARDS § 207-4
170:279
chapter or other applicable Borough ordinances or codes for the
proper repair and maintenance of the premises.
E. Rental agreement and addendum.
(1) Each occupancy of a regulated rental unit shall be memorialized in
a rental agreement as defined herein.
(2) Within the time frame set forth in Subsection C, above, the owner
and the occupant shall execute and addendum and written rental
agreement which discloses to the occupant, among other things,
the requirements of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the
eviction provisions hereof.
(3) The owner and occupant shall not include any term in a rental
agreement that is contrary to the provisions of this chapter.
(4) With respect to leases and other agreements or arrangements for
the occupancy of a regulated rental unit existing on the effective
date of this chapter, an addendum to each such lease, agreement or
arrangement shall be provided by the owner to the occupant in
accordance with this chapter. Should an occupant refuse to execute
the addendum, then the owner shall secure a written
acknowledgement that the occupant received the addendum and
refused to execute the same. Upon oral or written request by the
Borough, the owner, within 10 days of the request, shall furnish to
the Borough copies of the executed addendum or acknowledgment.
F. Complaints. The owner shall respond to and correct (or make a good
faith effort to correct) complaints or problems within 30 days after
receiving notice thereof or a valid complaint from an occupant.
G. Eviction.
(1) If an occupant of a regulated rental unit is involved in a third
disruptive conduct incident within any one-year period (calculated
back from the date of the most recent incident of disruptive
conduct) or has violated any federal, state or local law on or
relating to the premises, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a
written notice to the owner or manager to order eviction of the
occupant. If the disruptive conduct was caused by only one of
multiple occupants, then at the discretion of the owner or manager,
the eviction may be limited to that occupant. The owner shall begin
eviction proceedings with 15 days after receiving such notice and
shall continue such proceedings to completion, without
interruption, unless the occupant voluntarily vacates the premises.
(2) Upon eviction, the occupant shall not be permitted to occupy any
part of the premises for the remainder of the term of the rental
agreement and, in the case of a boardinghouse, for a period of one
year from the date of the actionable conduct.
§ 207-4 CATASAUQUA CODE § 207-4
170:280
§ 207-5. Duties of occupant.
(3) The failure of an owner to carry out an eviction in accordance with
this section shall constitute a violation of this chapter and result in
revocation of the rental license.
(4) The requirement to evict an occupant shall not apply if a successful
appeal is made to the Council, if a District Court rules in favor of
the occupant in any eviction proceeding, or an appeal to a court or
other legal action has been filed that would prevent such eviction.
(5) The Code Enforcement Officer shall maintain a list of occupants
who were evicted and the related premises. Such list shall be
maintained for a minimum period of three years and is subject to
inspection in accordance with applicable law.
(6) The occurrence of a conviction for the underlying conduct
constituting disruptive conduct or a judicial finding that such
conduct occurred shall not be a prerequisite for eviction hereunder.
[Added 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 1275]
H. Repairs by the Borough. If an owner of a premises shall fail or refuse to
comply with any notice from the Code Enforcement Officer to correct a
violation relating to the maintenance and repair of the premises within
the period of time stated in such notice, and the order is not appealed,
then the Borough may cause the violation to be corrected at the owner's
expense. There shall be imposed upon the owner a charge, which shall
include the actual costs of maintenance and/or repair, actual legal fees
and court costs together with an administrative fee in the amount of
25% of actual costs incurred or $50, whichever is greater, for each time
the Borough shall cause a violation to be corrected. The owner shall be
billed after such work has been completed, and any such bill which
remains unpaid and outstanding after 30 days shall carry interest at the
legal rate and be grounds for the placement of a municipal lien as
provided by law.
I. Inspection by the Borough. The owner shall permit and schedule
inspections of the premises by a Code Enforcement Officer during
Borough business hours, after a minimum of seven calendar days'
notice. The owner shall provide a minimum of three calendar days'
advance notice to the occupant of each rental unit of the time and date
of the inspection. These notice requirements shall not apply where the
Code Enforcement Officer has reason to believe that there is occurring,
or that there is about to occur, a threat to the public health, safety or
welfare.
A. General.
(1) The occupant shall comply with all obligations imposed by this
chapter, all other applicable ordinances and codes of the Borough
and all applicable provision of law.
§ 207-4 JUNKYARDS § 207-5
170:281
(2) A regulated rental unit shall not be occupied in any manner which
violates the Zoning Ordinance67 and other applicable laws, codes,
ordinances or regulations. To the extent that the Zoning Ordinance
and other applicable laws, codes, ordinances or regulations conflict
or set different standards or requirements, the more restrictive
shall apply.
(3) An occupant shall not permit guests to engage in disruptive
conduct on the premises in accordance with Subsection D, below.
B. Health regulations. The occupant shall collect and dispose of all
rubbish, garbage and other waste in a clean and sanitary manner and
shall comply with Borough ordinances and codes relating to solid
waste, sanitation and recycling. An occupant shall keep that part of the
premises which he or she occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary
condition and free of nuisance conditions.
C. Illegal activities. Neither occupants nor guests shall engage in, tolerate
or permit any conduct on the premises declared illegal under any
federal or state law or regulation, including, but not limited to, the
Pennsylvania Crimes Code (18 Pa.C.S.A. § 101, et seq.); the
Pennsylvania Liquor Code (47 P.S. § 1-101 et seq.), the Controlled
Substance, Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act (35 P.S. § 780-101 et seq.),
or any successor laws.
D. Disruptive conduct.
(1) No occupant shall engage in, tolerate or permit guests to engage in
disruptive conduct, violations of Subsection C of this section or
violations of any other applicable Borough ordinances or codes
relating to the use or occupancy of the premises.
(2) Where a Code Enforcement Officer investigates an allegation of
disruptive conduct, he or she shall complete a disruptive conduct
report. The report shall set forth a finding as to whether there
occurred an incident of disruptive conduct as that term is defined
herein. The report shall include, to the extent known or
discoverable, all information necessary to carry out the purpose
and intent of this chapter. The Council shall approve by resolution
the form of report.
(3) When the Code Enforcement Officer issues a disruptive conduct
report containing a finding that such conduct occurred, a copy shall
be mailed to the occupant and the owner, and the original shall be
placed in the file for the premises.68
E. Inspection of premises. An occupant shall permit a Code Enforcement
Officer to conduct inspections of the premises during Borough business
67.Editor's Note: See Ch. 280, Zoning.
68.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D(4) and (5), which immediately followed, regarding
criminal or civil citations, were repealed 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 1275.
§ 207-5 CATASAUQUA CODE § 207-5
170:282
§ 207-6. Licenses and inspections.
hours, after receiving notice from the owner, manager or the Borough
in accordance with § 207-4I, above.
A. License requirement.
(1) A rental license shall be required for each occupied, regulated
rental unit within the Borough.
(2) Within 120 days after the effective date of this chapter, the owner
shall apply for a rental license for each regulated rental unit on the
premises. The rental license shall be acquired by the owner within
60 days after application; except that for a boardinghouse, a single
rental license shall be issued for the premises covering all dwelling
units contained therein. All forms and applications shall be
provided by the Borough and may be obtained at the Borough
office.
(3) A rental license shall not be issued or renewed until:
(a) (Reserved)69
(b) the owner has identified a manager and provided all of the
information concerning the premises and occupancy thereof in
accordance with this chapter.
(c) The failure of a landlord to pay general or special taxes
applicable to the premises shall not constitute grounds to
refuse to issue or renew, suspend or revoke a rental license.
[Added 3-5-2018 by Ord. No. 1367]
(4) The following shall not be considered regulated rental units for the
purpose of this chapter:
(a) Owner-occupied dwelling units;
(b) Hotels and motels as defined by the Zoning Ordinance;
(c) Hospitals and state-licensed nursing homes and personal care
homes;
(d) Bed-and-breakfast homes as defined in the Zoning Ordinance;
(e) One dwelling unit that is on the same lot as a second dwelling
unit, provided the two dwellings units are only occupied by the
owner and a person who is related to the owner; and
(f) On-campus dormitories owned and/or operated and
maintained by a college or university.
69.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(3)(a), regarding overdue real estate taxes and
municipal fees, was repealed 3-5-2018 by Ord. No. 1367.
§ 207-5 JUNKYARDS § 207-6
170:283
(5) Dwelling units owned and/or operated by the Housing Authority
within the Borough shall be exempt from the inspection provisions
of this chapter provided that the Code Enforcement Officer
determines annually that the Housing Authority's inspection
program is sufficient to carry out the purpose and intent of this
chapter and a copy of the inspection report is provided to the Code
Enforcement Officer. Dwelling units owned and/or operated by the
Housing Authority shall comply with the requirements of this
chapter relating to evictions and disruptive conduct, unless
specifically preempted by federal or state law.
(6) A rental license application shall be provided by the Borough and
shall require, at a minimum, that the owner provide a list
containing the name of each resident occupying each unit covered
by the license application, regardless of age. The owner shall
update the list at least annually and from time to time in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter. [Amended
12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 1275]
B. License term, inspection and fees.
(1) Each rental license shall have an annual term.
(2) Premises regulated hereunder shall be inspected according to the
following schedule: [Amended 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 1275]
(a) Except for a boardinghouse as defined herein, each regulated
rental unit shall be inspected following a change of occupancy.
Where circumstances permit, the owner shall make the unit
available for inspection while the unit is vacant; however, in no
event shall the inspection occur later than three days following
re-occupancy. In the event that the unit is occupied at the time
of the inspection, the owner shall provide a copy of the
inspection report(s) to the tenant(s) within five days of receipt
from the Borough.
(b) Common areas shall undergo a minimum of one inspection
every four years, based upon a schedule established by the
Code Enforcement Officer.
(c) With respect to a boardinghouse, all common areas and
individual units shall be inspected at the same time, every two
years.
(d) Following a determination that there has occurred an active
working fire, each unit so involved shall be inspected within 48
hours of extinguishment of the fire in order to determine
whether the unit or the premises are habitable and subject to
occupancy. If the premises or any unit thereof are deemed not
habitable, the premises or unit, as the case may be, shall be reinspected
and approved for occupancy prior to re-occupancy.
§ 207-6 CATASAUQUA CODE § 207-6
170:284
(3) The Code Enforcement Officer shall require that the common area
of each premises be made available for inspection in a designated
year and then be reinspected in accordance with this chapter. The
Borough shall not be obligated to commence and/or complete all
inspections within this schedule and shall not be liable for any such
failure. If the Borough, through no fault of the owner, manager or
occupant is unable to complete an inspection of a regulated rental
unit in the designated year, the Borough may inspect the unit in one
or more following years.
(4) The common area inspection requirements of this section are
hereby modified for the following premises, provided that there
does not exist evidence of possible violations of this chapter or of
other applicable Borough ordinances or codes, the premises has
not been the subject of any code or ordinance enforcement actions
by the Borough within the preceding two years or if the premises
has no outstanding taxes, fines or fees due to the Borough or any of
its authorities:
(a) Premises newly constructed within the four years preceding
the effective date of this chapter and that were inspected by
the Borough after construction, shall be exempt from
inspection during the first two years after the effective date of
this chapter;
(b) Premises substantially rehabilitated within the last two years,
as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer, and inspected
by the Borough after rehabilitation, shall be exempt from
inspection for the first two years after the effective date of this
chapter; and
(c) Premises inspected by the Borough for code compliance within
the four years preceding the effective date of this chapter shall
be inspected after two years from the effective date of this
chapter.
(5) Upon application for a rental license and prior to any issuance or
renewal thereof, each owner shall pay to the Borough an annual
fee. The fee for a calendar year shall be paid by December 31, and
if unpaid shall be subject to a penalty in accordance with this
chapter. The fee shall cover the Borough's actual costs to
administer the licensing and inspection program. A fee schedule
shall be established by resolution of the Council and may contain,
among other things, application fees, license fees, late payment
penalties, fees for reinspection of a unit, and fees for reinstatement
of suspended or revoked licenses.
(6) All owners subject to this chapter shall obtain an initial rental
license for the premises on or before the effective date hereof. Each
such rental license shall expire on December 31, 2009.
§ 207-6 JUNKYARDS § 207-6
170:285
§ 207-7. Nonrenewal, suspension or revocation of licenses.
(7) The issuance of a rental license or conduct of an inspection shall
not warrant that a regulated rental unit is lawful, safe, habitable or
in compliance with all Borough codes, and this chapter shall not
constitute a waiver of any immunity granted to the Borough or
otherwise create liability on the part of the Borough.
(8) The fee for any inspection hereunder shall be the greater of the fee
established by resolution of the Council or the actual cost to the
Borough in the event that a third-party inspector is utilized.
Utilization of a third-party inspector shall be at the sole discretion
of the Borough. [Added 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 1275]
(9) The Borough may, in the exercise of its discretion, provide the
results of any inspection conducted pursuant to this chapter to the
insurer of any premises regulated hereunder or to the agent of that
insurer. [Added 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 1275]
C. Inspection.
(1) Each regulated rental unit shall be subject to inspection by the
Code Enforcement Officer pursuant to the schedule provided by
this chapter, and the Code Enforcement Officer shall be authorized
to enforce this chapter and take appropriate measures to abate
violations hereof.
(2) This chapter shall not be construed to limit the Code Enforcement
Officer's authority to conduct inspections or maintain enforcement
actions under any other Borough ordinance or code.
A. General.
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer may initiate enforcement actions
against an owner, manager or occupant for violation of any
provision of this chapter that imposes a duty upon such persons.
(2) Within the limitations of federal and state law, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall have authority to apply for an
administrative search warrant to enter and inspect the premises
and/or a regulated rental unit located thereon.
B. Violation notices.
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer shall provide written notification of
violations of this chapter and require that they be corrected within
a reasonable time period as set forth in the notice.
(2) The Code Enforcement Officer may determine that the regulated
rental unit is unfit for human habitation, in which case he shall
order that it be vacated and remain vacated until the situation is
corrected. In such instance, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
§ 207-6 CATASAUQUA CODE § 207-7
170:286
issue to the owner, manager and each occupant a violation notice
detailing the grounds for determining that the unit is unfit.
(3) For serious violations that do not require that the regulated rental
unit or premises be immediately vacated, the Code Enforcement
Officer may require that the violations be corrected within a period
of time no less than 24 hours.
C. Nonrenewal.
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer shall deny an application for
renewal of a rental license if there are outstanding violations of this
chapter or other Borough ordinances or codes relating to the
premises. If such violations do not pose a threat to the safety of
occupants or other members of the public, the Code Enforcement
Officer may permit the current occupant(s) to continue to reside in
the premises for a reasonable period of time as set forth in the
notice of nonrenewal. Any such violations must be corrected within
the time limit set forth in such notice.
(2) The Code Enforcement Officer may issue a temporary rental license
conditioned upon certain actions being taken to remedy a defect or
violation of this chapter or other Borough ordinances or codes
relating to the premises by a date certain.
D. Revocation. The Code Enforcement Officer shall revoke a rental license
for the premises or a regulated rental unit if he determines that
violations of this chapter or other Borough ordinances or codes relating
to the premises present an immediate threat to the safety of occupants
or other members of the public, at which time the owner shall take
immediate steps to remove the occupants and to locate alternative
housing for the occupants. The revocation shall remain in effect until all
such violations are corrected and the premises or unit have been
reinspected and approved.
E. Suspension. The Code Enforcement Officer may suspend a rental
license until violations of this chapter or other Borough ordinances or
codes relating to the premises are corrected and require that such
violations be corrected by a date certain. A failure to timely correct any
or all such violations constitutes grounds for revocation or nonrenewal
of the rental license.
F. Criteria for applying sanctions. The Code Enforcement Officer, when
deciding upon the sanctions provided for in this chapter, shall consider
the following:
(1) The effect of the violation on the health and safety of the
occupant(s) of the regulated rental unit, other occupants of the
premises, and neighboring residents;
§ 207-7 JUNKYARDS § 207-7
170:287
(2) Whether the owner has committed prior violations of this chapter,
and whether those violations were satisfactorily corrected in a
timely manner;
(3) The effect of sanctions upon the occupant(s), particularly when the
occupant(s) did not cause the violation; and
(4) The actions taken by the owner to remedy the violation(s) and to
prevent future violations, including any written plan submitted by
the owner and good faith efforts of the owner to bring the premises
or regulated rental unit into compliance.
G. Conditions. In addition to applying and enforcing sanctions as set forth
in this chapter, the Code Enforcement Officer may establish reasonable
conditions upon the reissuance or reinstatement of a rental license to
an owner consistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter.
H. Grounds for imposing sanctions. Any of the following shall subject an
owner to sanctions as provided for in this section:
(1) Failure to abate a violation of this chapter or other Borough
ordinances or codes relating to the premises within the time frame
established in the notice;
(2) Refusal of an owner, manager or occupant to permit the inspection
of the premises or regulated rental unit by a Code Enforcement
Officer as required by this chapter;
(3) Failure to take steps to remedy and/or stop violations of this
chapter by occupants of regulated rental units as required by this
chapter; and
(4) Failure to evict an occupant(s) after having been directed to do so
by a Code Enforcement Officer as provided for in this chapter.
I. Procedure for nonrenewal, suspension or revocation of license.
(1) Following a determination that grounds for nonrenewal,
suspension or revocation of a rental license exist, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall provide written notice to the owner or
manager of the action to be taken and the reason(s) therefor.
(2) The written notice required by this subsection shall include at least
the following information:
(a) The address of the premises in question and identification of
each affected regulated rental unit;
(b) A description of each violation which has been found to exist;
(c) A statement that the rental license for the premises or each
such regulated rental unit is suspended, revoked or will not be
renewed for the next license period unless the violation is
corrected within the time deadline provided in the notice, and
§ 207-7 CATASAUQUA CODE § 207-7
170:288
in the case of a revocation, the notice shall state the date upon
which revocation shall occur;
(d) A statement that during the rental license nonrenewal or
revocation period, the premises or unit shall not be rented for
occupancy except for any temporary, conditional rental license
extension that the Code Enforcement Officer may issue; and
(e) Information setting forth the appeal process.
J. Appeals.
(1) Any person affected by a decision, notice or order of a Code
Enforcement Officer under this chapter, the issuance of a
disruptive conduct report or any eviction order under this chapter
shall have the right to appeal to the Council or, in the case of
property maintenance or repair issues, to the Code Hearing Board.
An application for appeal shall state the grounds for appeal and
may include a claim that a provision of this chapter has been
improperly applied or administered, that factual errors were made
by the Code Enforcement Officer or such other grounds under this
chapter as the person may allege.
(2) A written application for appeal shall be filed at the Borough office
within 20 days after service of the determination, decision, report,
notice or order. An appeal fee to be established by resolution of the
Council shall be paid at the time of filing the appeal, however, upon
request and for good cause shown, the Code Enforcement Officer
may waive the fee or any part thereof. If the appellant is successful
on appeal, then the fee shall be reimbursed.
(3) Nothing contained herein shall modify the jurisdiction of the
Borough's Zoning Hearing Board, Uniform Construction Code
Board of Appeals or the Board of Health.
K. Notice.
(1) Notices of violation and license suspension, revocation and
nonrenewal shall be provided by certified mail to the owner,
manager and occupant. If a notice is returned as unclaimed or
refused, then the Code Enforcement Officer shall make reasonable
efforts to attempt delivery by personal service, which may include
posting the notice conspicuously on the premises.
(2) The Borough shall not be responsible for failing to provide notice
where the owner has not provided current names and/or addresses
for the owner, manager or occupants.
(3) Any notice required by this chapter to be given to the owner shall
be deemed delivered to the owner if served upon the manager.
(4) A claimed lack of knowledge by the owner of any violation
hereunder shall not be a defense to the nonrenewal, suspension or
§ 207-7 JUNKYARDS § 207-7
170:289
§ 207-8. Violations and penalties.
revocation of a rental license or any eviction order, provided that
notice was sent to the owner's last known address and the premises
were posted as required by this chapter.
A. General. Any violation of this chapter shall subject the owner, manager,
and/or occupant to the penalties set forth herein. The owner and
manager are hereby declared to be jointly and severally liable for
violations of this chapter.
B. Penalties.
(1) Any person who violates a provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof by a District Judge, be liable to pay the following
penalties:
(a) For the first violation in a calendar year: a fine of $300.
(b) For a second violation in a calendar year: a fine of $450.
(c) For a third and each subsequent violation in a calendar year: a
fine of $600.
(d) For operation of a regulated rental unit without a rental
license: a fine of $600, per unit.
(2) Each day that a violation continues to exist after the time limit
established for correction of the violation by the Code Enforcement
Officer without a written time extension or without the same having
been appealed, a separate offense shall be deemed to have
occurred.
(3) In the event of an eviction of an occupant, the rental license shall
be revoked or suspended until such time as the owner undertakes
and completes any corrective action deemed necessary to prevent
the further occurrence of the activity causing the eviction.
C. Nonexclusive remedies.
(1) The penalty provisions and the rental license nonrenewal,
suspension and revocation procedures provided in this chapter
shall not be the exclusive remedies of the Borough in the event of a
violation of this chapter, and the Borough retains all remedies
otherwise provided by law to enforce the requirements of this
chapter.
(2) Where a violation of this chapter constitutes a violation of another
Borough ordinance or code, nothing contained herein shall
preclude or limit the prosecution of a violation under such other
ordinance or code.
§ 207-7 CATASAUQUA CODE § 207-8
170:290
§ 207-9. Changes in ownership, management and/or occupancy.
§ 207-10. Owners jointly and severally responsible.
Where a regulated rental unit is owned by more than one person, each
person shall be jointly and severally responsible for a violation of this
chapter, and each person shall be separately subject to prosecution for such
violation.
Chapter 210
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal authorities — See Ch. 10.
Water Department and Sewage
Department — See Ch. 95.
Uniform codes — See Ch. 130.
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 165.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 225.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
235.
Water — See Ch. 265.
Wellhead protection — See Ch. 275.
Zoning — See Ch. 280.
D. Any person found guilty of violating an ordinance shall be assessed
court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in
the enforcement proceedings. [Added 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1288]
A. Each owner of a regulated rental unit shall notify the Code Enforcement
Officer in writing of a change in ownership and/or management no later
than five business days prior to such change. The notice shall include
the name, business address and telephone number of the new owner or
manager.
B. The owner or manager shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer in
writing of a change in the status of the premises from a nonregulated
dwelling unit or building to a regulated rental unit or a change in the
number of regulated rental units on the premises no later than 30
business days prior to such change. However nothing contained herein
shall negate the requirement that occupancy not occur until a rental
license is obtained.
C. Each owner and/or manager of a regulated rental unit, except
boardinghouses, shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer in writing of
a change in occupancy no later than five business days after such
change. The notice shall include the name and home address of each
new adult occupant and the total number of persons intended to occupy
the unit.
D. Any failure to comply with these notice provisions shall constitute a
violation of this chapter.
§ 207-8 JUNKYARDS § 207-10
170:291

ARTICLE I
Sewer Connections
[Adopted 4-4-1955 by Ord. No. 377 (Ch. XIV, Part 1, of the 1962
Code)]
§ 210-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORITY — Refers to Catasauqua Borough Authority as presently or
hereafter constituted, which has been created by said Borough Council and
to which has been referred by said Borough Council the specific project of
sewers.
BOROUGH — Refers to the Borough of Catasauqua, Lehigh County,
Pennsylvania, or the duly constituted and elected municipal authorities
thereof.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE —
OCCUPIED BUILDING — Refers to any structure erected and intended for
continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or
animals and from which structure sewage and industrial waste, or either
thereof, is or may be discharged.
PERSON — Includes individuals or natural persons, artificial persons
existing only in contemplation of law, and shall be construed to include
associations, partnerships, limited partnerships, joint stock companies and
corporations.
PROPERTY ACCESSIBLE TO THE SEWAGE SYSTEM — Refers to real estate
which adjoins, abuts on, or is adjacent to, the sewer system.
SEWAGE — Refers to the normal water-carried household and toilet wastes
from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial
establishments.
SEWER SYSTEM — Refers to the sanitary sewer collection system and
sewage treatment plant together with appurtenant facilities about to be
constructed in and for the Borough of Catasauqua and any improvements,
additions or extensions that hereafter may be made thereto by the Authority
or the Borough or to any part or parts of any or all thereof.
Refers to the liquid, gaseous or solid waste from industrial processes as
distinct from domestic sewage.
A.
Refers to that part of the sewer system extending from a public main
or street sewer to curb line or property line if there is no curb, and
where the main or street sewer line is laid under a sidewalk, the word
"lateral" shall mean and refer to the "Y" connection from the main or
street sewer line.
B.
§ 210-1 JUNKYARDS § 210-2
170:293
§ 210-2. Notice of completion of sewer systems.
Whenever the sewer system is completed and ready for public use it shall
be the duty of the Borough to cause notice of the fact to be given by
advertisement published once in one newspaper of general circulation in
the Borough, and such advertisement shall state that said sewer may be
used by all property owners in the Borough subject to the payment of any
connection charges and of annual sewer rentals in amounts as may from
time to time be fixed by the Borough.
§ 210-3. Sewer connections required.
§ 210-4. Certain receptacles prohibited where sewer accessible.
It shall be unlawful for any person owning any property accessible to
the sewer system to erect, construct or use or maintain or cause to be
erected, constructed, used or maintained, any privy, cesspool, sinkhole,
septic tank or other receptacle on such premises for receiving sewage,
after the expiration of the particular period specified in § 210-3 hereof, or
otherwise at any time to erect, construct, use or maintain any pipe, conduit,
drain or other facility for the discharge of sewage except into the sewer
system.
§ 210-5. Unlawful receptacles for sewage abatable as nuisances.
Any person who erects, constructs, uses or maintains a privy, cesspool,
sinkhole or septic tank on any property accessible to the sewer system
in violation of this article, shall be deemed and shall be declared to be
erecting, constructing and maintaining a nuisance, which nuisance the
Borough is hereby authorized and directed to abate in the manner provided
by law.
§ 210-6. Certain connections unlawful.
No connection shall be made to take sewer system except in compliance
with the ordinances and resolutions as well as such rules and regulations as
A. All persons owning any occupied building now erected upon property
accessible to the sewer system shall at their own expense connect such
building with the sewer system within 60 days after the date of
publication specified in § 210-2.
B. All persons owning any property accessible to the sewer system upon
which a building is hereafter erected shall, at the time of the erection of
such building and at their own expense, connect the same with the
sewer system.
C. All persons owning any occupied building upon property which
hereafter becomes accessible to the sewer system shall, at their own
expense, connect such building with the sewer system within 60 days
after notice to do so from the Borough.
§ 210-2 CATASAUQUA CODE § 210-6
170:294
may, from time to time, be enacted, adopted, approved or promulgated by
the Borough.
§ 210-7. Notice to make connections.
After the expiration of the particular periods specified in § 210-3 of this
article, if any owner of an occupied building on property accessible to the
sewer system shall have failed to connect such property with the sewer
system as required by said § 210-3, the Borough shall cause to be served on
the owner of such property, so failing to connect to said sewer system, and
also upon the occupants of the building in question, a copy of this article
and a written or printed notice requiring such connection to be made, and
such notice shall further state that its requirements shall be complied with
within 60 days from the date thereof.
§ 210-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-7-1962 by Ord. No.
466; 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1288]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof before the Mayor or any District Justice of the Borough,
be sentenced to pay a fine of $50 and costs of prosecution. Provided:
each ninety-day period during which such violation shall continue shall
be deemed to be a separate offense. Any person found guilty of violating
an ordinance shall be assessed court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees
incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings.
§ 210-9. Easements, rights-of-way and other rights granted to
Catasauqua Borough Authority.
Borough hereby grants to Authority all and every easement, right-of-way
and any and all other rights necessary or desirable on, over or under the
streets, sidewalks and alleys in the Borough for the purpose of constructing
the sewer system therein.
§ 210-6 JUNKYARDS § 210-9
170:295

ARTICLE II
Sewer Connection Charges and Sewer Rentals
[Adopted 11-2-1981 by Ord. No. 827 (Ch. XIV, Part 2, of the 1962
Code)]
§ 210-10. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Catasauqua, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Property used by a person, wholly or in
part, for the manufacturing, fabrication, processing, cleaning, laundering or
assembly of any product, commodity or article.
NONRESIDENTIAL UNIT — One or more rooms, with water fixtures,
designed or used for the purpose of engaging in activities of, or connected
with, commerce, industry or education.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation,
group or political subdivision.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT — One or more rooms, including kitchen and sanitary
facilities, designed for occupancy by not more than one family for living or
sleeping purposes, or by a group of persons who are not all related by blood
or marriage, living together and sharing the same water service.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm,
surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
SEWER SYSTEM — All facilities for collecting, treating and disposing of
sewage.
WASTE WATER — The water-carried waste from residences, business
buildings, institutions and industrial establishments.
WATER COMPANY — The Catasauqua Borough Municipal Water Works or
any other water company supplying water to a user of the Catasauqua
Sanitary Sewer System.
§ 210-11. Lateral and connection charges. [Amended 10-3-1988 by
Ord. No. 935]
Each new user shall install appropriate laterals to the closest sewer main
as approved by the Borough Engineer, or shall reimburse the Borough for
its cost of supplying the lateral. In addition, there shall be a new service
connection charge for each residential, nonresidential or industrial unit as
set from time to time by resolution of Borough Council.70
70.Editor's Note: See Ch. A285, Fees.
§ 210-10 JUNKYARDS § 210-12
170:297
§ 210-12. Imposition of sewer rent or charge.
There is hereby imposed upon each and every person connected to the
sewer system operated by the Borough of Catasauqua, sewer rents as
hereinafter set forth.
§ 210-13. Sewer rents for nonmetered users. [Amended 8-4-1986 by
Ord. No. 903]
All persons owning property connected to the sewer system and served with
unmetered water service by the water company shall pay a quarterly rental
for sanitary sewage services based on a rate schedule as established by
resolution of Borough Council.71
§ 210-14. Sewer rents for metered users. [Amended 8-4-1986 by
Ord. No. 903]
All persons using the sewer system who are served by metered water shall
pay a quarterly rental for sanitary sewage services based upon quantity
of water used, as evidenced by meter readings of water meters installed
and maintained by the appropriate water company for the purposes of
measuring water purchased from that company. Where sewage itself is
measured for any person, then the meter readings shall be utilized instead
of the water meter readings. The rate for metered customers shall be as
established by resolution of Borough Council.72
§ 210-15. Protective surcharge program. [Added 11-5-2001 by Ord.
No. 1128]
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ACTION LEVEL — The concentration and/or mass above which the
Borough believes has the potential to cause problems due to differences
in treatability and/or toxicity of a specific discharge.
AVERAGE WASTELOAD SURCHARGE — A surcharge calculated from
the waste analysis, the strength factor and the site's quarterly water
consumption or the actual measured flow to the sewer, based on the
average quantity (in pounds) of surchargeable material discharged.
CHANGED DISCHARGES — Any change that will significantly affect
the quality, composition, color, odor, pH, toxicity or temperature of the
effluent or increase the potential and/or the severity of slug discharges.
LOCAL LIMITS — The maximum concentration of pollutants allowable
in wastewater discharges to the wastewater treatment system.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGE LEVEL — For purpose of the protective
surcharge program, a level above which a user is not allowed to
71.Editor's Note: See Ch. A285, Fees.
72.Editor's Note: See Ch. A285, Fees.
§ 210-12 CATASAUQUA CODE § 210-15
170:298
discharge, based on concentration and/or mass for any parameter
which the Borough believes has the potential to cause pass through,
interference, NPDES violations or any other operating problems. The
prohibited discharge level is also known as the cease and desist level.
SINGLE EVENT SURCHARGE — A flat rate surcharge for each
parameter in a high strength discharge not covered by quarterly
surcharges.
SLUDGE PROTECTION REQUIREMENTS — The maximum
concentration of pollutants allowable in wastewater discharges to the
wastewater treatment plant, which are calculated to ensure the
greatest opportunities for the plant to dispose of its sludge in the most
efficient and economic means available.
STRENGTH FACTOR (SF) — The strength factor compensates for the
additional plant capacity utilized and the increased operating expenses
from accepting wastes at or over the action level. The SF will be 1.0
below the action level and 2.0 for wastes at or above the action level
with prior Borough approval.
SURCHARGE — An additional amount levied against a discharger to
the Catasauqua wastewater treatment system whether located within
the Borough or in one of the contributing communities, imposed as a
result of sampling results indicating a discharge above an enumerated
level.
SURCHARGE SAMPLING MANHOLE — An approved sampling
manhole purchased and/or installed by the user, with provision for flow
measurement.
B. Protective surcharge program.
(1) General purpose. The protective surcharge program is established
to regulate discharges to the wastewater treatment system and
plant which have characteristics, and/or strengths, which require
additional treatment, additional plant capacity or could cause pant
upsets, NPDES violations or other operating problems. The
program establishes levels of discharge for various parameters and
provides a table for calculating the surcharge to be levied at
various thresholds of discharge. The program also authorizes the
Borough to prohibit discharges of certain materials.
(2) Surcharge schedule and formula.
(a) The formula for calculating the average waste load surcharge
is:
QS = CONC(mg/l) x FLOW(MG) x 8.34 x SF x R
Where:
QS =Quarterly surcharge for each surchargeable
parameter.
§ 210-15 JUNKYARDS § 210-15
170:299
CONC =The surchargeable concentration, the
difference between the effluent concentration
and the surcharge level in mg/l.
FLOW =The total quarterly flow in millions of gallons.
8.34 =The conversion factor from mg/l to pounds.
SF =The strength factor.
R =Surcharge rate.
Surcharge Levels (mg/l) and Rates ($/lb)
Parameter TSS BOD COD NH3-N TKN
Surcharge
Level
200 200 600 30 75
Action Level 600 600 1,200 120 600
Prohibited
Level
850 850 2,500 200 1,000
Surcharge
Rates
(See Note 1)
Table Notes:
1. The surcharge rates are established by Borough Council
by resolution from time to time.
2. Surcharges from other parameters may be adopted by
resolution at a later date.
3. In situations where BOD and/or NH3 - N are not
representative of the strength of industrial and
commercial discharges, surcharges for COD and/or TKN
may be substituted. Since some materials can vary
widely in treatability and toxicity, the discharge of any
materials within the above limits that the Borough
believes cannot be treated effectively or will cause other
problems, can be restricted or prohibited.
4. In addition to the surcharges calculated from the above
table the cost of sampling and analysis will be added
to the invoice. Fees for source identification and control
may also be included.
(3) Single event surcharge.
(a) A minimum of one sample is required to access a single event
surcharge. These surcharges apply regardless of the quantity
discharged. For each parameter over the surcharge level the
single event surcharge shall be calculated according to the
following schedule:
[1] Up to twice the surcharge level: one times event rate.
§ 210-15 CATASAUQUA CODE § 210-15
170:300
[2] Over twice the surcharge level: two times event rate.
[3] Over the action level: four times event rate.
[4] Over the prohibited level: eight times event rate.
(b) The event rate shall be established by resolution of Borough
Council from time to time.73
(c) In addition to the surcharges calculated from the above table
the cost of sampling and analysis will be added to the invoice.
Fees for source identification and control may also be included.
(4) General regulations.
(a) The payment of a surcharge is not an authorization for
discharge. Discharges are only authorized by permit or permit
amendment. Unauthorized discharges will be surcharged and
may also be subject to enforcement action. Enforcement action
may also be taken for each parameter exceeding the action or
prohibited levels. Discharges of the prohibited level must
immediately cease.
(b) Total prohibitions. In cases where the Borough believes that a
material could cause problems at very low levels due to its
toxicity and/or treatability, the prohibited level will be set at
zero and no discharge will be permitted.
(c) When an action level is reached, the Borough will make a
decision based on the specific circumstances ranging from
allowing the discharge to continue, to requiring pretreatment,
to a temporary or permanent prohibition. Discharges above the
action level are prohibited unless specifically approved by the
Borough in writing. The Borough will only approve a discharge
above the action level if the user demonstrates to the
Borough's satisfaction that the discharge will not cause
problems. When a discharge exceeds the action level, the
Borough may also require pretreatment, issue a temporary or
permanent discharge prohibition, or take other action as
deemed necessary, including the establishment of a schedule
for the user to bring its discharge into compliance with the
action level.
(d) Flow equalization will be required for large variations in flow
rates and/or pollutants concentration. Flow equalization is not
the same as dilution of waste discharges, which are not
allowed.
(5) Sampling and analysis costs for surcharges. The costs for sampling
and analysis will be added to the surcharge.
73.Editor's Note: See Ch. A285, Fees.
§ 210-15 JUNKYARDS § 210-15
170:301
(6) Random sampling. The Borough will conduct sampling without
notifying the user. The users must grant twenty-four-hour sampling
access to the site as specified by Borough ordinance. Sampling
points must be located outside any buildings unless the Borough is
given permission in writing for unrestricted access without
notification and/or interference.
(7) Surcharge sampling. The Borough will collect either timeproportioned
composite samples or grab samples depending on the
types of sampling point, which in many cases, will be a sewer
cleanout. Where necessary, a single grab may be used. In certain
instances, the Borough may require the installation of an approved
sampling manhole with recording flow measuring equipment
(compatible with Borough sampling equipment) so flow
proportional composite sampling can be used.
(8) Source identification and control fees. When unusual and/or
problem discharges are detected in the collection system, at the
treatment plant or in the plant's effluent to the river, the Borough
must try to identify and control these discharges. The identification
and control activities can be time consuming and expensive, at
times requiring the use of outside consultants, contract
laboratories, engineers and attorneys. When a probable source (or
sources) of discharges causing actual or potential problems is
identified, the Borough will assess a fee to cover its identification
and control expenses. (For example: Sampling and analysis costs,
administrative time and consultant and attorney fees.) The
minimum fee for these extras services will be as set from time to
time by resolution of Borough Council.74 Based on the
circumstances of the incident, an enforcement action may also be
initiated.75
(9) Responsibility for surcharges. In the event that the materials
qualifying for a surcharge are found in the effluent from multitenant
building without sampling points for each occupant, the
individual or firm whose name appears on the water/sewer bill (for
example: landlord, building owner or management company) will
be responsible for the surcharge.
(10) Responsibility for pollutant discharges. In the event that the
materials harmful to the environment and/or in violation of federal,
state and local government rules and regulations are found in the
effluent from a multi-tenant building (without individual sampling
points for each occupant) the individual or firm whose name
appears on the water/sewer bill will be held responsible for taking
action to control the source and will be subject to the actions listed
in the Enforcement Response Plan.
74.Editor's Note: See Ch. A285, Fees.
75.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 210-15 CATASAUQUA CODE § 210-15
170:302
(11) Sampling for average surcharges. A minimum of three samples,
collected on either consecutive or nonconsecutive days are
required. Any screening sampling done may count as part of the
total sampling required. Sampling times may be based on the site's
operating schedule. Resampling will be done at least annually.
Resampling can be requested when a documented and approved
changed discharge occurs.
(12) Revised surcharges, action and prohibited levels. Surcharges,
action and prohibited levels can be revised by ordinance and/or
permit amendment based on operating experience and
environmental impact.
(13) Allocation of plant capacity. The Borough can allocate and/or limit
the amount of any material discharges as necessary.
(14) Request for information on discharge volumes. The user will be
sent a request requiring that copies of the water bill(s) for the
previous six months be sent to the Borough within 15 days. The
number of operating days during each billing period must be
marked clearly on each bill. Other information may also be
requested. If the water bill(s) is/are not furnished within 15 days,
the Borough will estimate the flow for calculating the surcharge.
Adjustments may be made after the water bill(s) or other flow data
has been received.
(15) Alternative methods of effluent flow measurement. If there are
reasons why using the water bill data will not serve as a measure of
effluent flow, the user should propose a suitable alternative method
to the Borough. Any method approved must be installed at the
user's expense.
(16) Adjustments/questions. If adjustments are requested or there are
any questions about the surcharges, a written request for review
should be submitted to the Pretreatment Coordinator within 30
days of imposition of the surcharge(s).
(17) Failure to pay. Those that fail to pay surcharges after two notices,
will be issued a civil penalty or a summons to appear before the
District Justice. The Borough has the option to issue "Letters of
Violation" instead of notices.
(18) Split samples. When requested, the Borough will split samples as
outlined below. The Borough reserves the right to obtain QA/QC
Data from the user's lab before agreeing to split. The Borough also
reserves the right to split with a referee lab. If a referee lab is used,
the sewer user will be billed for half the costs. The results from all
participating labs will be averaged, if statistically relevant.
(19) Procedures for splitting samples. To assure a random sample, the
Borough will notify the sewer user only on the day of sample
collection. The users designated contact will be notified a minimum
§ 210-15 JUNKYARDS § 210-15
170:303
§ 210-16. Minimum sewer rental for metered water users.
[Amended 8-4-1986 by Ord. No. 903]
All persons having property serviced by the sewer system operated by the
Borough of Catasauqua, who also have metered water, shall pay a minimum
sewer rental per quarter per unit as set by resolution of Borough Council.76
§ 210-17. Determination of water consumed.
§ 210-18. Industrial establishments which exclude water wastes
from sewer system.
of one hour prior to sample collection. Persons (either in the user's
employ or the user's contract lab) must use a "Chain of Custody"
form and keep it on file for one year. If the user's representative
does not show up within 15 minutes of the scheduled time, the
Borough has no obligation to split the sample.
A. Volume of all water consumed, to be used for billing sewage service
charges under this article, shall include water purchased from the
water company plus water obtained from sources other than the water
company and shall be determined:
(1) From meters installed and maintained by the water company; or
(2) From meters approved by the Borough but installed and
maintained by the property owner; or
(3) From estimates or measurements made by the Borough in
situations where meters are inaccurate or inoperative.
B. Where a single meter is used to measure water supplied to two or more
premises, properties or establishments, the quantity of water used will
be divided equitably to each of such premises, properties or
establishments for billing purposes.
A. Noncontaminated waste waters and waters which are used solely for
cooling purposes shall be excluded from the sewer system and the
sewer rental charge will be based on water metered, less water so
excluded at the rates provided for in this article. Similar credit may be
allowed for water consumed in connection with steam generation or
other purposes where no sewage or wastes result. The volume of water
excluded from the sewer system may be determined from meters
installed and maintained by the industrial establishment or from
estimates or measurements made by the Borough or the industrial
establishment may elect to measure the volume of wastes actually
discharged into the sewer system. For this purpose, any industrial
establishment, at its own expense, may install and maintain a recording
and totalizing flow meter approved by the Borough for measuring the
76.Editor's Note: See Ch. A285, Fees.
§ 210-15 CATASAUQUA CODE § 210-18
170:304
§ 210-19. Inspection of meters by Borough.
The Borough through its duly authorized representatives shall have access
at all reasonable times to inspect meters used for establishing or
determining water consumption or sewage flow.
§ 210-20. Time and methods of payment.
Lateral and connection charges (§ 210-11), shall be payable upon
application for a permit to make such installation. Sewer rentals or charges
shall be paid quarterly and quarterly billings for sewer rentals shall be made
by bills dated on the first days of January, April, July and October of each
year. In the case of metered persons, the bill shall be for the quarterly
calendar period immediately preceding the date of the bill. In the case of
nonmetered persons the bill shall be for the next quarter.
§ 210-21. Penalties, delinquent sewer rentals and liens. [Amended
6-5-1989 by Ord. No. 945]
sewage and wastes discharged to the sewer system in which case
sewer rental rates applicable under the provisions of this article to
water consumed per quarter shall be applied to the gallons of sewage
discharged into the sewer system per quarter plus applicable
surcharges for strength of wastes under § 210-15.
B. Any industrial establishment which, after taking advantage of this
section, bypasses or otherwise interferes with the correct measurement
of sewage, shall be backfilled for all previous credits and thereafter
deprived of the benefits of this section.
A. All sewer bills not paid within 30 days from the date of billing shall have
an additional sum of 15% added to the bill.
B. If the sewer bill for a property shall remain unpaid for a period of 60
days from the date of billing, formal notice to the owner thereof that the
Borough will institute procedures to place a lien against the property
for the unpaid bill, will be sent. 15 days after the letter has been sent, if
no payment has been received, then the Solicitor shall be notified to
immediately file a lien against said property and proceed under the
"Municipal Claims and Liens Act" to collect the sum due and owing.
C. All persons whose properties are connected to the sewer system must
give the Borough their correct address. Failure to receive bills will not
be considered an excuse for nonpayment nor permit an extension of the
period during which bills are payable at face.
D. Any payment or payments made on a sewer bill shall be credited in the
following order: first to any interest accrued, then to any legal costs,
then penalties, then delinquent balances, then current balances.
§ 210-18 JUNKYARDS § 210-22
170:305
§ 210-22. Segregation of sewer revenues.
The funds received by the Borough from the collection of the connection
charges, or from sewer rentals and all penalties thereon as herein provided
for, and any fines collected by the Borough in connection with the sewer
system, shall be segregated and kept separate and apart from all other
funds of the Borough, and shall be used only for the purpose of defraying
the expenses of the Borough in the operation, maintenance, repair,
alteration, inspection, depreciation or other expenses in relation to such
sewer system and for such payments as the Borough may be required to
make under any lease or agreement it may enter into for and of, or in
connection with, said sewer system with the Authority, in accordance with
the provisions of the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 385, as amended.
§ 210-23. Rules and regulations.
The Borough reserves the right to, and may from time to time, adopt, revise,
amend and readopt such rules and regulations as it deems necessary and
proper for the use and operation of the sewer system, and all such rules and
regulations shall be and become a part of this article.
§ 210-22 CATASAUQUA CODE § 210-23
170:306
ARTICLE III
Wastewater Treatment
[Adopted 4-4-1983 by Ord. No. 852 (Ch. XIV, Part 3A, of the 1962
Code)]
§ 210-24. Definitions and abbreviations. [Amended 1-9-1990 by Ord.
No. 951; 9-6-1994 by Ord. No. 1018; 11-6-1995 by Ord. No. 1044]
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms, as
used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated:
A. Abbreviations. The following abbreviations, not previously enumerated
with a definition, shall have the designated meanings: [Amended
4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1287]
BMP - Best management practice
CAP - Corrective action plan
CFR - Code of Federal Regulations
COD - Chemical oxygen demand
gpd - Gallons per day
L - Liter
mg - Milligrams
O&M - Operation and maintenance
POC - Pollutant of concern
RCRA - Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
SNC - Significant noncompliance
SWDA - Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.)
TSS - Total suspended solids
USC - United States Code
B. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the
Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
ACTION LEVELS — Pollutant concentration guidelines which are set
when, in the Borough’s opinion, a discharge, alone or in combination
with other discharges, will cause or will have the potential to cause
problems as listed in § 210-26B(1). Action levels can apply to one or
more parameters discharged by one or more sewer users. New action
level guidelines can be set at any time when, in the Borough’s opinion,
they are needed to prevent problems such as those previously listed
in § 210-26B(1). All affected sewer users will be notified in writing.
If an existing discharge or a proposed new discharge exceeds or has
the potential to exceed any action level (in the then-current permit or
set after permit issuance), the user must submit a corrective action
§ 210-24 JUNKYARDS § 210-24
170:307
plan (CAP) to reduce the levels of the pollutant(s) in its discharge to
amounts acceptable to the Borough. This plan must include sufficient
information on the site-specific conditions to demonstrate that this
discharge will not cause any adverse effects such as those listed. The
Borough can also require that a Part B watershed protection permit
application be submitted as part of the plan. If the CAP is found to be
unacceptable, the user may be required to temporarily or permanently
cease or not begin such discharges until the action plan is approved.
When appropriate, a reasonable time to correct the problem(s) may be
given. Action levels can also be set for any discharge when there is
little or no information to demonstrate that the volume and strength
of the proposed discharge will not cause adverse effects. The Borough
reserves the right to apply or waive any action level or CAP for one
or more sewer users based on the site-specific information that they
submit.[Added 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1287]
APPEAL PROCESS FOR PERMIT CONDITIONS — If the sewer user
believes a permit condition such as an action level, corrective action
plan, best management practice or conditional permit is not
appropriate, the user can petition the Pretreatment Coordinator for
reconsideration. If the issue is not resolved, the sewer user can appeal
to Borough Council by filing a notice of appeal with the Manager as
described in Catasauqua Ordinance § 210-42 for the appeal of civil
penalty assessments.[Added 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1287]
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The regional administrator for Region III of
the United States Environmental Protection Agency, or his designee.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE INDUSTRIAL USER —
If the industrial user is a corporation, "authorized representative"
shall mean:
The president, secretary, treasurer or vice president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any
other person who performs similar policy or decision making
functions for the corporation.
(a)
The manager of one or more manufacturing, production or
operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having
gross annual sales or expenditures of $25,000,000 (in secondquarter
1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been
assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with
corporate procedures.
(b)
(1)
If the industrial user is a partnership, or sole proprietorship, an
"authorized representative" shall mean a general partner or
proprietor, respectively.
(2)
If the industrial user is a federal, state or local governmental
facility, an "authorized representative" shall mean a director to
(3)
§ 210-24 CATASAUQUA CODE § 210-24
170:308
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMPs — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in this
article and 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b). BMPs also include treatment
requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site
runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw
materials storage.[Added 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1287]
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure as described in the standard methods for the
examination of water and wastewater, in five days at 20° C., expressed
in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter).
BIO-TOXIC MATERIALS — A POC consisting of a material or a
combination of materials that, even in small amounts, can kill
microorganisms and thus can adversely affect biological wastewater
and sludge treatment processes and cause aquatic toxicity or degrade
water quality. These materials include but are not limited to
bactericides, fungicides, insecticides, pesticides, or germicides.
[Added 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1287]
BOROUGH — The Borough of Catasauqua or Borough Council of the
Borough of Catasauqua.
BOROUGH MANAGER — The Borough Manager of the Borough of
Catasauqua or his duly appointed deputy, agent or representative.
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL
STANDARD — Any regulations containing pollutant discharge limits
promulgated by the U.S. EPA in accordance with §§ 307(b) and (c) of the
Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which apply to a specific category of industrial
users and which appear at 40 CFR, Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts
405-471.
COLOR — The optical density at the visual wave length of maximum
absorption, relative to distilled water. One hundred percent
transmittance is equivalent to zero (0.0) optical density.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — The sample resulting from the combination of
individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an
increment of either flow or time.
oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the
government facility, or his/her designee.
The individuals described in Subsections (1) through (3), above,
may designate another authorized representative if the
authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the
individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the
facility from which the discharge originates or having overall
responsibility for environmental managers for the company, and
the written authorization is submitted to the Borough of
Catasauqua.
(4)
§ 210-24 JUNKYARDS § 210-24
170:309
COOLING WATER — The water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, during which the only pollutant
added to the water is heat.
DOMESTIC WASTES — Liquid wastes:
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA — The U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term may
also be used as a designation for the Regional Water Management
Division Director or other duly authorized official of said agency.
EXISTING SOURCE — Any source of discharge, the construction or
operation of which commenced prior to the publication of proposed
categorical pretreatment standards which will be applicable to such
source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with
§ 307 of the Act.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling,
storage and sale of food.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample taken from a waste stream on a one-time
basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period
of time not to exceed 15 minutes.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE — The introduction of
pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under
§ 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act.
INDUSTRIAL USER or USER — A source of indirect discharge.
INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER — The liquid wastes resulting from the
processes employed in industrial, manufacturing, trade or business
establishments, as distinct from domestic wastes.
INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT —
The maximum concentration (or loading) of a pollutant allowed to be
discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete
or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate
and the duration of the sampling event.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, both:
From the noncommercial preparation, cooking and handling of
food; or
(1)
Containing human excrement and similar matter from the sanitary
conveniences of dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial
facilities and institutions.
(2)
Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or
operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal;
(1)
Therefore is a cause of a violation of POTW's NPDES permit
(including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation)
(2)
§ 210-24 CATASAUQUA CODE § 210-24
170:310
MEDICAL WASTE — Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood
and blood byproducts, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, fomites,
etiologic agents, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially
contaminated laboratory wastes and dialysis wastes.
NAMED USER — The individual or firm whose name appears on the
water/sewer bill.[Added 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1287]
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM
(NPDES) — The program for issuing, conditioning and denying permits
for the discharge of pollutants from point sources into the navigable
waters, the contiguous zone and the oceans pursuant to Section 402 of
the Act.
NEW SOURCE —
or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance
with the following statutory provisions and regulations of permits
issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations):
Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal
Act (SWDA) including Title II commonly referred to as the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and
including state regulations contained in any State Sludge
Management Plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the
SWDA, the Clear Air Act, the Toxics Substances Control Act,
and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act.
(a)
Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there
is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
started after the publication of proposed treatment standards
under Section 307(c) of the Act which shall be applicable to each
such source for such standards as are thereafter promulgated in
accordance with that section, provided that:
The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at
a site at which no other source is located; or
(a)
The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces
the process or production equipment that causes the discharge
of pollutants at an existing source; or
(b)
The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation is substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In
determining whether these are substantially independent
factors such as the extent to which the new facility is
integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the
new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as
is the existing source, should be considered.
(c)
(1)
Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results
in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does
(2)
§ 210-24 JUNKYARDS § 210-24
170:311
PASS THROUGH — A discharge or pollutant which cannot be treated
adequately by POTW, and therefore exits into waters of the United
States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction
with the discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a
violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including
an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation).
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, partnership, corporation,
association, group or society and includes the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and agencies, districts, commissions and political
subdivisions created by or pursuant to state law, and agencies of the
United States government and their agents.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen
ions in grams per liter of solution.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical waste, chemical
waste, industrial wastes, biological materials, radioactive material,
heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt,
agricultural and industrial wastes, and the characteristics of the
wastewater [i.e., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, chemical
oxygen demand (COD), toxicity, odor].
POLLUTANTS OF CONCERN (POCs) — Any pollutant that might be
reasonably expected to be discharged to the treatment plant in
sufficient amounts that pass through or interfere with the plant,
not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting
the criteria of Subsection (1)(b) or (c), above, but otherwise alters,
replaces or adds to the existing process or production equipment.
Construction of a new source as defined under this subsection has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
Begun or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site
construction program:
Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
[1]
Significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or
facilities which are necessary for the replacement,
assembly or installation of new source facilities or
equipment.
[2]
(a)
Entered into a binding contractual obligation for purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in
its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase
or contracts which can be terminated or modified without
substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering and
design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under
this subsection.
(b)
§ 210-24 CATASAUQUA CODE § 210-24
170:312
contaminates the sludge, causes problems in the collection system,
jeopardizes the worker or is otherwise designated as such by the
Borough.[Added 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1287]
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of introducing such
pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained
by physical, chemical or biological processes, by process changes, or
by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants
unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment imposed on any industrial user,
other than a pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS — All applicable federal rules and
regulations implementing Section 307 of the Act, as set forth in 40
CFR, Subchapter N, Parts 401-471, as well as any nonconflicting state
or local standards. In case of conflicting standards or regulations, the
more stringent thereof shall be applied.
PROACTIVE CONTROL OF POCs — Nondomestic users shall identify
actual or potential POCs and biotoxics, including any POCs and
biotoxics not specifically identified in this permit or Borough
ordinances, to prevent pass-through and interference, personnel and
public exposure and collection system problems.[Added 4-1-2013 by
Ord. No. 1287]
PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED
DISCHARGES — Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain
substances.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) — A "treatment
works" as defined by § 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292), which is
owned by the state or municipality. This definition includes any devices
or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and
reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes and any conveyances which
convey wastewater to a treatment plant. The term also means the
municipal entity having jurisdiction over the industrial users and the
responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the treatment
works.
SEPTIC TANK WASTE — Any sewage from holding tanks such as
vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers and septic tanks.
SEWAGE — The normal water-carried household and toilet wastes
from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial
establishments.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER —
Except as provided in Subsection (2) of this definition, the term
"significant industrial user" means:
(1)
§ 210-24 JUNKYARDS § 210-24
170:313
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE — Occurs when a significant
industrial user (or any other industrial user whose violation meets
Subsection (3), (4) or (8) below has a violation of this article, and
said violation meets one or more of the following criteria: [Amended
4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1287]
All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards under 40 CFR § 403.6 and 40 CFR, Chapter I,
Subchapter N; and
(a)
Any other industrial user that discharges an average of 25,000
gallons per day or more of processed wastewater to the POTW
(excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and blow down
wastewater); contributes a process waste stream which makes
up 5% or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic
capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or is designed as such
by the control authority as defined in 40 CFR § 403.12(a),
a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement [in accordance with 40 CFR § 403.8(f)(6)].
(b)
Upon the finding that an industrial user meeting the criteria in
Subsection (1)(b) of this definition has no reasonable potential
for adversely affecting the POTW's operation for violating any
pretreatment standard or requirement, the control authority may
at any time on its own initiative or in response to a petition received
from an industrial user or POTW and in accordance with 40 CFR
§ 403.8(f)(6), determine that such industrial user is not a significant
industrial user.
(2)
Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken for
the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed (by
any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement,
including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l);
(1)
Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of all of the measurements taken for the same
pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed
the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement,
including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l)
multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC=1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil,
and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
(2)
Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as
defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l) (daily maximum, long-term average,
instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the POTW
determines has caused, alone or in combination with other
discharges, interference or pass-through (including endangering
the health of POTW personnel or the general public);
(3)
§ 210-24 CATASAUQUA CODE § 210-24
170:314
SLUG LOAD — Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which
would cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards of this
article or any discharge of nonroutine, episodic nature including, but
not limited to, an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) CODE — A
classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual
issued by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or immediately following
any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and
which is removable by laboratory filtering.
TOXIC POLLUTANT — One of 126 pollutants, or combination of those
pollutants, listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA under
the provision of § 307 (33 U.S.C. § 1317) of the Act.
TREATMENT PLANT EFFLUENT — Any discharge of pollutants from
the POTW into the waters of the state.
UNPOLLUTED WATER — Water not containing any pollutants limited or
prohibited by the effluent standards if effect, or water whose discharge
will not cause any violation of receiving water quality standards.
USER — Any person who discharges, causes or permits the discharge
of wastewater into the Borough's wastewater treatment system.
Commercial and industrial users shall be categorized into levels, as
follows: "Level I users" shall mean significant industrial users, as
elsewhere defined in this article; "Level II users" shall mean those
Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or
has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority
pursuant to § 210-30 B(6) of this chapter to halt or prevent such a
discharge;
(4)
Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control
mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction,
completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
(5)
Failure to provide, within 45 days after the due date, required
reports such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance
reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on
compliance with compliance schedules;
(6)
(7) Failure to accurately report noncompliance;
Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a
violation of best management practices, which the POTW
determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of
the local pretreatment program.
(8)
§ 210-24 JUNKYARDS § 210-24
170:315
§ 210-25. General sanitary regulations. [Amended 7-2-1984 by Ord.
No. 871; 6-3-1985 by Ord. No. 889; 1-9-1990 by Ord. No. 951]
sewer users who are not classified as significant industrial users but
whose actual and/or potential discharges could cause a significant
adverse impact on the treatment plant, its employees, the collection
system, the Lehigh River and the downstream water consumers; "Level
III users" shall mean those users with actual or potential discharges
which should cause only minimal adverse impact on the treatment
plant, its employees, the collection system, the Lehigh River and
downstream water consumers, but who must follow the rules and
regulations for sewer use and be aware of the need for pollution
prevention.
USER CLASSIFICATION — A classification of user based on the 1972
(or subsequent) edition of the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC)
Manual prepared by the Office of Management and Budget.
WASTEWATER — The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic
wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and
institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and
stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which
is discharged into or permitted to enter the Borough's wastewater
system.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT — That
portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment of sewage and
industrial waste.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEM (SYSTEM) — Any devices,
facilities, structures, equipment or works owned, leased or used by
the Borough for the purpose of the transmission, storage, treatment,
recycling and reclamation of industrial and domestic wastes, or
necessary to recycle or reuse water at the most economical cost over
the estimated life of the system, including intercepting sewers, outfall
sewers, sewage collection systems, pumping, power and other
equipment, and their appurtenances; extensions, improvements,
remodeling, additions and alterations thereof; elements essential to
provide a reliable recycled supply such as standby treatment units and
clear well facilities; and any works, including site acquisition of the land
that will be an integral part of the treatment process or is used for
ultimate disposal of residues resulting from such treatment.
C. Terms not otherwise defined herein shall be as adopted in the latest
edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, the
American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control
Federation.
D. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive or discretionary. The use of
the singular shall be construed to include the plural and the plural shall
include the singular as indicated by the context of its use.
§ 210-24 CATASAUQUA CODE § 210-25
170:316
A. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any watercourse within the
Borough, or in any area of the Borough, any sewage or other polluted
waters or industrial wastewater except as hereinafter provided.
B. It shall be unlawful for any user to discharge into a storm sewer any
sewage or unauthorized industrial wastewater.
C. It shall be unlawful to construct any privy, privy vault, septic tank,
cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
D. The owner of any premises in the Borough accessible to the sewage
system is hereby required, at his expense, to install suitable toilet
facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with said
sanitary sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within
90 days after date of official notice to do so.
E. No user shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use,
alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first
obtaining a written permit from the Borough of Catasauqua.
F. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building; except that where one building stands at the rear of another
on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be
constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, yard, or
driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to
the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer for
purposes of this article, provided appropriate written agreement
therefor shall be made between the affected property owners.
G. Existing building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings
only when they are found, after examination and testing by the Borough
Code Enforcement Officer, to meet all requirements of this article.
H. The size, slope, alignment and materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe,
jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the
requirements of the Building Code and Plumbing Code77 and other
applicable rules and regulations of the Borough. In the absence of code
provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set
forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manuals
of Practice shall apply.
I. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at a depth below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved
means and discharged to the building sewer. Exceptions to this
requirement shall be requested in writing and approved by the Borough
Code Enforcement Officer.
77.Editor's Note: See Ch. 130, Codes, Uniform.
§ 210-25 JUNKYARDS § 210-25
170:317
§ 210-26. Prohibitions and limitation on wastewater discharges.
[Amended 6-3-1985 by Ord. No. 889; 1-9-1990 by Ord. No. 951;
1-6-1992 by Ord. No. 976; 8-3-1992 by Ord. No. 989; 11-6-1995 by
Ord. No. 1044]
J. No user shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation
drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is
connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
K. The connection of the building drain to the building sewer or of the
building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements
of the Building Code and Plumbing Code with procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manuals of
Practice. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight.
Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be
approved in writing by the approving authority before installation.
L. When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be
connected to said sewer within 90 days, but if the building sewer shall
be declared a health hazard by the Borough Health Officer, the building
sewer shall be immediately connected to the public sewer. At the time
of connection, the private sewage disposal system shall be cleaned of
sludge filled with approved material.
M. The owner of any improved property shall maintain and repair the
building drain, the building sewer, and lateral from the boundary of the
property to the building at his own expense, and he shall remove all
trees, tree roots and other obstructions to the building drain, the
building sewer and the lateral up to the property owner's boundary line.
The Borough of Catasauqua shall maintain and repair the lateral from
the public main or street sewer to the owner's property line at the
Borough's expense and shall remove all trees, tree roots and other
obstructions to the lateral.
N. It shall be unlawful for any party to discharge into the sewage system
operated by the Borough of Catasauqua any waste or materials which is
in violation of federal law or Environmental Protection Agency
regulations. Promulgated as of now or in the future, including federal
pretreatment standards.
A. Prohibitions on wastewater discharges.
(1) No user shall discharge or deposit or cause or allow to be
discharged or deposited into the wastewater treatment system any
wastewater which contains the following:
(a) Oils and grease.
[1] Oil and grease concentrations or amounts from industrial
facilities violating federal pretreatment standards.
§ 210-25 CATASAUQUA CODE § 210-26
170:318
[2] Wastewater from industrial facilities containing floatable
fats, wax, grease or oils.
[3] Any oils in amounts that will cause pass through or
interference are prohibited.
(b) Fire/explosive hazard. Liquids, solids or gases which by reason
of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either
alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or
explosion or be injurious in any other way to the wastewater
treatment system or to the operation of the system. At no time
shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at
the point of discharge into the sewer system, be more than 5%
nor any single reading over 10% of the lower explosive limit
(LEL) of the meter. Prohibited materials include, but are not
limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene,
zylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides,
chlorates, perchalorates, bormates, carbides, hydrides and
sulfides. Any waste streams with a closed cup flash point of less
than 140° Fahrenheit or 60° Celsius using test methods
specified in 40 CFR § 261.21.
(c) Noxious material. Noxious or malodorous solids, liquids or
gases, which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes,
are capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life, or
are or may be sufficient to prevent entry into a sewer for its
maintenance and repair.
(d) Improperly shredded garbage. Garbage that has not been
ground or comminuted to such a degree that all particles will
be carried freely in suspension under flow conditions normally
prevailing in the public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/
2 inch in any dimension.
(e) Radioactive wastes. Radioactive wastes or isotopes of such
half-life or concentration that they do not comply with
regulations or orders issued by the appropriate federal and
state agencies having control over their use and which will or
may cause damage or hazards to the sewage facilities or
personnel operating system.
(f) Solid or viscous wastes. Solid or viscous wastes which will or
may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer, or otherwise
interfere with the proper operation of the wastewater
treatment system. Prohibited materials include, but are not
limited to, grease, uncomminuted garbage, animal guts or
tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings,
entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent
lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass
clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood,
§ 210-26 JUNKYARDS § 210-26
170:319
plastic, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or
processing of fuel or lubricating oil, and similar substances.
(g) Excessive discharge rate. Wastewater at a flow rate or
containing such concentrations or quantities of pollutants that
exceed for any time period longer than 15 minutes more than
five times the average twenty-four-hour concentration,
quantities or flow during normal operation and that would
cause a treatment process upset and subsequent loss of
treatment efficiency; or the introduction of any pollutant,
including oxygen-demanding pollutants (such as BOD),
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant
concentration which would cause interference with the POTW.
(h) Toxic substances. Any toxic substances in amounts exceeding
standards promulgated by the Administrator of the United
States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to Section
307(a) of the Act, and chemical elements or compounds,
phenols or other taste or odor-producing substances, or any
other substances which are not susceptible to treatment or
which may interfere with the biological processes or efficiency
of the treatment system, or that will pass through the system.
(i) Unpolluted waters. Any unpolluted water including, but not
limited to, cooling water or of stormwater origin.
(j) Colored discharge. If a nondomestic discharge causes unusual
color in the treatment plant’s influent samples, the wet well or
the primary clarifier inlets, the colored discharge is prohibited
and must be ceased. BMPs to control color can be required.
[Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1287]
(k) Corrosive wastes. Any waste which will cause corrosion or
deterioration of the treatment system. All wastes discharged to
the public sewer system must have a pH value in the range of 6
to 9 standard units. Prohibited materials include, but are not
limited to, acids, sulfides, concentrated chloride and fluoride
compounds and substances which will react with water to form
acidic products.
(l) Interference. Any waste which would cause interference with
the biological processes or efficiency of the treatment system
as defined in this article.
(m) Pass through. Any waste which constitutes a pass through of
the system as defined in this article.
(n) Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the Borough in accordance with § 210-27H.
(o) Temperature. Any wastewater having a temperature that will
inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in
§ 210-26 CATASAUQUA CODE § 210-26
170:320
interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the
temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to
exceed 104° Fahrenheit (40° Celsius).
(p) Any sludges, screenings or other residues from the
pretreatment of industrial waste.
(q) Any medical waste, except as specifically authorized by the
Borough Manager in a wastewater discharge permit.
(r) Any wastewater causing the treatment plant's effluent to fail a
toxicity test.
(s) Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents or
other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the
POTW.
(t) Toxic gases/vapors/fumes. Pollutants which result in the
presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a
quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety
problems.
(2) Wastes prohibited in this section shall not be processed or stored in
such a manner that they would be discharged to the POTW. All floor
drains located in process or material storage areas must discharge
to the industrial user's pretreatment facility before connecting with
the POTW.
B. Proactive control of influent pollutants of concern must be given a high
priority. Wastewater entering the treatment plant is treated by
biological organisms growing in slime like biofilms which are
susceptible to inhibition or destruction from relatively small amounts of
toxic influent materials. The plant does not have flow equalization
which increases the risk of harm from short-duration, higherconcentration
influent loadings. Very small amounts of biotoxic
materials, such as biocides, bactericides, herbicides and pesticides can
cause aquatic toxicity and inhibit or kill the plant’s biological treatment
processes. Therefore both the Borough and nondomestic users have a
responsibility to identify actual or potential biotoxics to prevent
problems such as process interference, sludge quality, aquatic toxicity,
personnel and public exposure, collection system issues, regulatory
compliance, and water quality because discharges to the Lehigh River
are under the special protection waters rules. Each industrial user is
limited on the concentration of pollutants allowed to be discharged as
hereinafter detailed. The controlling limit is the lesser of the local limit
or the federal categorical pretreatment standard for each pollutant.
Dilution of any wastewater for the purpose of meeting the limits
hereinafter described, or the local limits or federal categorical
pretreatment standards, shall be considered a violation of this article.
[Amended 11-3-2003 by Ord. No. 1159; 4-1-2013 by Ord. No.
1287]
§ 210-26 JUNKYARDS § 210-26
170:321
(1) The following are the maximum concentrations of pollutants
allowable, the action level guidelines for pollutants of concern and
surcharge levels of pollutants of concern in wastewater discharges
to the wastewater treatment system. Development of these limits
and levels was done taking into account the existing loading on our
sludge of these pollutants, plant efficiency and total combined flow
from all industrial discharges. These local limits will be reviewed
periodically and may change as a result of changes in the factors
contributing to their development. If such changes are made in the
local limits for pollutants of concern, these changes, with the
required EPA approvals, can be adopted and used in new or revised
permits without further ordinance revisions.
Local Limits for Pollutants of Concern
Parameter
Daily Maximum
Concentration
Biological oxygen demand
(BOD)1
850 mg/l
Total suspended solids (TSS) 850 mg/l
pH 6-9 standard units
Total dissolved solids (TDS) Monitor only
Oil and grease, cyanide,
biotoxics
Enforceable BMPs
NOTES:
1 In situations where, in the Borough's opinion, BOD is not
representative of the strength of industrial and commercial
discharges, and/or COD tests are better for process control
purposes, testing for COD may be substituted for testing for BOD.
Where monitoring for COD is required in a permit or permit
amendment, the permittee will usually not be required to monitor
for BOD. However, if there is a need to know the site's BOD
loading as a percentage of the plant's design capacity, testing for
both BOD and COD may be required.
Action Level Guidelines for Pollutants of Concern
Parameter Action Level (mg/l)
Cadmium 0.104
Chromium 6.97
Copper 1.35
Silver 0.535
Zinc 2.96
Barium 715
§ 210-26 CATASAUQUA CODE § 210-26
170:322
Surcharge Levels for Pollutants of Concern
Surcharge
parameter
TSS BOD COD NH3 N TKN
Surcharge
level
200 mg/l 200 mg/l 600 mg/l 30 mg/l 75 mg/l
Action
level
600 600 1200 120 600
Prohibited
level
850 850 2500 200 1000
Discharges over the prohibited level are not allowed at any time
and must be ceased.
(a) Action level appeal process. The numerical action levels are
guidelines that when exceeded indicate that a CAP is
necessary. The submission of an acceptable CAP is an
enforceable permit condition. If the sewer user believes that
the action level is not appropriate or that a CAP is not
necessary, the user can petition the Borough for
reconsideration by submitting additional information to the
Pretreatment Coordinator to justify the change. If in the
Borough's opinion the data submitted is not sufficient to make
a determination, the discharge above the action level may be
temporarily or permanently denied. In instances where the
Borough must use an outside consultant to evaluate the
information submitted, the user must first agree to compensate
the Borough for the estimated consultant fees. When the
Borough has determined that discharges over the action level
are not acceptable, all such discharges must be ceased or the
permit can be revoked and service terminated. The permit can
also be amended to exclude any discharges of the specific
materials exceeding the action level.
(2) Federal categorical pretreatment standards. Any categorical
industry discharging to the POTW must also comply with the
categorical industrial limits established by EPA. There are too many
types of categorical industries for the federal categorical
pretreatment standards to be listed here. Any industrial user which
would be regulated under the categorical pretreatment standards
will have those standards listed in its industrial discharge permit.
The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR, Chapter
I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471, are incorporated by reference
herein.
(3) Best management practices for additional pollutants of concern.
Enforceable best management practices are required for
discharges containing significant amounts of materials such as
arsenic, lead, mercury, molybdenum, nickel, selenium, silver,
toxics, biocides, dissolved solids, and any material which in the
§ 210-26 JUNKYARDS § 210-26
170:323
Borough’s opinion is a POC because it will cause or have the
potential to cause environmental problems such as those listed in
action levels. BMPs must be preapproved before any discharges
will be authorized and will be enforceable permit conditions.
[Added 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1287]
C. Special agreements. Nothing in this section shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the
Borough and any user of the wastewater treatment system whereby
wastewater of unusual strength or character is accepted into the
system and specially treated to be acceptable, subject to any payments
or user charges as may be applicable. Local standards set forth in this
article may be waived by special agreement but this provision does not
allow waiver of any national pretreatment standards.
(1) Any special agreement is prohibited from waiving any other federal
retreatment requirements. [Added 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1287]
(2) One of the conditions of any special agreement is that the total
loading for any pollutant allocated to all users does not exceed the
maximum allowable industrial loading calculated as part of the
most recently accepted local limits evaluation. [Added 4-1-2013
by Ord. No. 1287]
(3) Any special agreement must be entered into and authorized in
writing. [Added 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1287]
D. Concentrations. Concentrations apply at the point where industrial
waste is discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic
substances are for "total" metal unless indicated otherwise. At his
discretion, the Borough Manager may impose mass limitations in
addition to or in place of the concentration based limitations set forth
above in Subsection B of this section.
E. Dilution. No industrial user shall ever increase the use of the process
water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or
complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with
a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable
pretreatment standard or requirement. The Borough Manager may
impose mass limitations on industrial users which are using dilution to
meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other
cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
F. Sludge protection requirements (SPR's). [Added 11-3-2003 by Ord.
No. 1158]
(1) The following are the maximum sludge protection requirement
levels allowable in wastewater discharges to the wastewater
treatment plant. Each industrial or commercial user actively
discharging pollutants that could accumulate in the sludge must
comply with the SPR's. If the discharge level exceeds the SPR's, the
user must develop a plan to come into compliance within a
§ 210-26 CATASAUQUA CODE § 210-26
170:324
reasonable period of time as approved by the Borough of
Catasauqua or cease discharging the problem waste stream.
Parameter
EPA Clean Sludge
(EQ) Limit
(mg/kg)
Daily Maximum
Concentration
(mg/l)
Zinc 2,800 1.25
Chromium 1,5001 0.7
Copper 1,500 0.42
Nickel 420 0.15
Lead 300 0.07
Selenium 100 0.1
Molybdenum 752 0.06
Arsenic 41 0.03
Cadmium 39 0.012
Mercury 17 0.007
NOTES:
1Borough Guideline.
2EPA Ceiling Limit.
(2) The Borough reserves the right to revise these limits any time
based on observational data. The Borough also reserves the right to
set more stringent limits for any pollutant, such as reactive cyanide
or reactive sulfide, if actual or potential discharges are believed to
adversely effect sludge quality and the landfill or land application
of the sludge.
(a) Reactivity.
Parameter
EPA Sludge Limit
(mg/kg)
Daily Maximum
Concentration
(mg/l)
Reactive Cyanide 250 0.05
Reactive Sulfide 500 0.1
(b) If reactive sulfide and/or reactive cyanide exceed or have the
potential to exceed 50% of their respective limits,
pretreatment is required.
(3) Being able to comply with an SPR is not an authorization to
discharge a nondomestic and/or toxic pollutant or domestic
pollutant in quantities exceeding normal domestic levels.
Authorization to discharges only granted by the issuance of a
§ 210-26 JUNKYARDS § 210-26
170:325
§ 210-27. Control of prohibited wastes. [Amended 6-3-1985 by Ord.
No. 889; 1-1-1990 by Ord. No. 951; 11-6-1995 by Ord. No. 1044]
permit, an emended permit or a letter of approval (which requires
a submission of a permit application or a notification of changed
discharge).
A. Regulatory actions. If wastewaters containing any substance described
in § 210-26 of this article are discharged or proposed to be discharged
into the sewer system of the Borough of Catasauqua or any sewer
system which is tributary thereto, or if the industrial user due to plant
setup or chemical storage considerations might require a slug/spill
prevention plan regardless of what they are or plan to be discharging,
the Borough Manager and the Borough Solicitor shall take all actions
against the user necessary to:
(1) Prohibit the discharge of such wastewater.
(2) Require a user to demonstrate that in-plant modifications will
reduce or eliminate the discharge of such substances in conformity
with this article.
(3) Require pretreatment, including storage facilities, or flow
equalization necessary to reduce or eliminate the objectionable
characteristics or substances so that the discharge will not violate
these rules and regulations.
(4) Require the user making, causing or allowing the discharge to pay
any additional cost or expense incurred by the Borough for
handling and treating excess loads imposed on the treatment
system.
(5) Where the Borough Manager determines that an emergency
condition exists requiring the immediate cessation of an offending
discharge into the sewer system, the Borough Manager shall
proceed as follows:
(a) He shall immediately notify the offending user of the situation
and order him to immediately stop the discharge.
(b) If the offender fails to respond to the Borough Manager's order,
the Borough Manager is empowered to do all acts necessary
including shutting off any flow from the offending user to the
sewer system. Wherever practical, the Borough Manager
should give the offending user a second notice just prior to
terminating their flow into the system.
(c) If an offending user feels aggrieved by either actions of the
Borough Manager, he may immediately appeal for a hearing
before Borough Council. Borough Council shall hold a hearing
within 48 hours after request of the same and shall either
§ 210-26 CATASAUQUA CODE § 210-27
170:326
affirm the Borough Manager's decision, reverse the decision,
or modify the same.
(d) It is the intent of this provision that the Borough Manager be
given all necessary powers to terminate immediately any
discharges which create emergency conditions which may
present an imminent danger to the health or welfare of persons
or society and/or which may do damage to the sewage
treatment facility.
B. Submission of plans. Where pretreatment or equalization of wastewater
flows prior to discharge into any part of the wastewater
treatment system is required, plans, specifications and other pertinent
data or information relating to such pretreatment or flow-control
facilities shall first be submitted to the Borough Manager for review
and approval. Such approval shall not exempt the discharge or such
facilities from compliance with any applicable code, ordinance, rule,
regulation or order of any governmental authority. Any subsequent
alterations or additions to such pretreatment or flow control facilities,
or changes to polluted discharges shall not be made without due notice
and prior approval of the Borough Manager, and the issuance of a new
or modified permit as required.
C. Pretreatment facilities operations. If pretreatment or control of waste
flows is required, such facilities shall be maintained in good working
order and operated as efficiently as possible by the owner or operator at
his own cost and expense, subject to the requirements of these rules
and regulations and all other applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
D. Admission to property. Whenever it shall be necessary for the purposes
of these rules and regulations, the Borough Manager, upon the
presentation of credentials, may enter upon any property or premises at
reasonable times for the purpose of copying any records required to be
kept under the provisions of this article, inspecting any monitoring
equipment or method, and sampling any discharge of wastewater to the
treatment works. The Borough Manager may enter upon the property
at any hour under emergency circumstances.
E. Protection from accidental discharge. Each user shall provide
protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other
wastes regulated by this article. Facilities to prevent accidental
discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at
the owner or operator's cost and expense. Detailed plans showing
facilities and operating procedures and any subsequent modifications
thereto to provide this protection shall be submitted to the Borough
Manager for review by the Borough Engineer, and shall be approved by
the Borough Engineer before construction of the facility. Cost of this
review shall be paid by the user. Review and approval of such plans and
operating procedures shall not relieve the user from the responsibility
to modify his facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this
article. Any industrial user required to develop and implement an
§ 210-27 JUNKYARDS § 210-27
170:327
accidental discharge/control slug plan shall submit a plan which
addresses at a minimum the following:
(1) Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges.
(2) Description of stored chemicals.
(3) Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of any accidental
or slug discharge. Such notification must also be given for any
discharge which would violate any of the prohibited discharges in
§ 210-26 of this article.
(4) Procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to,
inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer
of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site
runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or
equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants
(including solvents) and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
F. Reporting of accidental discharge. If, for any reason, a facility does not
comply with or will be unable to comply with any publication or
limitations in this article, the user responsible for such discharge shall
immediately notify the Borough Manager so that corrective action may
be taken to protect the treatment system. In addition, a written report
addressed to the Borough Manager detailing the date, time and cause
of the accidental discharge, the quantity and characteristics of the
discharge and corrective action taken to prevent future discharges,
shall be filed by the responsible facility within five days of the
occurrence of the noncomplying discharge.
G. Tenant responsibility. Where an owner of property leases premises to
any other person or as a tenant under any rental or lease agreement, if
either the owner or the tenant is an industrial user, either or both may
be held responsible for compliance with the provisions of this article.
H. Hauled wastewater.
(1) Septic tank waste may be accepted into the POTW at a designated
receiving structure within a treatment plant area, and at such
times as are established by the Borough Manager; provided, such
wastes do not violate other sections of this article or any other
requirement established or adopted by the Borough. Wastewater
discharge permits for individual vehicles to use such facility shall
be issued by the Borough Manager.
(2) The discharge of hauled industrial waste, as "industrial septate,"
requires prior approval and a wastewater discharge permit from
the Borough. The Borough Manager shall have authority to prohibit
the disposal of such wastes, if such disposal would interfere with
§ 210-27 CATASAUQUA CODE § 210-27
170:328
the treatment plant operation. Waste haulers are subject to all
other sections of this article.
(3) Fees for dumping septate will be established as part of the
industrial user fee system as authorized under this article.
I. Vandalism. No person shall maliciously or willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface, tamper with or prevent access to any
structure, appurtenance or equipment or other part of the POTW. Any
person found in violation of this requirement shall be subject to the
sanctions set out in § 210-30.
J. Responsibility for environmental compliance and pollutant discharges.
[Added 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1287]
(1) Responsibility for environmental compliance. The industrial or
commercial user named on a municipal water/sewer bill ("named
user") is responsible for compliance with federal, state, and local
and environmental rules, regulations and ordinances. Each
occupant at that address also has the same responsibilities and
must have a watershed protection permit to discharge. If violations
and/or environmental problems occur at a multioccupant site and
the occupant responsible does not take immediate corrective action
or cannot be positively identified, the named user shall be fully
responsible for correcting all of the site's noncompliance and
pollution issues and is subject to all enforcement options. When
required by the Borough, the named user must apply for and be
issued a watershed protection permit for the entire site.
(2) Responsibility for pollutant discharges.
(a) Responsibility for pollutant discharges from single-occupant
sites. The occupant must obtain a Level I, II or III watershed
protection permit before commencing any discharges. In the
event that materials harmful to the environment and/or in
violation of federal, state and local government rules and
regulations are found in the effluent, the occupant and, if
necessary, the named user, will be held responsible for taking
action to control the source and any costs of remediation for
any damages caused and will be subject to all actions in the
enforcement response plan.
(b) Responsibility for pollutant discharges from multiple-occupant
sites. Each occupant must obtain a Level I, II or III watershed
protection permit before commencing any discharges. In the
event that materials harmful to the environment and/or in
violation of federal, state and local government rules and
regulations are found in the effluent of a multioccupant
building (without individual sampling points for each
occupant) and the occupant responsible for the discharge
cannot be identified, the named user will be held responsible
§ 210-27 JUNKYARDS § 210-27
170:329
for taking action to control the source and any costs of
remediation for any damages caused and will be subject to all
actions in the enforcement response plan.
(3) Responsibility for the costs of compliance.
(a) Watershed protection permit application costs. Each sewer
user proposing to discharge new pollutants or increased levels
of previously approved pollutants is responsible for all of the
application costs, including but not limited to sampling,
laboratory tests and consultant services.
(b) Permit compliance costs. Each permitted sewer user is
responsible for the costs of sampling, analysis and any other
expenses required to comply with the site's permit.
(c) Additional analysis and testing. If a sewer user discharges any
pollutant which requires additional sampling, analysis and
other tests, the sewer user is responsible for the additional
costs.
(d) Site-specific NPDES permit and pretreatment compliance
costs. If a sewer user discharges any material for which the
DEP and EPA specifies additional or modified NPDES permit
requirements and/or additional pretreatment requirements,
the sewer user is responsible for any additional costs incurred
by the Borough to implement and maintain compliance with
these requirements.
(e) Costs of identification and correction of violations. The sewer
user or users responsible for discharges that cause violations,
harm to the treatment plant and the environment are also
responsible for all extra expenses incurred by the Borough to
locate the sources(s) and take the necessary corrective actions.
If a sewer user, who is not the property owner, is found to be a
source and does not promptly and properly assume these
responsibilities, the named user will be held responsible.
K. Termination of sewer service. [Added 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1287]
(1) All sewage discharges to the Borough's treatment plant must be
terminated on permit expiration or permit revocation or when a
cease and desist order is issued. Permits can be revoked or a cease
and desist order issued for illegal discharges (actual or potential),
NPDES violations and continued noncompliance with permit
requirements, such as local limits, action levels, enforceable BMPs
and/or other applicable local, state and federal environmental
regulations. When there are actual and/or potential adverse effects,
the Borough can immediately terminate sewer service with or
without taking prior enforcement actions. This can be done by
issuing a cease and desist order that will stay in effect until
compliance can be assured. Cease and desist orders will usually be
§ 210-27 CATASAUQUA CODE § 210-27
170:330
§ 210-28. Compliance monitoring and reporting. [Amended
1-9-1990 by Ord. No. 951; 11-6-1995 by Ord. No. 1044]
sent by certified mail, but in unusual or emergency situations, they
can be given verbally (in person or over the phone), hand delivered
or sent by fax or e-mail.
(2) Actions that must be taken when sewer service is terminated.
(a) When a permit expires or has been revoked or a cease and
desist order has been issued, the sewer user must terminate all
wastewater discharges to the Borough's WWTP within 15
calendar days. The time to terminate all discharges may be
reduced where there is an indication that imminent harm will
occur. Any further violations found during the period during
which termination of all discharges must occur will be subject
to additional escalating enforcement as serious, willful
violations.
(b) The sewer user must send a termination of discharge
certification letter to the Borough Manager by certified mail as
soon as possible but within 15 calendar days of permit
expiration or receipt of a cease and desist order signed by the
person in charge of the site's operations certifying that all
discharges to the WWTP have been permanently stopped
describing the actions taken so that further discharges cannot
occur. The time frame to submit the termination of discharge
certification letter is separate and independent from the timeframe
to terminate all wastewater discharges set forth in
§ 210-27K(2)(a). If after 16 days this termination of discharge
certification letter has not been received by the Borough, a
civil penalty assessment of no less than $200 per day of
continued illegal discharge will be issued. This daily penalty
may be increased one or more times if illegal discharges
continue and/or the certification letter is not received.
A. Compliance monitoring.
(1) Inspection and sampling. The Borough of Catasauqua shall have
the right to enter the facilities of any industrial user to ascertain
whether the purpose of this article, and any permit or order issued
hereunder, is being met and whether the industrial user is
complying with all requirements thereof. Industrial users shall
allow the Borough Manager or his representatives ready access to
all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling,
records examination and copying, and the performance of any
additional duties.
(a) Where an industrial user has security measures in force which
required proper identification and clearance before entry into
its premises, the industrial user shall make necessary
§ 210-27 JUNKYARDS § 210-28
170:331
arrangement with the security guard so that, upon
presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the
Borough, state and EPA will be permitted to enter without
delay, for the purposes of performing their specific
responsibilities.
(b) The Borough, state and EPA shall have the right to set up on
the industrial users property, or require installation of such
devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering
of the user's operations.
(c) The Borough may require the industrial user to install
monitoring equipment, as necessary. The facility's sampling
and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a
safe and proper operating condition by the industrial user at its
own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and
quality shall be calibrated at least semi-annually to insure their
accuracy.
(d) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy
access to the industrial facility to be inspected and/or sampled
shall be promptly removed by the industrial user at the written
or verbal request of the Borough Manager or his
representative and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing
such access shall be borne by the industrial user.
(e) Unreasonable delays in allowing Borough personnel access to
the industrial user's premises shall be a violation of this article.
(2) Search warrants. If the Borough Manager, or his representative,
has been refused access to a building, structure or property or any
part thereof, and if the Borough Manager has demonstrated
probable cause to believe there may be a violation of this article or
that there is a need to inspect as part of a routine inspection
program of the Borough of Catasauqua designed to verify
compliance with this article or any permit or order issued
hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and
welfare of the community, then upon application by the Borough
Solicitor, the Judge of the Court of Common Pleas of Lehigh County
shall issue a search and/or seizure warrant describing therein the
specific location subject to the warrant. The warrant shall specify
what, if anything, may be searched and/or seized on the property
described. Such warrants shall be served at reasonable hours by
the Borough Manager in the company of a uniformed police officer
of the Borough of Catasauqua. In the event of an emergency
affecting public health and safety, inspections shall be made
without the issuance of a warrant.
B. Reporting requirements.
(1) Base line monitoring reports.
§ 210-28 CATASAUQUA CODE § 210-28
170:332
(a) Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical
pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on
a categorical determination under 40 CFR § 403.6(a)(4),
whichever is later, existing significant industrial users subject
to such categorical pretreatment standards, and currently
discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW, shall be
required to submit to the Borough of Catasauqua a report
which contains the information listed in Subsection B(1)(b),
below. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their
discharge, new sources and sources that become industrial
users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable
categorical standard, shall be required to submit to the
Borough of Catasauqua a report which contains the
information listed in Subsection B(1)(b), below. A new source
shall also be required to report the method of pretreatment
standards. A new source shall also give estimates of its
anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants discharged.
(b) The industrial user shall submit the information required by
this section including:
[1] Identifying information. The name and address of the
facility including the name of the operator and owners.
[2] Wastewater discharge permits. A list of any environmental
control wastewater discharge permits held by or for the
facility.
[3] Description of operations. A brief description of the
nature, average rate of production and standard industrial
classification of the operation(s) carried out by such
industrial user. This description should include a
schematic process diagram which indicates points of
discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes.
[4] Flow measurement. Information showing the measured
average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day,
to the POTW from regulated process streams and other
streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste
stream formula set out in 40 CFR § 403.6(e).
[5] Measurement of pollutants.
[a] Identify the categorical pretreatment standards
applicable to each regulated process.
[b] Submit the results of sampling and analysis
identifying the nature and concentration (and/or mass,
where required by the standard or by the Borough of
Catasauqua) of regulated pollutants in the discharge
from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily
maximum and long term average concentrations (or
§ 210-28 JUNKYARDS § 210-28
170:333
mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample
shall be representative of the normal discharges from
the daily operations occurring during the reporting
period and shall be analyzed in accordance with the
procedures set out in Subsection B(10) of this section.
In cases where the applicable standard requires
compliance with a best management practice or
pollution prevention alternative, the user shall submit
documentation as required by the Borough or the
applicable standard to determine compliance with the
standard. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1287]
[c] Sampling must be performed in accordance with the
procedures set out in Subsection B(11).
[6] Certification. A statement used by the industrial user's
authorized representative and certified by a qualified
professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards
are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether
additional operation and maintenance and/or additional
pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment
standards and requirements.
[7] Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or
O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards;
the shortest schedule by which the industrial user will
provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The
completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the
compliance date established for the applicable
pretreatment standard. The compliance schedule pursuant
to this section must meet the requirements set out in
§ 210-29D of this article.
[8] All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and
certified in accordance with § 210-29D(9).
(2) Compliance schedule progress report. The following conditions
shall apply to the schedule required in Subsection B(1)(b)[7]. The
schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for
the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment re-required
for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such
events including hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and
final plans, executing contracts for the major components,
commencing and completing construction, beginning and
conducting routine operation). No increment referred to above
shall exceed nine months. The industrial user shall submit a
progress report to the Borough Manager no later than 14 days
following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance
including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress, the reason for any delay, (and, if
§ 210-28 CATASAUQUA CODE § 210-28
170:334
appropriate) the steps being taken by the industrial user to return
to the established schedule. In no event shall more than nine
months elapse between such progress reports to the Borough
Manager.
(3) Report on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard
deadline.
(a) Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with
applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case
of a new source, following commencement of the introduction
of wastewater into the POTW, any industrial user subject to
such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to
the Borough a report containing the information described in
Subsection B(1)(b)[4] to [6].
(b) For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or
concentration limits established in accordance with the
procedures in 40 CFR § 403.6(c), this report shall contain a
reasonable measure of the industrial user's long term
production rate. For all other industrial users subject to
categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of
allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other
measure of operation), this report shall include the industrial
user's actual production during the appropriate sampling
period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with § 210-29D(9).
(4) Periodic compliance reports.
(a) Any significant industrial user subject to a pretreatment
standard shall, at a frequency determined by the Borough
Manager but in no case less than twice per year (in June and
December), submit a report indicating the nature and
concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited
by such pretreatment standards and the measured or
estimated average of maximum daily flows for the reporting
period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and
certified in accordance with § 210-29D(9). In cases where the
applicable standard requires compliance with a best
management practice or pollution prevention alternative, the
user shall submit documentation as required by the Borough or
the applicable standard to determine compliance with the
standard. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1287]
(b) All wastewater samples must be representative of the normal
discharges occurring during the reporting period. Wastewater
monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly
operated, kept clean and maintained in good working order at
all times. The failure of an industrial user to keep its
monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds
§ 210-28 JUNKYARDS § 210-28
170:335
for the industrial user to claim that sample results are
unrepresentative of its discharge. [Amended 4-1-2013 by
Ord. No. 1287]
(c) If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirement in
and of this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than
required by the POTW, using the procedures prescribed in
Subsection B(11) of this article, the results of this monitoring
shall be included in this report.
(5) Report of changed conditions. Each industrial user is required to
notify the Borough Manager of any planned significant changes to
the industrial user's operation or system which might alter the
nature, quality or volume of its wastewater, or impact the potential
for slug discharge, at least 90 days before the change. [Amended
4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1287]
(a) The Borough Manager may require the industrial user to
submit such information as may be deemed necessary to
evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a
wastewater discharge permit application under § 210-29B.
(b) The Borough Manager may issue a wastewater discharge
permit under § 210-29C or modify an existing wastewater
discharge permit under § 210-29I.
(c) No industrial user shall implement the planned changed
condition(s) until and unless the Borough Manager has
responded to the industrial user's notice.
(d) For purposes of this requirement, flow increases of 10% or
greater and the discharge of any previously unreported
pollutants shall be deemed significant.
(6) Reports of potential problems.
(a) In the case of any discharge including, but not limited to,
accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic
nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load which
may cause potential problems for the POTW (including a
violation of the prohibited discharge standards in § 210-26 of
this article), it is the responsibility of the industrial user to
immediately telephone and notify the Borough of Catasauqua
of the incident. This notification shall include the location of
discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known,
and corrective actions taken by the industrial user.
(b) Within five days following such discharge, the industrial user
shall, unless waived by the Borough Manager, submit a
detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge
and the measures to be taken by the industrial user to prevent
similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve
§ 210-28 CATASAUQUA CODE § 210-28
170:336
the industrial user of any expense, loss, damage or other
liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the
POTW, natural resources or any other damage to relieve the
industrial user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability
which may be imposed by this article.
(c) Failure to notify the Borough of potential problem discharges
shall be deemed a separate violation of this article.
(d) A notice shall be permanently posted on the industrial user's
bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees
whom to call in the event of a discharge described in
Subsection B(6)(a), above. Employers shall ensure that all
employees who may cause or suffer such a discharge to occur
are advised of the emergency notification procedures.
(e) Reports of potential problems as described in this Subsection
B(6) shall also be required within the same time frames and to
the same agencies whenever there are facility changes that
affect the potential for slug discharges. This notification
requirement is in addition to any other requirement relating to
slug discharges contained elsewhere in this Chapter 210.
[Added 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1287]
(7) Reports from nonsignificant industrial users. All industrial users
not subject to categorical pretreatment standards and not required
to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate
reports to the Borough as the Borough Manager may require.
(8) Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. If sampling
performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the industrial
user must notify the Borough within 24 hours of becoming aware of
the violation. The industrial user shall also repeat the sampling and
analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the
Borough within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. The
industrial user is not required to resample if the POTW performs
monitoring at the industrial user's premises at least once a month,
or if the POTW performs sampling between the industrial user's
initial sampling and when the industrial user receives the results of
the sampling.
(9) Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste.
(a) Any industrial user who commences the discharge of
hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional
Waste Management Division Director and state hazardous
waste authorities in writing of any discharge into the POTW of
a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be
hazardous waste under 40 CFR, Part 261. Such notification
must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in
40 CFR, Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the
§ 210-28 JUNKYARDS § 210-28
170:337
type of discharge (continuous, batch or other). If the industrial
user discharges more than 10 kilograms of such waste per
calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also include
the following information to the extent such information is
known and readily available to the industrial user: an
identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the
wastes, an estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste
stream expected to be discharged during the following 12
months. All notifications must take place no later than 180 days
after the discharge commences. Any notification under this
subsection need be submitted only once for each hazardous
waste discharged. However, notifications of changed
discharges must be submitted under Subsection B(5), above.
The notification requirement in this section does not apply
to pollutant already reported under the self-monitoring
requirements of Subsections B(1), (3) and (4), above.
(b) Discharges are exempt from the requirements of Subsection A
of this section during a calendar month in which they
discharge no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes as
specified in 40 CFR § 261.30(d) and § 261.33(e). Discharge of
more than 15 kilograms of nonaccute hazardous waste
specified in 40 CFR § 261.30 and § 261.33(3) requires a onetime
notification.
(c) In the case of any new regulations under § 3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or
listing any additional substances as hazardous waste, the
industrial user must notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste
Management Waste Division Director, and state hazardous
waste authorizes of the discharge of such substance within 90
days of the effective date of such regulations.
(d) In the case of any notification made under this section, the
industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to
reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated
to the degree it has determined to be economically practical.
(10) Analytical requirements. All pollutant analyses, including sampling
techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge
permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with
techniques prescribed in 40 CFR, Part 136, unless otherwise
specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40
CFR, Part 136, does not contain sampling or analytical techniques
for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be
performed in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA.
(11) Sample collection.
(a) Except as indicated in Subsection B(11)(b), below, the
industrial user must collect wastewater samples using flow
§ 210-28 CATASAUQUA CODE § 210-28
170:338
proportional composite collection techniques. The Borough
Manager may authorize the use of another sampling technique
as long as the sample is representative of discharge. In
addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance
with instantaneous discharge limits. [Amended 4-1-2013 by
Ord. No. 1287]
(b) Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols,
toxicity, sulfides and volatile organic compounds must be
obtained using grab collection techniques.
(12) Determination of noncompliance. The Borough Manager may use a
grab sample(s) to determine noncompliance with pretreatment
standards.
(13) Timing. Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on
the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage
prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the U.S. Postal Service, the
date of receipt of the report shall govern.
(14) Recordkeeping. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1287]
(a) Any industrial user subject to the reporting requirements
established in this article shall maintain and make available for
copying records of all information resulting from any
monitoring activities required by this article, including
documentation associated with best management practices.
Such records shall include for all samples:
[1] The date, exact place, method, and time of sampling and
the names of the person or persons taking the samples;
[2] The date(s) analyses were performed;
[3] Who performed the analyses;
[4] The analytical techniques/methods used;
[5] The results of such analyses.
(b) Any industrial user subject to the reporting requirements
established in this article (including documentation associated
with BMPs) shall be required to retain for a minimum of three
years any records of monitoring activities and results (whether
or not such monitoring activities are required by this section)
and shall make such records available for inspection and
copying by the Borough of Catasauqua. This period of retention
shall be extended during the course of any unresolved
litigation concerning compliance with this article, or where the
industrial user has been specifically notified of a longer
retention period by the Borough Manager.
§ 210-28 JUNKYARDS § 210-28
170:339
§ 210-29. Wastewater applications and permits. [Amended 1-9-1990
by Ord. No. 951; 9-6-1994 by Ord. No. 1018; 11-6-1995 by Ord. No.
1044]
All commercial and industrial users must submit information on the nature
and characteristics of the wastewater, materials stored on site and wastes
sent for off-site disposal, by completing a permit application prior to
commencing any discharge, or within the time frames set forth for existing
users. The Borough Manager is authorized to prepare a form for this
purpose and may periodically require commercial and industrial users to
update their application. Failure to complete the application shall be
reasonable grounds for terminating service to the user and shall be
considered a violation of this article.
(15) Additional monitoring data. Industrial users that monitor more
frequently than required, using appropriate procedure, are
required to submit such monitoring to the POTW. The timing,
procedures and record keeping requirements for such additional
reports shall be the same as for the required reporting.
C. Confidential information. Information and data on an industrial user
obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit
applications, wastewater discharge permits and monitoring programs,
and from city inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to
the public without restriction unless the industrial user specifically
requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Borough
that the release of such information, processes or methods of
production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state
law. When required and demonstrated by the industrial user furnishing
a report that such information should be held confidential, the
proportions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret
processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but
shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental
agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment
program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person
furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and
other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR § 2.302 will not be
recognized as confidential information and will be available to the
public without restriction.
A. Wastewater discharge permits required.
(1) All significant industrial users proposing to connect to discharge
into any part of the wastewater treatment system must first obtain
a discharge permit therefor.
(2) All existing significant industrial users connected to or discharging
to any part of the Borough's system must obtain a wastewater
discharge permit within 90 days from and after the effective date of
this article.
§ 210-28 CATASAUQUA CODE § 210-29
170:340
(3) Any existing permitted user which changes its discharge must
obtain a discharge permit prior to commencing any changed
discharge.
(4) All nonsignificant industrial users, and all commercial users shall
be required to obtain a water pollution management permit, either
Level II or Level III.
(a) Existing users shall apply for said water pollution management
permit within 180 days of publication of this article.
(b) New users shall apply for and obtain a water pollution
management permit prior to occupancy.
(5) The Borough Manager may require other industrial users,
including liquid waste haulers, to obtain wastewater discharge
permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this article.
B. Permit application. Users seeking a wastewater discharge permit or
seeking a new permit due to revised discharges, shall complete and file
with the Borough Manager an application on a form prescribed by the
Borough Manager and accompanied by the applicable fee. Said
application may require the following general information, as well as
additional user specific information:
(1) Name, address, and SIC number of applicant.
(2) Volume of wastewater to be discharged.
(3) Wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but not
limited to, those set forth in § 210-26 of this article as determined
by a reliable analytical laboratory.
(4) Time and duration of discharge.
(5) Average base water flow rates.
(6) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details
to show all sewers and appurtenances by size, location and
elevation.
(7) Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises including all materials and types of materials which are,
or could be, discharged.
(8) Each product produced by type, amount and rate of production.
(9) Number and type of employees and hours of work.
(10) Any other information as may be deemed by the Borough Manager
to be necessary to evaluate the permit application.
(11) All wastewater discharge permit applications and industrial user
reports must contain a certification statement and must be signed
§ 210-29 JUNKYARDS § 210-29
170:341
by an authorized representative of the industrial user. The
language of said certification is set forth below in Subsection D(9)
of this section.
(12) Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and
will be returned to the industrial user for revision.
C. Permit decision. The Borough Manager will evaluate the data furnished
on the application and may require additional information. Properly
completed applications shall automatically serve as Level III permits. At
any time during the term of the Level III permit, if it is determined to be
necessary, the Borough may require a Level I or Level II discharge
permit application to be filed. The Borough Manager may deny any
application for a wastewater discharge permit or revoke an existing
permit for cause. If a determination that a Level I or Level II permit
application is required, the failure of an industrial user to make
application within a time frame set forth in the notice thereof, shall
constitute a violation of this article and shall be reasonable grounds for
terminating service to the industrial user.
D. Permit conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly
subject to all provisions of this article and all other regulations, user
charges and fees established by the Borough. The conditions of
wastewater discharge permits shall be uniformly enforced in
accordance with this article and applicable state and federal
regulations. Permit conditions will include the following:
(1) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
wastewater to be discharged to the system.
(2) The average and maximum wastewater constituents and
characteristics.
(3) Limits on rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow
regulations and equalization.
(4) Requirements for installation of inspection and sampling facilities,
and specifications for monitoring programs.
(5) Requirements for maintaining and submitting technical reports and
plant records relating to wastewater discharges. The individual
reports required shall include, at least, periodic compliance reports
for all industrial users and compliance schedule progress reports,
compliance reports, and baseline monitoring reports for
categorical industries.
(a) Periodic compliance reports. All industrial users must submit a
biannual periodic compliance report. The report shall indicate
the precise nature and concentrations of the regulated
pollutants in its discharge to the POTW, the average and
maximum daily flow rates of the facility, the methods used by
the discharger to sample and analyze the data, and a
§ 210-29 CATASAUQUA CODE § 210-29
170:342
certification that these methods confirmed to those methods
outlined in the regulations. [40 CFR 403.12(e)].
(b) Compliance schedule progress reports. No later than 14 days
following each date in the categorical compliance schedule,
the permittee shall submit to the Borough a progress report
including at a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the
date on which it expects to comply with the increment of
progress, the reasons for the delay, and the steps being taken
to return the project to the schedule established.
(c) Report on compliance. Within 90 days after the compliance
date for categorical pretreatment standards or in the case of a
new source following commencement of the introduction of
wastewater into the POTW, any industrial user subject to the
standards must submit to the Borough a "Report on
Compliance" that states whether or not applicable
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis.
The report must indicate the nature and concentration of all
regulated pollutants in the facility's regulated process waste
streams; and a statement of whether compliance is
consistently being achieved, and if not, what additional
operation and maintenance and/or pretreatment is necessary
to achieve compliance. [40 CFR 403.12(d)].
(d) Baseline monitoring report. All industrial users subject to
categorical pretreatment standards must submit a baseline
monitoring report (BMR) to the Borough within 180 days after
the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard or
180 days after the final administrative decision made upon a
category determination request, whichever is later.
(e) Compliance monitoring. All limits must be complied with, but
periodic monitoring is usually required only for the parameters
that are actively discharged. However, the Borough can
require either temporary screening or periodic monitoring for
any parameter with or without a limit that is believed to have
an actual or potential harmful effect on the plant, its
employees, the public, the sludge, the collection systems and
the Lehigh River. [Added 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1287]
(6) Daily average and daily maximum discharge rates, or other
appropriate conditions when pollutants subject to limitations and
prohibitions are proposed or present in the user's wastewater
discharge.
(7) Compliance schedules.
(8) Best management practices (BMPs). [Added 4-1-2013 by Ord.
No. 1287]
§ 210-29 JUNKYARDS § 210-29
170:343
(a) BMP certification. Those users with BMP requirements in their
permits will be required to certify within 60 days and then
annually that the BMPs are being effectively implemented and
submit all documentation required by the BMP, such as process
control, cleaning, maintenance and off-site disposal of records
which must be kept for at least three years. Copies must be
shown to or sent to the Borough when requested. In the event
that there is a noticeable increase in the treatment plant
influent of a parameter used by a site with a BMP, the Borough
can require immediate monitoring and other actions in
accordance with the applicable monitoring requirements on a
temporary or permanent basis. Failure to comply with an
approved BMP may result in any one or more of the following:
escalating enforcement actions, a temporary or permanent
change in permit level or permit fees, or submission of a new
permit application may be required. In addition sewer service
can be terminated until the user conclusively demonstrates
that a sustainable approved BMP has been adopted and
implemented.
(b) Customized BMPs. A sewer user who believes that a sitespecific
BMP could be more environmentally beneficial and/or
more cost effective than complying with a numerical discharge
limit or action level should contact the Borough’s Pretreatment
Coordinator to determine if a BMP would be appropriate. If the
use of a BMP is found to be suitable the, Borough may work
with the user to plan and implement an enforceable BMP.
(c) Enforceable BMPs for biotoxic materials. Dischargers of
biotoxics must submit BMPs acceptable to the Borough before
commencing any discharges. The BMPs must assure that toxic
amounts of these materials will not be discharged at any time,
or the user must use less toxic materials or zero discharge.
(d) Enforceable BMPs for cyanide dischargers. Dischargers of
cyanide or cyanide-containing materials must implement
enforceable BMPs acceptable to the Borough before
commencing any discharges. The BMPs must include the use of
a preapproved cyanide destruction system that reduces the
total cyanide to nondetect (below a reporting limit of 0.005 mg/
l). In some instances, the Borough may require that, after the
cyanide destruction process, the treated wastewater be held in
sealed and secure containers until the cyanide content has
been tested and found to be <0.005 mg/l; if not the batch must
be retreated.
(e) Enforceable BMPs for oil and grease. All Level I and Level II
permittees discharging FOG (fats or oils or greases or a
combination thereof) must submit a BMP called a "FOG
management plan" for Borough approval.
§ 210-29 CATASAUQUA CODE § 210-29
170:344
(9) Signatory requirement. Baseline monitoring reports (BMR's),
reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard
deadlines, ninety-day compliance reports and periodic reports on
continued compliance must be signed and certified by a duly
authorized representative of the industrial user. A duly authorized
representative is one who meets the criteria established at 40 CFR
403.12(1). The signature for these reports must be accompanied by
the following certification statement:
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all
attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in
accordance with a system designed to insure qualified personnel
properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on
my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or
those person directly responsible for gathering the information,
the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are
significant penalties for submitting false information, including
the possibility of fines and imprisonment for knowing violations."
(10) General sewer use rules and regulations.
(11) A statement of applicable civil, criminal and administrative
penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and
requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such
schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that
required by applicable federal, state or local law, and the statement
of penalties may reference only those set forth hereafter in the
audience.
(12) A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit
does not relieve the permittee of responsibility with compliance
with all applicable state and federal pretreatment standards,
including those which become effective during the term of
discharge permit.
(13) Conditional discharge permits for new or increased POC
discharges or noncompliance. Conditional watershed protection
permits can be issued when, in the Borough’s judgment, it is
necessary to protect the plant and the environment when the
harmful effects of new pollutants or increased amounts of existing
pollutants are not well known, especially when the proposed
influent loadings are substantially higher than the usual
background levels and/or the discharge flow is higher or uneven
throughout the day or has spikes or slug discharges. An existing
permit can also be revoked and reissued as a conditional permit
after a letter of violation and/or a notice that preventive action is
required has been issued because of noncompliance or marginal
compliance with permit requirements. Conditional permits are
valid for a period of up to one year and will only be renewed (either
as a conditional or a multiyear conventional permit) if there is
§ 210-29 JUNKYARDS § 210-29
170:345
satisfactory compliance with the requirements of the permit.
[Added 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1287]
(14) Applicable slug control and slug discharges notification
requirements. [Added 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1287]
(15) Applicable BMP requirements. [Added 4-1-2013 by Ord. No.
1287]
(16) Other conditions to ensure compliance with this article. [Added
4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1287]
E. Duration of permits. Permits shall be used for a specified time period,
not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period of less than
one year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. Any permittee
desiring to continue to discharge after the expiration date shall file an
application for reissuance of the permit not less than 120 days prior to
the expiration of the permit. The terms and conditions of the permit
may be subject to modification and change by the Borough Manager
during the life of the permit, as limitations or requirements as identified
in § 210-26 are modified and changed. The user shall be informed of any
proposed changes in his permit at least 30 days prior to the effective
date of the change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall
include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. [Amended
4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1287]
(1) Subject to the general provisions on the duration of permits, it is
the intention of this subsection that Level I and Level III permits
shall have terms of up to five years and that Level II permits shall
have terms of up to three years.
(2) Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon nonuse,
cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All
wastewater discharge permits are void upon the issuance of a new
wastewater discharge permit.
F. Transfer of a permit. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a
specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit
shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user,
different premises or a new or changed operation.
G. Revocation of permit.
(1) Any user who violates the following conditions of his permit or of
this article, or of applicable state and federal regulations, is subject
to having his permit revoked. Violations subjecting a user to
possible revocation of his permit include, but are not limited to, the
following:
(a) Failure of a user to accurately report the wastewater
constituents and characteristics of his discharge;
§ 210-29 CATASAUQUA CODE § 210-29
170:346
(b) Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations,
or wastewater constituents and characteristics;
(c) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the
purpose of inspection or monitoring;
(d) Violation of conditions of the permit;
(e) Failure to meet effluent limitations, pay fines, pay sewer
charges, meet compliance schedules, complete a wastewater
survey or the wastewater discharger permit application, or
provide advanced notice of the transfer of a permitted facility;
(f) Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any
terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this article.
(2) Procedure for revocation of permit. Whenever the Borough
Manager or his designee finds that any person has violated or is
violating this article, or any prohibition, limitation or requirement
contained herein, and that person has an industrial discharge
permit, the Borough Manager shall inform the user in writing of the
violation(s) pursuant to the enforcement response guide prepared
by the Borough. The user shall be informed of the time in which to
make the necessary corrections. If the corrections are not made
within the time allotted, then the Borough Manager may revoke the
discharge permit. The revocation of industrial discharge permit by
the Borough Manager may be appealed by written request to the
Borough Council within 10 days after the permit has been revoked.
Borough Council shall schedule a hearing thereon and
determination the proprietary of the Borough Manager's decision
for the revocation of said permit.
H. Permit appeals. Any person, including the industrial user, may petition
the Borough to reconsider the terms of the wastewater discharge
permit within 30 days of its issuance. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord.
No. 1287]
(1) Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be
a waiver of the administrative appeal.
(2) In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater
discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this
objection and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in
the wastewater discharge permit.
(3) The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be
stayed pending the appeal.
(4) If the Borough fails to act within 30 days, a request for
reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decision not to
reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a
wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater
§ 210-29 JUNKYARDS § 210-29
170:347
discharge permit shall be considered final administrative action for
purposes of judicial review.
(5) Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative
wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a
complaint with the Court of Common Pleas for Lehigh County
within the time frame set forth by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania for filing such appeals.
I. Wastewater discharge permit modification.
(1) The Borough Manager may modify the wastewater discharge
permit for good cause including, but not limited to, the following:
(a) To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local
pretreatment standards or requirements.
(b) To address significant alterations or additions to the industrial
user's operation, processes or wastewater volume or character
since the time of the wastewater discharge permit issuance.
(c) A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or
permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized
discharge.
(d) Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a
threat to the Borough's POTW, Borough personnel or the
receiving waters.
(e) Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater
discharge permit.
(f) Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any
required reporting.
(g) Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical
pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR § 403.13.
(h) To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater
discharge permit.
(i) To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation
to a new owner/operator.
(j) New or increased POC discharges as prohibited slug
discharges. When new or increased pollutant loadings, with or
without an action level, substantially exceed the usual
background levels and the effects on the plant and the Lehigh
River are unknown, the Borough can temporarily or
permanently classify them as prohibited slug discharges. The
sewer user or qualified others must provide documentation to
the Borough to demonstrate that the discharge is acceptable
§ 210-29 CATASAUQUA CODE § 210-29
170:348
§ 210-30. Enforcement; violations and penalties. [Amended
6-3-1985 by Ord. No. 889; 1-9-1990 by Ord. No. 951; 11-6-1995 by
Ord. No. 1044]
for release to the sewer. Proposals for flow equalization will be
considered. [Added 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1287]
(2) The filing of a request by the permittee for a wastewater discharge
permit modification does not stay any wastewater discharge permit
condition.
A. General enforcement procedures.
(1) The Borough will prepare and adopt an enforcement response
guide for the purpose of assisting in identifying industrial user
noncompliance and responding with the appropriate enforcement
measures. The enforcement response guide will be adopted by
resolution of Borough Council and will be amended or modified
from time to time by resolution of Council. Enforcement options
available to the Borough include suspension of wastewater
treatment service, revocation of industrial discharge permit,
assessment of civil and/or criminal penalties, assessment of
administrative fines and issuance of administrative orders and
court action for injunctive relief.
(2) Remedies nonexclusive. The provisions of this section are not
exclusive remedies. The Borough of Catasauqua reserves the right
to take any, all or any combination of these actions against a
noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will
generally be in accordance with the Borough's enforcement
response plan. However, the Borough reserves the right to take
other action against any user when the circumstances warrant.
Further, the Borough of Catasauqua is empowered to make more
than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. These
actions may be taken concurrently.
(3) Annual publication of significant noncompliance. A list of industries
which were in significant noncompliance and/or which were
subject to enforcement proceedings during the previous calendar
year shall be annually published by the Borough in a newspaper of
general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within
the service area. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1287]
B. Administrative enforcement remedies.
(1) Whenever the Borough Manager finds that any user has violated or
is violating this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the
Borough Manager or his agent may serve upon said user a written
notice of violation. Within 30 days of the receipt of this notice, an
explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory
§ 210-29 JUNKYARDS § 210-30
170:349
correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required
actions, shall be submitted by the user to the Borough Manager.
Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for
any violations occurring before or receipt of the notice of violation.
Nothing in this section shall limit the Borough of Catasauqua to
take any action, including emergency actions or any other
enforcement actions, without first issuing a notice of violation.
(2) Consent orders. The Borough Manager is hereby empowered to
enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance or
other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user
responsible for noncompliance. Such orders will include specific
action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within
a time period also specified by the order. Consent orders shall have
the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued
pursuant to Subsections B(4) and (5), below, and shall be judicially
enforceable.
(3) Show cause hearing. The Borough Manager may order any user
which causes to contributes to violation(s) of this article,
wastewater discharge permit, or orders issued hereunder, or any
other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the
Borough Manager and show cause why a proposed enforcement
action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user
specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed
enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that
the user show cause why this proposed enforcement action should
not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally
or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least
20 days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any
authorized representative of the user. Whether or not the user
appears as ordered, immediate enforcement action may be pursued
following the hearing date. A show cause hearing shall not be a
prerequisite for taking any other action against the user.
(4) Compliance orders. When the Borough Manager finds out a user
has violated or continues to violate the ordinance, wastewater
discharge permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the Manager may issue an
order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the
user come into compliance and setting forth a time frame to
achieve compliance. If the user does not come into compliance
within the required time frame, sewer service shall be discontinued
unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related
appurtenances are installed and properly operated. A compliance
order may also contain other requirements to address the
noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and
management practices designed to minimize the amount of
pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not
extend the deadline for compliance established for a federal
§ 210-30 CATASAUQUA CODE § 210-30
170:350
pretreatment standard or requirements, nor does a compliance
order release the user of liability from any violation, including any
continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a
prerequisite to taking any other action against the user.
(5) Cease and desist. When the Borough Manager finds out the user is
violating this article, the user's wastewater discharge permit, any
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur,
the Borough Manger may issue an order to the user directing it to
cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to:
(a) Immediately comply with all requirements.
(b) Take such appropriate remedial or preventative action as may
be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened
violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the
discharge. Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a
prerequisite to taking any other action against the user.
(6) Emergency suspensions. The Borough Manager may immediately
suspend a user's discharge (after informal notice to the user)
whenever such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual
or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or
cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or
welfare of persons. The Borough Manager may also immediately
suspend the user's discharge (after notice and opportunity to
respond) that threatens to interfere with the operation of the
POTW, or which presents or may present an endangerment to the
environment.
(a) Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge immediately
stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's
failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension
order, the Borough Manager shall take such steps as deemed
necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer
connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its
receiving stream or endangerment to any individuals. The
Borough Manager shall allow the user to recommence its
discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction
of the Borough that the period of endangerment has passed,
unless the termination proceedings set forth in Subsection B(7)
are initiated against the user.
(b) A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed
written statement describing the causes of the harmful
contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future
occurrence to the Borough Manager, prior to the date of any
show cause or termination hearing under Subsection B(3) and
Subsection B(7).
§ 210-30 JUNKYARDS § 210-30
170:351
(c) Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a
hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section.
(7) Termination of discharge.
(a) The provisions of § 210-29G of this article relating to
revocation of permit for violation of certain conditions of this
article, also apply to any user whether a permit holder or not.
Any user that violates the conditions set forth in § 210-29G is
subject to discharge termination.
(b) Any such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its
discharge and be offered an opportunity show cause under
Subsection B(3) of this section why the proposed action should
not be taken.
C. Judicial enforcement remedies.
(1) Injunctive relief. Whenever a user has violated a pretreatment
standard or requirement or continues to violate the provisions of
this article, wastewater discharge permits or orders issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the Borough
Manager may petition the Court of Common Pleas of Lehigh County
through the Borough Solicitor for the issuance of a temporary or
permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels
the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order
or other requirement imposed by this article on activities of the
industrial user. Such other action as appropriate for legal and/or
equitable relief may also be brought by the Borough. A petition for
injunctive relief need not be filed as a prerequisite to taking any
other action against the user.
(2) Civil penalties. Civil penalties may be assessed against any user
who violates any provision of this article including, but not limited
to, any provision of the pretreatment permit issued under the
provisions of this article. The civil penalty policy as set forth in
Ordinance 1021 of the Borough of Catasauqua,78 which ordinance
is made a part hereof by reference, as if the same were fully set
forth herein.
(3) Criminal prosecution.
(a) Any user that willfully or negligently violates any provision of
this article, any orders or wastewater discharge permits issued
hereunder or any other pretreatment requirements shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of
not more than $1,000 per violation per day or imprisonment for
not more than 90 days, or both.
78.Editor's Note: See Art. IV of this chapter.
§ 210-30 CATASAUQUA CODE § 210-30
170:352
§ 210-31. Affirmative defenses to discharge violations. [Amended
11-6-1995 by Ord. No. 1044]
(b) Any user that willfully or negligently introduces any substance
into the POTW which causes personal injury or property
damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and
be subject to a penalty of at least $1,000 and/or be subject to
imprisonment for 90 days. This penalty shall be in addition to
any other cause of action for personal injury or property
damage available under state law.
(c) Any user that knowingly makes any false statement or
certification in any application, record, report, plan or other
documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to
this article, wastewater discharge permit or order, or who
falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any
monitoring device or method required under this article shall,
upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000
per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than 90
days.
(d) In the event of a second conviction, a user shall be punished by
a fine of not more than $1,000 per violation per day or
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both.
D. Any person found guilty of violating an ordinance shall be assessed
court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in
the enforcement proceedings. [Added 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1288]
A. Upset.
(1) For the purpose of this section, "upset" means an exceptional
incident in which there is unintentional and temporary
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of
factors beyond a reasonable control of the industrial user. An upset
does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by
operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities,
inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance
or careless or improper operation.
(2) An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action
Borough for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment
standards if the requirements of Subsection A(3), are met.
(3) An industrial user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense
of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed,
contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence, that:
(a) An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the
cause(s) of the upset.
§ 210-30 JUNKYARDS § 210-31
170:353
(b) The facility was, at the time, being operated in a prudent and
workmanlike manner and in compliance with the applicable
operation and maintenance procedures.
(c) The industrial user has submitted the following information to
the POTW treatment operator within 24 hours of becoming
aware of the upset, and if this information is provided orally, a
written submission must be provided within five days:
[1] A description of the indirect discharge and a cause of
noncompliance.
[2] The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and
times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the
noncompliance is expected to continue.
[3] Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
(4) In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to
establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
(5) Industrial users will have the opportunity for a judicial
determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action
brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment
standards.
(6) The industrial user shall control production or all discharges to the
extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical
pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss or failure of its
treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative
method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the
situation where, among other things, the primary source of power
of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.
B. General/specific prohibitions. An industrial user shall have an
affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for
noncompliance with the general and specific prohibitions in § 210-26 of
this article, if it can prove that it did not know or have reason to know
that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other
sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either:
(1) A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the industrial
user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to and during
the pass through interference; or
(2) No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially
in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the
Borough was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and
in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable
sludge use or disposal requirements.
C. Bypass.
§ 210-31 CATASAUQUA CODE § 210-31
170:354
(1) Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
BYPASS — The intentional diversion of waste streams from any
portion of an industrial user's treatment facility.
SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE — Substantial physical damage to
the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable,
or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can
reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe
property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in
production.
(2) An industrial user may allow any bypass to occur which does not
cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but
only if it is also for essential maintenance to assure efficient
operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of
Subsections C(3) and (4), below.
(3) Notice.
(a) If an industrial user knows in advance of the bypass, it shall
submit prior notice to the POTW, at least 10 days before the
date of the bypass, if possible.
(b) An industrial user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated
bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to the
POTW within 24 hours from the time [he] becomes aware of
that bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within
five days of the time the industrial user becomes aware of the
bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of
the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including
exact dates and times and, if the bypass has not been
corrected, the anticipated time [it] is expected to continue; and
steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent
reoccurrence of the bypass. The POTW may waive the written
report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been
received within 24 hours.
(4) Prohibited bypass; exceptions.
(a) Bypass is prohibited, and the POTW may take enforcement
action against an industrial user for bypass, unless:
[1] Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal
injury or severe property damage.
[2] There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as
the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of
untreated wastes or maintenance during normal periods of
equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if
adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in
the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to
§ 210-31 JUNKYARDS § 210-31
170:355
§ 210-32. Pretreatment charges and fees. [Amended 9-6-1994 by
Ord. No. 1018; 11-6-1995 by Ord. No. 1044]
The Borough of Catasauqua may adopt reasonable charges and fees for
reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the Borough's
pretreatment program which may include:
prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of
equipment downtime or preventative maintenance.
[3] The industrial user submitted notices as required under
Subsection C(3) of this section.
(b) The POTW may approve an anticipated bypass, after
considering its adverse effects, if the POTW determines that it
will meet the three conditions listed in Subsection C(4)(a) of
this section.
A. Fees for wastewater permit applications including the cost of
processing such application.
B. Fees for wastewater discharge permits, Level I, Level II and/or Level
III.
C. Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures including
the cost of collection and analyzing an industrial user's discharge and
reviewing monitoring reports submitted by industrial users.
D. Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures
and construction.
E. Fees or filing appeals.
F. Other fees as the Borough may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters
covered in this article and are separate from all other fees, fines and
penalties chargable by the Borough.
G. Said fees shall be calculated in accordance with the schedule of fees
and charges as established by resolution of Borough Council,79 and may
be changed from time to time by resolution of Borough Council.
79.Editor's Note: See Ch. A285, Fees.
§ 210-31 CATASAUQUA CODE § 210-32
170:356
ARTICLE IV
Civil Penalties for Violation of Pretreatment Permits
[Adopted 11-7-1994 by Ord. No. 1021 (Ch. XIV, Part 3B, of the 1962
Code)]
§ 210-33. Definitions.
§ 210-34. Civil penalty. [Amended 11-6-1995 by Ord. No. 1043]
The Borough of Catasauqua, through its Pretreatment Officer (or in his
absence, the Borough Manager), may assess a civil penalty in an amount
not to exceed $25,000 per day for each violation, regardless of jurisdictional
boundaries. Civil penalties may be assessed against:
§ 210-35. Separate violations.
Each violation for each separate day shall constitutes a separate and
distinct offense.
§ 210-36. Willfulness not required.
The civil penalty may be assessed whether or not the violation was willful
or negligent.
§ 210-37. Notice.
Notice of assessment of civil penalty shall state the appeal process to be
followed including the name, address and telephone number of the person
responsible for accepting such appeal. Said notice shall also contain the
date or dates of violation, the permit requirement that was violated and
the amount of civil penalty assessed. The notice shall state the time frame
for appeal. It shall be served personally on the violator or shall be sent by
certified mail to the address of the permit holder as noted on the permit.
A. All definitions contained in Section 73 of the Public Owned Treatment
Penalty Law are incorporated herewith.
B. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERMIT — Pretreatment permit issued by the Borough of Catasauqua.
A. Any user of the system who violates any provision of this article, or
Ordinance No. 852, as amended.80
B. Any pretreatment permit holder who violates any condition of its permit
including, but not limited to, its effluent discharge limits.
80.Editor's Note: See Art. III of this chapter.
§ 210-33 JUNKYARDS § 210-38
170:357
§ 210-38. Policy on assessment.
The civil penalty shall be assessed in accordance with § 210-39 which sets
forth the Borough of Catasauqua's assessment policy considering damage
to air, water, land or other natural resources, cost of restoration and
abatement, saving resulting to the person for the violation, history of past
violations, deterrence of future violations and other relevant factors.
§ 210-39. Chart for assessment.
A. Assessment shall be as follows:
Damage to
Environment Points
Costs of
Restoration/
Abatement Points
Extreme 5 Over $10,000 5
Severe 4 7,000 4
Moderate 3 5,000 3
Slight 2 2,500 2
None 1 0 1
Savings to
Violator Points
Past Violations No.
Violations in Last 365
Days Points
10,000 5 5 5
7,500 4 4 4
5,000 3 3 3
2,500 2 2 2
0 1 1 1
Deterrence of
Future
Violations Points Other Factors Points
Extremely
Important
5 (Such as damage to
pretreatment works,
willfulness, or
concealment, others)
5
Important 4 4
Moderate 3 3
Slight 2 2
Minimal 1 1
B. Points shall be assessed for a violation in accordance with the above
chart which constitutes the Borough of Catasauqua assessment policy.
Points shall be totalled and the civil penalty shall be assessed as
follows:
§ 210-38 CATASAUQUA CODE § 210-39
170:358
§ 210-40. Use of civil penalties.
All civil penalties collected shall be placed in a restricted account and shall
only be used by the Borough of Catasauqua (operator) or with permission
of the Borough of Catasauqua, the Catasauqua Borough Authority (owner)
to repair damage and provide for additional maintenance and costs as a
result of violations, to pay penalties imposed by state or federal government
for violation of pretreatment standards, for the costs of investigation and
enforcement of action resulting in penalty for monitoring of discharges in
the pretreatment program and for capital improvement to the treatment
works including sewage collection lines.
§ 210-41. Other remedies.
The Borough of Catasauqua shall retain the power to use all other available
remedies provided by law to enforce its pretreatment ordinance including
injunctive relief.
§ 210-42. Appeals.
No. of Points Penalty
25 $25,000
20 $20,000
15 $15,000
10 $10,000
5 $5,000
C. The assessment of penalties may include numbers which are not whole,
such as 1.5, to allow flexibility and discretion by the pretreatment
officer in arriving at a fair and appropriate penalty. The above listed
monetary civil penalties shall be then prorated to reflect the less than
whole number of points assessed.
Example: Total points = 12.5
Civil
penalty
= $12,500
A. Any penalty seeking to appeal the assessment of a civil penalty shall do
so by filing a notice of appeal with the Borough Manager within 30 days
after receipt or service of said notice.
B. The Borough Council shall hear all such appeals. A transcript shall be
made of said hearing at the sole expense of the appellant.
C. Appellant shall pay the cost of appeal and the sum for estimate of
stenographer bills at the time of filing said appeal. Failure to pay said
sums at the time of filing shall make the appeal void. The charge for an
appeal and the advancement of stenographer costs shall be established
by the Borough Council in resolution for fees and charges.81
§ 210-39 JUNKYARDS § 210-42
170:359
§ 210-43. Address information.
Each permit holder shall keep the Borough apprised in writing of any
change in mailing address. The address on the permit shall be used to
send all correspondence and notice of civil assessment to permit holders.
The sending of a notice of civil assessment to a permit holder's address
on permit shall conclusively be presumed to be valid service; thus, if the
certified mail sent to such address is not accepted or picked up by permit
holder, the date of service shall be the date that the certified mail was
rejected or returned unclaimed.
§ 210-44. Costs of damage to the publicly owned treatment works.
[Amended 11-6-1995 by Ord. No. 1044]
The Borough shall charge all costs for establishing the operation of the
public owned treatment works after a violation to said violator. These costs
shall be paid by the violator within 10 days after notice of assessment of
civil penalties. Any violator not timely paying said assessment shall pay an
additional penalty of 5% per month or any part thereof.
D. After the hearing, any additional stenographer charges shall be billed to
appellant and shall be paid in full within 10 days of receipt or appeal
shall be null and void ab initio.
E. The Borough Council shall either affirm the decision of the
Pretreatment Officer or reverse or modify the same as the substantial
evidence indicates in accordance with the assessment policy adopted
by the Borough.
F. Appeals from the decision of the Borough Council shall be in
accordance with state law.
81.Editor's Note: See Ch. A285, Fees.
§ 210-42 CATASAUQUA CODE § 210-44
170:360
ARTICLE V
Sewer Connection, Customer Facilities and tapping fees
[Adopted 7-17-2006 by Ord. No. 1199]
§ 210-45. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this § 210-45, unless the context otherwise indicates:
AUTHORITY — The Catasauqua Sewer Authority, constituted and existing
pursuant to the Municipalities Authorities Act of 1945, as amended.
BOD5 — The five-day biochemical-oxygen demand.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Catasauqua, a municipal corporation,
incorporated under the Borough Code.
DESIGN CAPACITY — The permitted or rated capacity of facilities
expressed as a multiple of 100 gallons per day. For nonresidential
customers, at the Borough's sole discretion, design capacity may also be
expressed in pounds of BOD5 per day, pounds of suspended solids per day
or any other capacity-defining parameter that is separately and specifically
set forth in the permit governing the operation of the system, and based
upon its original design as modified by those regulatory agencies having
jurisdiction over these facilities.
DESIGN CAPACITY REQUIRED BY A NEW RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMER —
The design capacity required by a new residential customer used in
calculating the sewer tapping fees shall not exceed an amount established
by multiplying 90 gallons per capita per day times the average number
of persons per household as established by the most recent census data
provided by the United States Census Bureau. Alternatively, the design
capacity required by a new residential customer shall be determined by a
study, but shall not exceed the average residential water consumption per
residential customer plus 10% or the average sewage flow per residential
customer determined by a measured sewage flow study. Such study shall
be completed in accordance with sound engineering practices within the
most recent five years for the lesser of three or all residential subdivisions
of more than 10 lots which have collection systems in good repair and which
connected to the Borough's facilities within the most recent five years. The
study shall calculate the average sewage flow per residential customer in
such developments by measuring actual flows over at least 12 consecutive
months at the points where such developments connected to the Borough's
sewer main.
DWELLING UNIT — Any structure, or part thereof, designed and intended
to be occupied as the living quarters of a single family or housekeeping unit,
and having separate kitchen and separate bathroom facilities.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property located within the area served by
the sewer system upon which there is erected a structure intended for
continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy, or use by human beings or
animals.
§ 210-45 JUNKYARDS § 210-45
170:361
OUTSTANDING DEBT — The principal amount outstanding of any bonds,
notes, loans or other form of indebtedness used to finance or refinance
facilities included in the tapping fee.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any improved property. When more than one person is the owner
of any particular parcel of improved property, all such persons shall be
jointly and severally liable for the payment of the fees and charges imposed
under this article.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, society,
corporation, or other group or entity.
SERVICE LINE — A sewer line that directly connects a single building or
structure to a collection facility.
SEWER LATERAL — A collection facility that connects a service line to a
sewer system main.
SEWER SYSTEM — All facilities, as of any particular time, for collecting,
pumping, transporting, treating, or disposing of sewage and other
wastewater, other than stormwater, which are situate in or adjacent to this
Borough and owned, leased or operated by the Borough.
SYSTEM DESIGN CAPACITY — The design capacity of the system for
which the tapping fee is being calculated which represents the total design
capacity of the sewer system.
§ 210-46. Sewer connection fees.
A. Imposition of fee. Except as provided in Subsections C through E and in
§§ 210-49 and 210-50, the owner of each improved property which is to
be newly connected to the sewer system shall pay a connection fee to
the Borough, in the amount in effect under Subsection B as of the time
of payment, at or before the time the owner or his agent obtains a
permit to connect into the sewer system. The connection fee is a charge
for the cost of constructing a sewer lateral from the sewer system main
to the curb or property line fronting the property to be connected, and
connecting the sewer lateral to the sewer system main.
B. Amount of standard connection fee. The standard sewer connection fee
shall be $3,255. [Amended 11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 1319]
C. Construction of facilities by owner.
(1) No sewer connection fee shall be charged to any owner who
constructs the sewer lateral and connects the sewer lateral to the
sewer system main by himself or through his agent at his own
expense. However, in that event, the owner shall pay the Borough
an inspection fee for inspecting the construction of the sewer
lateral and the connection with the sewer system in the amount of
$242. [Amended 11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 1319]
§ 210-45 CATASAUQUA CODE § 210-46
170:362
§ 210-47. Sewer customer facilities fees.
(2) In any case in which the Borough performs some of the labor and/or
provides some of the materials for the sewer lateral construction
and connection, and the owner performs or provides the remainder,
the connection fee shall be equal to the actual cost incurred by the
Borough in connection with the construction of the sewer lateral
and the making of the connection with the sewer system (including
actual inspection costs), the amount of the connection fee
notwithstanding.
(3) No owner shall have the right to construct and connect a sewer
lateral to the sewer system without the approval of the Borough,
which approval may be withheld for any reason or no reason. If the
Borough agrees to permit an owner or his agents to construct a
sewer lateral or make a sewer lateral connection, it may impose
any conditions it desires in connection with the approval, and may
require the payment of the Borough's review, inspection,
administrative, legal, engineering, and other costs, and an advance
deposit or other security to insure such payment.
D. Exception connections. In any case in which the Borough constructs the
sewer lateral and/or makes the connection with the sewer system, and
in which the length of the sewer lateral exceeds 40 feet or the diameter
of the sewer lateral exceeds six inches, the connection fee shall be
equal to the actual cost incurred by the Borough in connection with the
construction of the sewer lateral and the making of the connection with
the sewer system main (including inspection costs).
E. Actual costs. In determining the actual costs incurred by the Borough
under Subsection C or D above, all materials used shall be billed at
their cost to the Borough, time expended by Borough employees shall
be billed at their hourly cost to the Borough (including benefits), time
expended by Borough agents other than employees shall be billed at
their cost to the Borough (to the extent that they are reasonable and do
not exceed normal charge when fees are not reimbursed by property
owners), and other Borough expenses (including administration,
overhead, and use of equipment) shall be billed at their cost to the
Borough, as reasonably estimated by the Borough. Before any work is
begun by the Borough, the owner shall pay the Borough's reasonable
estimate of the connection fee due; after the work is completed, the
Borough shall refund any excess or charge any shortage of the
estimated connection fee as compared to the actual connection fee for
the work.
F. (Reserved)
A. In general.
(1) All customer facilities to connect the structure served on an
improved property with the sewer system at the termination of the
§ 210-46 JUNKYARDS § 210-47
170:363
§ 210-48. Tapping fees.
sewer lateral shall be constructed by the owner or his agents. The
construction shall be in accordance with the Borough's regulations,
requirements, rules, and standards, shall be performed by a
contractor acceptable to the Borough, and shall be subject to
inspection by the Borough. Prior to construction, the owner must
deposit with the Borough the Borough's estimated reasonable and
necessary costs of review, inspection, administrative, legal,
engineering, and other services in connection with the work.
Inspection fees under the preceding sentence shall be in addition
to any inspection fees otherwise imposed in relation to the
construction of structures on the improved property or under
§ 210-46, Sewer connection fees. After the completion of the
construction, the Borough may retain all costs actually incurred,
and charge any additional amount of costs in excess of the amount
deposited. However, the Borough shall make no charge for the
purchase or installation of a water meter used for measuring a
user's sewage discharge; such a charge may only be imposed by
the Borough in relation to the connection of an improved property
to the Borough's water system.
(2) The owner shall pay the Borough an inspection fee in the amount of
$242 for inspecting the construction and connection of the service
line from the building or structure to the curb or property line
fronting the property to be connected to sewer lateral. [Amended
11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 1319]
B. Actual costs. In determining the actual costs incurred by the Borough
under Subsection A, all materials used shall be billed at their cost to the
Borough, time expended by Borough employees shall be billed at their
hourly cost to the Borough (including benefits), time expended by
Borough agents other than employees shall be billed at their cost to the
Borough (to the extent that they are reasonable and do not exceed
normal charges when fees are not reimbursed by property owners), and
other Borough expenses (including administration, overhead, and use
of equipment) shall be billed at their cost to the Borough, as reasonably
estimated by the Borough.
C. (Reserved)
A. Initial connection.
(1) New connection. Except as provided in §§ 210-49 and 210-50, the
owner of each improved property which is to be newly connected to
the sewer system shall pay a tapping fee to the Borough, in the
amount specified under Subsection D as of the earlier of the time of
connection or the time the owner or his agent obtains a permit to
connect into the sewer system.
§ 210-47 CATASAUQUA CODE § 210-48
170:364
(2) Improper connection. The owner of each improved property which
is improperly connected to the sewer system without a permit shall
pay a tapping fee to the Borough, in the amount specified under
Subsection D as of the time of actual payment, immediately upon
demand by the Borough.
(3) Failure to make required connection. The owner of each improved
property, which is not connected to the sewer system within 120
calendar days after the date the Borough serves a notice to connect
such improved property to the sewer system, shall pay a tapping
fee to the Borough, in the amount specified under Subsection D as
of the time of actual payment, on the 121st calendar day after the
date the notice was served. Service for this purpose shall be
complete when a notice to connect is deposited, postage prepaid, in
the United State mail, addressed to the legal owners(s) of the
improved property at their last known address according to the
records of the Lehigh County real estate tax office.
(4) Amount of sewage flow.
(a) For residential use, the amount of sewage flow for an improved
property which is being assessed a tapping fee under this
Subsection A shall be equal to the design capacity required by
a new residential customer for the improved property as of the
later of the date of payment, the date the use intended for the
improved property is established, or the date the
improvements contemplated for the improved property are
completed.
(b) For nonresidential use, the amount of sewage flow for an
improved property which is being assessed a tapping fee under
this Subsection A shall be equal to the daily anticipated amount
of peak flow, as if full building utilization is being realized, for
the proposed nonresidential use for the improved property as
of the later of the date of payment, the date the use intended
for the improved property is established, or the date the
improvements contemplated for the improved property are
completed.
(c) The Borough shall have the option of estimating the amount of
sewage flow using flow calculations available from the
Department of Environmental Protection, from public utility
industry publications, or from user estimates, so long as the
latter has an empirical and readily verifiable basis, provided
that no estimate shall be made in a manner which conflicts
with Acts 2003-57 or 1990-203.
(5) Purpose. The sewer tapping fee is imposed for the ability to use
sewer system facilities to the extent of the sewage flow associated
with the use of the improved property.
B. Increase in potential usage.
§ 210-48 JUNKYARDS § 210-48
170:365
(1) Imposition of fee. The owner of each improved property which is
connected to the sewer system shall pay a tapping fee to the
Borough, in the amount specified under Subsection D as of the time
of payment, whenever the use of the improved property is to be
changed, the use of the improved property is to be intensified, or
improvements, alterations, extensions, or modifications are to be
constructed or made on the improved property unless the amount
of additional sewage flow for the improved property as of the date
the new use intended for the improved property is established, the
date the existing use of the improved property is intensified, or the
date the improvements, alterations, extensions, or modifications
contemplated for the improved property are completed, is less than
or equal to the amount of sewage flow assigned to the improved
property at the time the most recent sewer tapping fee was paid.
(2) Time of payment. The sewer tapping fee described in Subsection
B(1) shall be paid:
(a) At or before the time the owner or his agent obtains a building
permit, if a building permit is required in connection with the
circumstances under which the tapping fee is imposed;
(b) At or before the time the owner or his agent obtains a zoning
permit, if a building permit is not required but a zoning permit
is required in connection with the circumstances under which
the tapping fee is imposed;
(c) At or before the time the owner or his agent completes his
improvements, alterations, extensions, or modifications, or
establishes his new use, or intensifies his existing use, if
neither a building permit, nor a zoning permit is required in
connection with the circumstances under which the tapping
fee is imposed;
(d) Immediately upon demand by the Borough, if a building
permit, or zoning permit is required but not obtained, and
activity which would have to be authorized by a valid building
permit, or zoning permit is undertaken.
(3) Amount of sewage flow.
(a) The amount of additional sewage flow for an improved
property which is being assessed a tapping fee under this
Subsection B shall be equal to:
[1] The amount or anticipated amount of sewage flow for the
improved property as of the later of the date of payment,
the date the use (or intensified use) intended for the
improved property is established, or the date the
improvements contemplated for the improved property are
completed; less
§ 210-48 CATASAUQUA CODE § 210-48
170:366
[2] The amount of sewage flow assigned to the improved
property as of the time the most recent sewer tapping fee
was paid.
(b) The Borough shall have the option of estimating the amount of
sewage flow using flow calculations available from the
Department of Environmental Protection, from public utility
industry publications, or from user estimates, so long as the
latter has an empirical and readily verifiable basis; provided
that no estimate shall be made in a manner which conflicts
with Acts 2003-57 or 1990-203.
(c) Purpose. The sewer tapping fee is imposed for the ability to use
sewer system facilities to the extent of the amount of additional
sewage usage associated with the new, changed, or intensified
use of the improved property.
(d) (Reserved)
C. Excess actual usage.
(1) Imposition of fee. The owner of each improved property which is
connected to the sewer system shall pay a tapping fee to the
Borough, in the amount specified under Subsection D as of the time
of payment, whenever the Borough shall reasonably determine that
the actual average flow of sewage from the improved property to
the sewer system during the thirty-day period for which the flow is
greatest in a year is more than 110% of the flow for which a sewer
tapping fee has been paid with respect to the improved property.
(2) Time of payment. The sewer tapping fee described in Subsection
C(1) shall be paid within 30 days after demand by the Borough.
(3) New or additional sewage flow. The new or additional sewage flow
for which an improved property shall be assessed a tapping fee
under this Subsection C shall be equal to:
(a) The actual sewage flow for the improved property as
reasonably determined by the Borough during the most recent
fifteen-month period; less
(b) The amount of sewage flow assigned to the improved property
at the time the most recent sewer tapping fee was paid.
(4) Purpose. The sewer tapping fee is imposed for the ability to use
sewer system facilities to the extent of the full sewage usage
associated with the use of the improved property.
D. Amount of fees.
(1) For residential use, the sewer tapping fee shall be equal to the
design capacity required by a new residential customer multiplied
§ 210-48 JUNKYARDS § 210-48
170:367
by the number of new dwelling units for which the fee is being
assessed multiplied by the sum of the following fee parts:
(a) Capacity part: a capacity part in the amount of $1,127.
[Amended 11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 1319]
(b) Collection part: a collection part in the amount of $780.
[Amended 11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 1319]
(c) Special purpose part: a special purpose part, but only with
respect to customers in areas served by special purpose
facilities, as described below:
Special Purpose Area Amount
None established to date —
All other areas of the sewer
system area
$0.00
(d) Reimbursement part. A reimbursement part, but only with
respect to customers in the following areas served by facilities
constructed by private persons:
Reimbursement Area
Dates
Applicable Amount
None established to date — —
All other areas of the sewer
system area
— $0.00
(2) For nonresidential use, the sewer tapping fee shall be equal to the
daily anticipated amount of peak flow, as if full building utilization
is being realized, for the proposed use for which the fee is being
assessed multiplied by the sum of the following fee parts:
(a) Capacity part: a capacity part in the amount of $1,127 per 216
gallons per day. [Amended 11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 1319]
(b) Collection part: a collection part in the amount of $780 per 216
gallons per day. [Amended 11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 1319]
(c) Special purpose part: a special purpose part, but only with
respect to customers in areas served by special purpose
facilities, as described below:
Special Purpose Area Amount
None established to date —
All other areas of the sewer system
area
$0.00
(d) Reimbursement part.
§ 210-48 CATASAUQUA CODE § 210-48
170:368
§ 210-49. Installment payments for existing residential
developments.
[1] A reimbursement part, but only with respect to customers
in the following areas served by facilities constructed by
private persons:
Reimbursement Area
Dates
Applicable Amount
None established to date — —
All other areas of the sewer
system area
— $0.00
[2] Optional or mandatory reimbursement agreements with
persons who construct sewer facilities may be entered into
from time to time by the Borough in accordance with the
provisions of 53 Pa.C.S. § 5607(d)(24)(i)(C)(IV).
A. Sewer fees in general. Notwithstanding the general provisions of
§§ 210-46A and 210-48A(1), in the case of any owner of an improved
property which is being used for residential purposes, and is being
served by a functioning on-lot septic tank which was installed before
sewer lines were extended to serve the improved property, the owner
may elect to pay the sewer connection fee and tapping fee described in
such sections in installments in accordance with the provisions of
Subsections B through D instead of paying such fees at or before the
time the owner (or his agents) obtains a permit to connect into the
sewer system. The election shall be made at or before the time the
owner (or his agents) obtains a permit to connect into the sewer system.
B. Installment payments. Any person who elects the relief granted by this
§ 210-49 shall pay to the Borough:
(1) Fifty percent of the amount of fees which would otherwise have
been due at the time the owner (or his agents) obtains a permit to
connect into the sewer system, at or before the time the owner (or
his agents) obtains a permit to so connect; and
(2) The remaining 50% of the amount of fees which would otherwise
have been due at the time the owner (or his agents) obtains a
permit to connect into the sewer system, plus simple interest on
that fifty-percent amount at the rate of 6% per annum from the date
the owner (or his agents) obtains a permit to so connect until
payment, on or before the first anniversary of the date the owner
(or his agents) obtains a permit to connect into the sewer system.
C. Liens. Any owner who elects the relief granted by this § 210-49 shall be
deemed to have consented to the placement of a lien on his improved
property by the Borough in the amount described in Subsection B(2).
The consent shall be granted on or before the date of the payment
§ 210-48 JUNKYARDS § 210-49
170:369
§ 210-50. Deferral of payment for certain residential property
owners.
described in Subsection B(1). The owner shall pay the costs of filing and
satisfying the lien, up to a maximum of $100, at the time of the payment
described in Subsection B(1). Any additional costs shall be borne by the
Borough.
D. Property owner must connect. The relief provided by this section shall
only be available if the owner actually connects to the sewer system,
within the period granted by the Borough in its notice to connect.
A. Sewer fees in general. Notwithstanding the general provisions of
§§ 210-46A and 210-48A(1), in the case of any owner of an improved
property which is being used for residential purposes, and is being
served by a functioning on-lot septic tank which was installed less than
one year prior to the commencement of construction of a sewer system
main extension which may serve the improved property; and after
Borough officials informed the owner that a sewer system main
extension to serve the improved property was not contemplated within
a period of at least three years. The owner may elect to defer the
payment of the sewer connection fee and tapping fee described in such
sections until the fifth anniversary of the date the owner (or his agent)
obtains a permit to connect into the sewer system, subject to the
requirements of Subsections B through D. The amount of the fees so
paid shall be equal to the fees in effect at the time the owner (or his
agents) obtains a permit to connect into the sewer system, without
adjustment for subsequent increases or for any interest or other time
charges. The election shall be made at or before the time the owner (or
his agent) obtains a permit to connect into the sewer system.
B. Liens. Any owner who elects the relief granted by this § 210-50 shall
consent to the placement of a lien on his improved property by the
Borough in the amount of the fees so deferred. The consent shall be
granted on or before the date the owner (or his agent) obtains a permit
to connect into the sewer system. The Borough shall pay all the cost of
filing and satisfying the lien.
C. Property owner must connect. The relief provided by this section shall
only be available if the owner actually connects to the sewer system
within the period granted by the Borough in its notice to connect.
D. No exemption from periodic rental payments. Nothing in this § 210-50
shall be construed to exempt any owner from the requirements to make
timely payments of all periodic sewer rental/usage charges for the
services provided by the sewer system.
§ 210-49 CATASAUQUA CODE § 210-51
170:370
§ 210-51. Calculations.
A detailed itemization of all calculations clearly showing the manner in
which the fees were determined has been marked as Exhibit A attached
hereto and made a part hereof.82
§ 210-52. Word usage.
All references to be, him, his and himself shall be considered gender
neutral, and shall be deemed to represent masculine, feminine and neuter
subjects and objects.
82.Editor's Note: See Exhibit A immediately following Ch. 237, Tapping Fees.
§ 210-51 JUNKYARDS § 210-52
170:371

ARTICLE VI
Control of Fats, Oils and Grease
[Adopted 7-9-2018 by Ord. No. 1371]
§ 210-53. Purpose.
§ 210-54. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACT — The Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq. (formerly the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act).
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND — The value of the five-day test for
biochemical oxygen demand, as described in the latest edition of "Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," hereinafter "BOD."
A. This article establishes uniform requirements for users of the Borough
of Catasauqua Publicly Owned Treatment Works (hereinafter "POTW")
for the capture and disposal of fats, oils and grease ("FOG") so as to
enable the Borough of Catasauqua to comply with all applicable state
and federal laws, including but not limited to the Act and the
pretreatment regulations promulgated by the Environmental Protection
Agency found at 40 CFR 403, all for the purpose of preventing sanitary
sewer overflows, effluent quality violations and other environmental
harm and property damage.
B. This article is enacted pursuant to the requirements and authorizations
of federal and state laws and regulations relating to the operation of
municipal sanitary sewer systems and accordingly the provisions of any
state law or municipal code setting or authorizing lesser standards are
deemed to be in conflict with the requirements of this article and are
therefore inapplicable as to the subject matter hereof.
C. The objectives of this article are:
(1) To prevent the introduction of FOG into the POTW which would
interfere with its operation and degrade the quality of the effluent;
(2) To prevent sanitary sewer overflows (hereinafter "SSO"), caused in
whole or in part by FOG blockage, where sewerage flows out of a
manhole cover and along the ground, causing contamination of the
ground, local water bodies and any other property with which the
sewerage comes into contact;
(3) To promote reuse and recycling of FOG prior to discharge into the
municipal sanitary sewer system; and
(4) To enable the Borough to comply with federal, state and local
pollutant discharge limits as well as the requirements of its NPDES
permit.
§ 210-53 JUNKYARDS § 210-54
170:373
BOROUGH — Borough of Catasauqua, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania.
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND — The value of the test for chemical oxygen
demand, as described in the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater," hereinafter "COD."
COOKING ESTABLISHMENT — Any facility (exclusive of residential
facilities) which, whether or not for profit, engages in some or all of the
activities of cooking, preparing, serving or otherwise making available for
human consumption any form of foodstuff, and which uses one or more
of the following cooking or preparation methods in connection with such
activities: cooking or preparation by frying (all methods), baking (all
methods), grilling, sauteing, rotisserie cooking, broiling (all methods),
boiling, blanching, roasting, toasting, poaching, or any type of cooking or
preparation that produces a hot, nonpotable product in or on a receptacle
that requires washing, rinsing or other form of cleaning. A cooking
establishment includes, but is not limited to, restaurants, cafeterias
contained within a commercial establishment, personal care facilities,
school cafeterias (public and private), and day-care facilities in which meals
for more than six individuals (including staff) are prepared or otherwise
made available for human consumption.
EPA — The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
FATS, OILS, AND GREASES (FOG) — Organic, polar compounds derived
from animal and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain
triglyceride molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable
using analytical test procedures established in 40 CFR 136, as may be
amended from time to time. All are sometimes referred to herein as "FOG."
GENERATOR — Any person who owns or operates a grease trap or grease
interceptor, or whose activities or processes produce FOG.
GREASE INTERCEPTOR — A wastewater pretreatment unit that is installed
in a sanitary drainage system in order to intercept and remove FOG from
wastewater discharge and which is installed outside of the facility.
GREASE TRAP — A plumbing appurtenance or appliance that is installed
in a sanitary drainage system in order to intercept and remove FOG from
wastewater and which is installed inside of the facility.
GREASE WASTE — Material (including solids resulting from dewatering
processes) collected in and from a grease interceptor or grease trap in the
sanitary sewer service line of a cooking establishment.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE — The direct or indirect
introduction of FOG from a cooking establishment by a user into the POTW.
INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT PROGRAM — The Borough's industrial
pretreatment program as described in the most current version of the
Borough's Sewer Use Ordinance or any successor ordinance thereto.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge which, in whole or in part, inhibits or
disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes, treatment operations, sludge
§ 210-54 CATASAUQUA CODE § 210-54
170:374
processes, use or disposal, or is a cause, or potential cause, of a violation of
the NPDES permit.
KITCHEN FACILITIES — Facilities maintained by a cooking establishment
which relate to the preparation or service of foodstuffs and the cleaning or
sterilization of cooking and serving equipment (including without limitation
serving items such as plates, cups, glasses, eating utensils and cooking
utensils).
NON-COOKING ESTABLISHMENT — Any person or facility engaged solely
in the providing or preparation of precooked foodstuffs which do not require
or involve any form of cooking and do not generate FOG or grease waste.
NPDES PERMIT — The Part I Water Quality Permit (Permit No. PA0021580)
issued to the Borough of Catasauqua by PADEP.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, limited-liability partnership,
company, limited-liability company, corporation, political subdivision,
municipal authority, agency or instrumentality of the United States, or
agency or instrumentality of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any
other legal entity, including, with respect to all of the foregoing, where
applicable, the officers or members thereof.
pH — The measure of the relative acidity or alkalinity of water and is
defined as the negative logarithm (base 10) of the hydrogen ion
concentration.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) — A sewage treatment
plant owned by a state or municipality as defined by Section 502(4) of
the Act, including any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment,
recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of
a liquid nature. The POTW includes also the sewers, pipes and other
conveyances that convey wastewater to the sewage treatment plant. The
term includes also the municipality as defined in Section 502(4) of the Act
having jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to, and the discharges from,
such a treatment works. For purposes of this article, the phrase "municipal
sanitary sewer system" and "POTW" may be used interchangeably.
RESIDENTIAL — A single- or multiple-family dwelling unit(s) within which
cooking facilities are used solely for the preparation of foodstuffs for private
consumption.
SEWER USE ORDINANCE — Borough of Catasauqua Ordinances as
codified in Chapter 210 of the Code of the Borough of Catasauqua, as may
be amended from time to time, and any successor ordinance thereto.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS) — The value of the test for total
suspended solids, as described in the most current edition of "Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" or any successor
publication thereto. All are sometimes referred to herein as "TSS."
TRANSPORTER — A person authorized by law to transport, among other
things, grease waste.
§ 210-54 JUNKYARDS § 210-54
170:375
USER — Any person who owns or operates a cooking establishment. This
definition includes the owner of any premises on which a cooking
establishment is located.
WASTEWATER — Any liquid waste or liquid-borne waste which contains, in
whole or in part, FOG and, whether treated or untreated, are contributed to
the POTW.
§ 210-55. Grease interceptor installation, maintenance,
recordkeeping and removal.
A. Industrial pretreatment program, wastewater discharge permit
application.
(1) No later than one year following the adoption of this article, all
existing users and existing non-cooking establishments shall apply
for a wastewater discharge permit (hereinafter "WDP") or an
exemption therefrom by completing and submitting to the Borough
for review and approval a wastewater discharge permit application
("application"). This requirement shall not apply to users with
existing discharge permits covering FOG in whole or in part.
(2) New users proposing a cooking establishment and persons
proposing a non-cooking establishment shall, as part of a building
permit or other permit or approval process, apply for a WDP and
complete an application on a form prescribed by the Borough.
(3) Upon written approval of the Borough, a non-cooking
establishment may be exempted from the requirements of this
article. To be exempt in accordance with this subsection, an
applicant shall provide a formal request for exemption and include
as a part thereof the following documentation relevant to the
establishment: blueprints and other design documents, a detailed
description of the operations and activities, and a detailed list of all
potential sources of FOG.
(4) Permit issuance.
(a) Upon review of the application, the Borough shall issue a draft
Level 2 WDP in accordance with this article and the Borough
Sewer Use Ordinance. The draft permit shall specify the
required pretreatment facilities, including any requirement for
installation of a grease interceptor unit.
(b) If the user objects to any of the requirements of the draft
permit, then no later than 45 days from the date of issuance of
the draft permit, the user shall provide written comments to
the Borough, citing and providing all data or other material in
support of the objection. The Borough shall review the
comments and issue a final permit. If changes are made to the
permit as a result of the user's comments, a new draft permit
will issue.
§ 210-54 CATASAUQUA CODE § 210-55
170:376
(c) Upon expiration of the forty-five-day period without comment,
or upon notification from the user of no comment, whichever
shall first occur, the Borough shall issue the final permit.
(d) The user may appeal from the issuance of the final permit in
accordance with the applicable provisions of the Sewer Use
Ordinance.
B. Grease interceptor requirements and specifications.
(1) Grease interceptors and appurtenances shall be designed to limit
the introduction, contribution and discharge of FOG into the POTW.
The design shall be submitted for review and approval by the
Borough or its designee prior to installation in accordance with the
Borough's "Standard Technical Specifications and Requirements
for the Construction of Sanitary Sewers and Appurtenances."
(2) Unless specified to the contrary in the Sewer Use Ordinance,
grease interceptors shall produce an effluent which with respect to
FOG does not exceed a discharge concentration of 100 mg/l.
(3) Grease interceptors shall be installed in such a manner as to
pretreat all wastewater generated by a cooking establishment, and
the design shall accommodate appropriate sampling and inspection
points.
(4) Any user proposing the installation of a grease interceptor shall
clean, in a manner acceptable to the Borough, the downstream
lateral serving the premises and remove any preexisting
accumulation FOG.
(5) A grease trap shall not be a suitable alternative to a grease
interceptor for the purpose of pretreatment of FOG.
C. Cleaning and maintenance requirements.
(1) Grease interceptors shall be cleaned once every two months, and
all contents removed shall be transported and disposed off site in
accordance with applicable laws and regulations. The introduction
of sludge or the scum layer into the POTW is prohibited.
(2) Following one year of continuous operation, and upon written
application with supporting data to the Borough, a user may
request a change in the frequency of cleaning from once every two
months to quarterly.
(3) In order to properly inspect and analyze the functioning of the
grease interceptor, the user shall supply an accessible entry into
each chamber of the interceptor and a downstream sampling point,
located upstream of any mixing with other sanitary flows. The
sampling point shall be a minimum eight-inch vertical cleanout.
§ 210-55 JUNKYARDS § 210-55
170:377
§ 210-56. Approval of alternatives.
(4) The user shall maintain at the premises detailed records
encompassing a period of at least five years which reflect the
operation, testing, cleaning, repair and maintenance of the grease
interceptor. This information shall include, but not be limited to,
dates of service, names of individuals or entities providing service,
invoices/receipts reflecting services rendered and invoices/receipts
reflecting the hauling of waste by transporters. In addition to these
requirements, and not in lieu thereof, every user shall comply with
40 CFR Part 403 as relates to recordkeeping.
(5) In accordance with the requirements of the final permit and on a
form provided by the Borough, every user shall submit an annual
report outlining all maintenance activities relating to the grease
interceptor and any appurtenance thereto as well as manifest
information relating to the transport of grease waste from the
premises. The manifest information shall include, but not be limited
to, the volume of waste transported off site, the identity of the
transporter, the time and date of cleaning, the time and date of
waste transport, and the name/location of the disposal site. In
addition, copies of the manifests shall be provided and depict the
name and signature of the transporter and the name and signature
of the responsible party accepting the waste at the disposal site.
(6) Users shall maintain the grease interceptor free of inorganic solids
which may clog, or settle in, the interceptor and reduce, or create
the potential to reduce, the effective capacity of the interceptor.
Examples of inorganic solids include grit, towels, gloves, cigarettes
and eating utensils.
(7) Users shall ensure that all waste material removed from grease
interceptors is stored in appropriate containers. Unless specifically
authorized, in writing, by the Borough, all storage containers must
be kept inside the building. If approved for exterior storage, such
containers must be secured, screened and protected from
inadvertent contact, damage, tipping, spills and vandalism and
otherwise be protected from all of the foregoing due to adverse
weather conditions.
(8) Users shall ensure that all waste material removed from grease
interceptors is transported and disposed of in compliance with all
federal, state and local statutes, rules, regulations, policies and
ordinances.
(9) In accordance with federal requirements, the Borough may inspect
the functioning of the grease interceptor and appurtenances at any
time and without prior notice.
A. An alternative is the remedy by which a user may receive a modification
or deferment of a requirement of this article as it applies to a specific
§ 210-55 CATASAUQUA CODE § 210-56
170:378
establishment. The approval of an alternative or deferral is based upon
individual circumstances and shall not constitute precedent.
B. An alternative or deferral may be approved at the discretion of the
Borough when the user demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Borough
all of the following:
(1) The literal enforcement of the Ordinance requirement is
unreasonable or will exact undue hardship directly resulting from a
peculiar condition of the premises or the facilities, or that the
proposed alternative will provide an equal or better result than the
Ordinance requirement;
(2) The proposed alternative or deferral is not contrary to the public
health, safety and general welfare;
(3) The proposed alternative or deferral will not cause the Borough to
violate the requirements of the NPDES permit, federal law and
regulation, state law and regulation and other Borough ordinances,
including the Sewer Use Ordinance;
(4) The proposed alternative or deferral is consistent with the intent
and purpose of this article and the Sewer Use Ordinance; and
(5) The proposed alternative or deferral represents the minimum relief
necessary.
C. The request shall be submitted to the Borough, in writing, at the time of
application for a discharge permit. The request shall identify the
specific ordinance provision(s) from/for which the alternative or
deferral is sought and shall state the purpose(s) and the grounds
therefor. The request shall be accompanied by all supporting
documentation and, where appropriate, sealed by a Pennsylvanialicensed
engineer (preferably with waste water experience) or other,
qualified professional.
D. If deemed complete by the Borough, the request shall be granted,
granted with conditions or denied. Notice of the action shall be
provided to the applicant at the time of issuance of the draft permit, and
any appeal relating thereto shall be taken in accordance with the
requirements of Subsection B above.
E. The approval of an alternative or a deferral shall not relieve the user
from compliance with the discharge standards and requirements of this
article and the Sewer Use Ordinance; and if at any time following the
installation of an approved alternative, or during an approved deferral
period, the user fails to meet the requirements of the WDP, this article
or the Sewer Use Ordinance, or if the alternative fails to function as
represented, the user shall make all changes to the grease interceptor
system necessary to achieve compliance.
§ 210-56 JUNKYARDS § 210-57
170:379
§ 210-57. Enforcement.
Enforcement of this article shall be in accordance with the enforcement
provisions of the Sewer Use Ordinance.
§ 210-58. Repeals.
Except as otherwise stated herein, all ordinances or parts of ordinances
in conflict with the provisions of this article are hereby repealed to the
extent of such conflict. The above notwithstanding, in the event of a conflict
between this article and the Sewer Use Ordinance, this article shall be
interpreted in pari materia with the Sewer Use Ordinance. Only where
there exists a direct conflict between this article and the Sewer Use
Ordinance which cannot be so resolved shall the Sewer Use Ordinance
control.
§ 210-59. Severability.
To the extent that any word, phrase, portion or provision of the text herein
is found by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, void or
unconstitutional, such word, phrase, portion or provision shall, to the extent
possible, be deemed to be repealed and those remaining valid portions of
the text shall remain in full force and effect, provided that the same can be
accomplished without the structure of this article having been destroyed by
elimination of that word, phrase, portion or provision found to be invalid or
void.
§ 210-60. Effective date.
This article shall become effective after enactment by the Council of the
Borough of Catasauqua and Mayoral approval.
§ 210-57 CATASAUQUA CODE § 210-60
170:380
Chapter 212
(RESERVED)
Chapter 215
SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform codes — See Ch. 130.
Garage sales — See Ch. 160.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 230.
Zoning — See Ch. 280.
§ 215-1. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all signs, posters, and placards, whether
temporary or permanent, placed within the public rights-of-way of the
Borough of Catasauqua, a public utility, or other governmental agencies.
§ 215-2. General regulations.
The following regulations shall apply to all signs, posters and placards:
§ 215-3. Failure to remove.
Upon the failure of the owner, user, or property owner to remove the sign,
the Borough Manager or his designee is authorized to remove the same
and any expense attendant thereto shall be the responsibility of the owner,
agent or person having the beneficial use of the sign, who shall be billed
therefor by the Borough Manager.
§ 215-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord. No.
1288]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof before any District Justice, be sentenced to pay a
A. No sign, poster, or placard, whether permanent or temporary
(hereinafter collectively called "sign"), shall exceed two square feet in
area, nor exceed two feet in any dimension either height or width.
B. No sign, the purpose for which will extend beyond 30 days, shall be
placed in the public right-of-way without the permission of the Borough
Manager or his designee.
C. Any unused, or abandoned, sign shall be removed by the owner of the
sign, user of the sign, or property owner on whose property the same is
located, within three days from the time the event or purpose for which
the sign was installed has passed or no longer applies.
§ 210-60 JUNKYARDS § 215-4
170:381
fine of not less than $25 and no more than $300 for each violation, plus
costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fines and costs, to
imprisonment in the Lehigh County Prison for a period of not more than 30
days. Any person found guilty of violating an ordinance shall be assessed
court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in the
enforcement proceedings.
§ 215-5. Conflict with other ordinances.
Chapter 220
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junkyards — See Ch. 170.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 255.
Zoning — See Ch. 280.
A. This chapter shall not in any way be construed as interfering with,
superseding, or otherwise interfering with the basic sign regulations
imposed by the Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 280).
B. Except as stated in Subsection A above, any ordinance in conflict with
this chapter is hereby repealed insofar as a conflict exists.
§ 215-4 CATASAUQUA CODE § 215-5
170:382
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 6-30-1986 by Ord. No. 901 (Ch. VIII, Secs. 1 to 11, of the
1962 Code)]
§ 220-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Borough of Catasauqua Municipal Solid
Waste Ordinance."
§ 220-2. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this article shall have, unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise, the meanings given to them in this
section:
APPLICANT — A person desirous of being authorized as a collector.
BOROUGH — Catasauqua Borough, Lehigh County.
COLLECTOR — A person authorized by the Borough to collect, transport,
and dispose of municipal waste.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in a
nonmanufacturing or nonprocessing business including, but not limited
to, stores, markets, office buildings, restaurants, shopping centers and
theatres.
COMMERCIAL UNIT — Any commercial, industrial or institutional
establishment which is not included under the definition of "residential
unit."
DISPOSAL — The incineration, deposition. injection, dumping, spilling,
leaking or placing of municipal waste into or on the land or water in a
manner that the waste or a constituent of the waste enters the environment,
is emitted into the air, or is discharged to the waters of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
DISPOSAL SITE — Any site, facility, location, area or premises to be used
for the disposal of municipal waste.
GARBAGE — All animal and vegetable wastes attending or resulting from
the handling, dealing, storing, preparation, cooking and consumption of
foods.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
manufacturing or processing including, but not limited to, factories,
foundries, mills, processing plants, refineries and the like.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
service to persons including, but not limited to, hospitals, nursing homes,
orphanages, schools and universities.
§ 220-1 JUNKYARDS § 220-2
170:383
MANAGEMENT — The entire process, or any part thereof, of storage,
collection, transportation, processing, treatment and disposal of municipal
wastes by any person engaging in such process.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other material including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities
and any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste
from a municipal, commercial or institutional waste supply treatment plant,
waste water treatment plant, or air pollution control facility. (Pennsylvania
Solid Waste Management Act 97, Section 103.83)
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipal authority, federal government
or agency, state institution and agency, or any other legal entity whatsoever
which is recognized by law as being subject to such rights and duties.
PROCESSING — Any technology used for the purpose of reducing the
volume or bulk of municipal waste or any technology used to convert part
or all of such waste materials for off-site reuse. Processing facilities include,
but are not limited to, transfer facilities, composting facilities, incinerators,
recycling facilities, and resource recovery facilities.
REFUSE — The collective term applying to all garbage, rubbish, ashes,
leaves and grass trimmings from residential, municipal, commercial or
institutional premises.
REGULAR — At least three or more times per month.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT — Any single-family, double-family or multifamily
apartments except those which contain a commercial unit; also churches,
convents, banks, business and professional offices, barber shops, and
newspaper and magazine shops; and also rooming houses and boarding
houses. For purposes of this article, the number of residential units in a
rooming or boarding house shall be determined by dividing the number of
rooms for roomers and boarders by three.
RIFFRAFF — All waste material which is too large for collection in a twentygallon
container. Examples include Christmas trees, furniture, tanks,
stoves, large dead animals, tree trimmings, etc.
RUBBISH — All waste material other than ashes or garbage which can be
collected in a twenty-gallon container such as paper, rags, street sweepings,
small dead animals, excelsior, straw, boxes, old clothes and shoes, leather
scraps, pieces of carpet, grass hedge trimmings, cloth, glass, china, wood,
sand, brick, tile, etc.
SOLID WASTE — Any waste, including but not limited to, municipal,
residual or hazardous wastes, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous materials. (Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act 97, Section
103.)
83.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 220-2 CATASAUQUA CODE § 220-2
170:384
STORAGE — The containment of any municipal waste on a temporary basis
in such a manner as not to constitute disposal of such waste, and it shall
be presumed that the containment of any municipal waste in excess of one
year constitutes disposal.
TRANSPORTATION — The off-site removal of any municipal waste
generated or present at any time from the Borough.
§ 220-3. General regulations. [Amended 9-6-1994 by Ord. No. 1016;
6-3-1996 by Ord. No. 1053]
A. All municipal waste, not elsewhere excluded, shall be collected,
conveyed and disposed of by the contractor for the Borough; provided,
however, that the Borough Manager shall require any person or persons
owning or occupying any premises whose accumulated municipal waste
per unit each time of collection is in excess of two twenty-gallon
containers or their equivalent by weight or volume, to personally
collect, convey and dispose of such municipal waste in accordance with
all regulations for collection, conveyance and disposal prescribed in
this article or made by the Borough Council or the Borough Manager, or
to pay such additional fees as may be required for the removal thereof.
B. Riffraff items can be disposed of by the Borough contractor upon the
notification of the property owner with the exception of Christmas trees
which shall be collected without the need for prior notification. With the
exception of Christmas trees, riffraff items shall be considered as
additional refuse and shall not be included as part of the annual service
fee of the Borough. Property owners or occupants of residential units
shall also have the option to dispose of riffraff items through a licensed
refuse hauler. The cost of collecting riffraff items shall be borne by the
owner of the property disposing of the items and shall be paid directly
to a licensed refuse hauler or to the residential contractor of the
Borough. Christmas trees shall be the only riffraff item included as part
of the annual service fee of the Borough and as such can only be
collected by the residential contractor of the Borough.
C. The cost for the collection service as defined and provided under this
article and as fixed from time to time by the Council of the Borough of
Catasauqua shall be borne and paid for by the owner of the premises
from which the municipal waste is collected.
D. Proper Borough officers are hereby authorized to contract for the
performance of the collection services provided by this article and to
award a contract therefor from time to time for such period of time as
shall be determined by Borough Council which contract shall require
the contractor to assume all responsibility for the collection of all
municipal waste in the Borough in accordance with the provisions of
this article and regulations, orders and specifications provided under
the authority thereof, and to convey, dump and dispose of all such
municipal waste in accordance with § 220-4, and to fix and regulate in a
manner not inconsistent with the terms of this article, and the manner,
§ 220-2 JUNKYARDS § 220-3
170:385
method and time of collecting and conveying refuse, the type of
equipment required for the purpose and the price to be paid for the
performance of said contract and the time or times for the payment
thereof.
E. The collection and disposal of municipal waste in the Borough of
Catasauqua shall be under the supervision of the Borough Manager. He
shall have authority to make regulations concerning the days of
collection, type and location of waste containers and to change and
modify the same after notice as required by law, provided that such
regulations are not contrary to the provisions hereof.
F. The Borough Manager is authorized to arrange date schedules for the
collection of municipal waste from all units not excluded in the various
categories and sections of the Borough and shall give public notice
thereof. Such schedules shall provide for two collections for each and
every week throughout the year. No collections shall be made on
Sundays or the following holidays: New Year's Day, Good Friday,
Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving and Christmas.
Only one collection shall be made in any week when one of these
holidays falls on a normal collection day.
G. All persons owning or occupying residential units within the Borough
other than those excluded under Subsection A of this section, or § 220-8
of this article, shall dispose of all municipal waste and Christmas trees
via the municipal collection service and no person shall transport or
dispose of any refuse by any means not approved by this article.
H. Ownership of garbage, rubbish, ashes or Christmas trees set out for
collection shall be vested in the Borough.
I. Garbage, ashes and rubbish shall be included in the regular collection
service and it shall not be necessary to separate these different types of
refuse.
J. The Borough Manager shall notify all occupants of the days of refuse
collection in each area of the Borough. Refuse may not be set out earlier
than 6:00 p.m. the day before the scheduled day of collection.
K. Prohibited acts. On and after the date of approval of this article
pursuant to the authority contained in this article:
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to place any refuse in any street,
alley or other public place or upon private property, whether owned
by such person or not, within the Borough, except it be in proper
receptacles for collection. No person shall throw or deposit any
refuse in any stream or other body of water.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person other than the occupants of the
premises on which refuse receptacles are stored, or the collector,
to remove the covers of any of the refuse receptacles or to remove
the refuse stored in such containers.
§ 220-3 CATASAUQUA CODE § 220-3
170:386
§ 220-4. Storage of municipal waste.
(3) It shall be unlawful to place in any containers provided for regular
collection any wearing apparel, bedding or refuse from premises
where highly infectious or contagious diseases have prevailed, or
any highly inflammable or explosive refuse.
(4) It shall be unlawful to haul refuse over the streets of the Borough of
Catasauqua in any vehicle other than a watertight vehicle provided
with a tight cover so as to prevent offensive odors from escaping
therefrom and refuse from being blown, dropped, or spilled
therefrom. No refuse shall be dumped or disposed of within the
limits of the Borough.
(5) It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any accumulation of
refuse on any premises in the Borough other than for the purpose
of collection in the manner provided by this article or by special
regulation of Borough Council. Any unauthorized accumulation of
refuse on any premises is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is
prohibited.
(6) Except during the time allowed by this article for the placement of
containers for collection, no trash container, refuse container or
recycling container shall be placed or stored on any property so as
to be visible from the street in front of the property.
(7) All furniture, materials and other similar products designed, built
and manufactured exclusively for indoor living use shall not be
stored on exterior porches, in yards or any other part of an exterior
property in residential and nonresidential areas. The storage of
automobile car seats and other non-weather-resistant materials
shall also be prohibited. [Added 3-7-2011 by Ord. No. 1263]
A. General.
(1) It shall be the duty of every owner of property and every person
occupying any dwelling unit, premises or place of business within
the Borough where municipal waste is produced and is
accumulated, by his own expense and cost to provide and keep at
all times, a sufficient number of containers to hold all municipal
wastes which may accumulate during the intervals between
collection of such municipal waste by an authorized collector.
(2) It shall be the responsibility of the person occupying the premises
to keep all refuse containers in a sanitary condition.
(3) All garbage shall have drained from it all free liquids and shall be
wrapped in paper before being placed in refuse containers.
(4) All rubbish shall be drained of liquid before being deposited for
collection.
§ 220-3 JUNKYARDS § 220-4
170:387
(5) Rubbish or ashes which are not placed in refuse containers must be
secured in some fashion so as to prevent them from blowing away
from the collection point.
(6) Christmas trees, hedge clippings and similar materials shall be cut
to lengths not to exceed three feet and shall be securely tied in
bundles not more than two feet thick before being offered for
regular collection.
(7) Rifraff items can be disposed of by the Borough contractor upon the
notification of the property owner with the exception of Christmas
trees which shall be collected without the need for prior
notification. With the exception of Christmas trees, riffraff items
shall be considered as additional refuse and shall not be included
as part of the annual service fee of the Borough. Property owners
or occupants of residential units shall also have the option to
dispose of riffraff items through a licensed refuse hauler. The cost
of collecting riffraff items shall be borne by the owner of the
property disposing of the items and shall be paid directly to a
licensed hauler or to the contractor of the Borough. Christmas
trees shall be the only riffraff item included as part of the annual
service fee of the Borough and as such can only be collected by the
contractor of the Borough. If the property owner or occupant of a
residential unit wishes to have riffraff items collected by the
contractor of the Borough, he can make arrangements for
collection by calling the Borough Hall.
(8) The removal of wearing apparel, bedding or other refuse from
premises where highly infectious or contagious diseases have
prevailed shall be performed under the supervision and direction of
the Board of Health. Occupants of premises containing such refuse
shall contact the Borough Manager to arrange for such removal.
(9) Highly inflammable or explosive refuse may not be offered for
regular collection. Occupants of premises containing such refuse
must contact the Borough Manager to arrange for removal at the
expense of the occupant.
(10) Any refuse container which does not conform to these regulations
or which has ragged or sharp edges or any other defect liable to
hamper or injure the collector shall be promptly replaced. Failure
to comply within 10 days will result in the removal of the defective
container as refuse.
(11) Emptied containers shall be removed from their collection point by
the owner or occupant by 12:00 noon the day of collection.
B. Storage on residential properties.
(1) Containers. All municipal waste accumulated by owners of each
property and/or the occupants of residential properties shall be
placed in containers, for collection by an authorized collector. The
§ 220-4 CATASAUQUA CODE § 220-4
170:388
§ 220-5. Authorization of collectors.
containers shall be durable, watertight and made of metal or
plastic. The size of each such container shall not exceed a twentygallon
capacity.
(2) Location of containers. Each municipal waste container shall be
located so as to be accessible to the collector at ground level and at
a point on the curb line of the street, or within no less than 10 feet
of the public street or alley right-of-way from which collection from
a vehicle can be made. Failure to place containers at such locations
may result in discontinuance of service.
C. Storage on commercial, institutional and industrial properties.
(1) Containers. Storage of municipal waste on commercial,
institutional and industrial properties shall be done in the same
type of containers as are required for residential properties except
where the accumulation for each commercial, institutional or
industrial property precludes their use, in which case such owner
or occupant shall make special arrangements with the authorized
collector for the storing of such additional quantities. Such special
arrangements shall include the following:
(a) The type of special bulk container to be furnished by the
collector and as may be approved by the Borough.
(b) The number of such containers shall be agreed to between the
collector and such owner or occupant of the commercial,
institutional or industrial property to be used in any collection
period.
(2) Location of containers. Containers for collection at commercial,
institutional and industrial properties shall be located on such
premises at a place agreed upon by such owner or occupant of the
commercial, institutional or industrial property and the authorized
collector and shall not be unsatisfactory to the Borough. Such
location shall not interfere with public or private sidewalks,
walkways, driveways, roads, streets, highways or entrances and
exits of public or private buildings.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than such persons as are duly
authorized by the Borough, to collect and transport solid waste of any
nature as a regular hauling business within or from the Borough.
Authorization shall be given only as set forth below.
B. Authorization to collect, transport and dispose of municipal waste for
persons other than one's self may be given only by the Borough through
the issuance of a license. All applications for licensing shall be reviewed
by the Borough Manager and shall be approved in accordance with the
following:
§ 220-4 JUNKYARDS § 220-5
170:389
§ 220-6. Transportation of solid waste.
Any person transporting solid waste within the Borough shall prevent or
remedy any spillage from vehicles or containers used in the transport of
such solid waste.
§ 220-7. Disposal of municipal waste.
(1) Municipal solid waste collection licenses may be issued only to
those persons who can provide satisfactory evidence that they are
capable of providing the necessary services and can comply with
the provisions and intent of this article. The municipality reserves
the right to disapprove any application for license.
(2) Applicants for a municipal solid waste collection license must
furnish the following information:
(a) The number of vehicles, and the make, model, license plate
number and size of the vehicle, to be used for collection and
transportation.
(b) The location, address and telephone number of the business
office of the applicant.
(c) A certificate of the applicant's workmen's compensation
insurance as required by law.
(d) A certificate of insurance coverage providing complete third
party comprehensive, bodily injury and property damage,
liability insurance, the limits of which shall be uniformly
determined by the Borough Solicitor.
(e) Any other information which the Borough may request and
deem necessary prior to the issuance of a license.
(3) Licenses shall be issued on a calendar year basis, but may be
revoked at any time by the Borough for just cause.
(4) Fees for licenses shall be set by resolution of Borough Council84
and the amount shall be provided to any applicant or other person
upon request.
A. All municipal waste produced, collected and transported from within
the jurisdictional limits of the Borough shall be, to the extent permitted
by law, disposed of at disposal facilities designated by the Borough and
in accordance with any currently effective Solid Waste Management
Plan of the Borough. In the absence of such designated facilities and/or
such currently effective Solid Waste Management Plan of the Borough,
the Borough reserves the right to designate a state-permitted facility of
84.Editor's Note: See Ch. A285, Fees.
§ 220-5 CATASAUQUA CODE § 220-7
170:390
§ 220-8. Exclusions. [Amended 12-28-1987 by Ord. No. 925]
its choice or require that disposal be at a state-permitted facility of the
authorized collector's choice.
B. If the Borough designated the disposal facilities as provided for above,
all authorized collectors and other interested persons shall be informed
by the Borough Manager of the location and other information
pertaining to the designated disposal facilities to be used for the
disposal of municipal waste collected, transported, removed and
disposed of from within the Borough.
C. This article shall govern all municipal waste including nonresidential
and residential municipal waste excluded from collection by the
Borough's collector.
A. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to prohibit any person not
regularly engaged in the business of collecting municipal waste from
hauling his own municipal waste on an irregular and unscheduled basis,
to a state-permitted disposal facility.
B. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit a farmer from carrying out the
normal activities of his farming operation, including composting and
spreading of manure or other farm-produced agricultural wastes.
C. The provisions of this article do not apply to anything but the storage,
collection, transportation and disposal of municipal waste and do not
apply, therefore, to hazardous or residual wastes as defined by the
Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act.
D. Residential units.
(1) The following residential units may be excluded for collection by
the Borough's collector at the owner's option upon notification in
writing to the Borough Manager:
(a) Buildings containing more than 10 residential units.
(b) Buildings containing less than 10 residential units where the
same building contains one or more commercial units and
where a special bulk container or containers is supplied for the
use of both the commercial and residential units.
(2) Where a property owner elects to have the residential municipal
waste excluded under the provisions of this section, the units will
be removed from the Borough's collection effective January 1 of the
collection year following the date of election by the property owner.
Each year thereafter the property owner shall submit a signed copy
of an agreement with a private authorized hauler to maintain the
exclusion. The affected units will remain governed by § 220-7 for
disposal.
§ 220-7 JUNKYARDS § 220-8
170:391
§ 220-9. Fees; billing of units. [Amended 12-28-1987 by Ord. No.
925]
E. It is the intent of this article to regulate and provide for the collection of
municipal waste from residential units only. The collection of all
municipal waste generated from nonresidential units including, but not
limited to, commercial, industrial and institutional establishments shall
not be governed by the provisions of this article with respect to
collection. All other provisions including the licensing and regulating of
haulers of nonresidential municipal waste, the storage and disposal of
nonresidential municipal waste shall be regulated by this article.
F. Grass clippings, when used for composting, shall be excluded from the
provisions of this article.
A. The fees for the collection and disposal of municipal waste from all units
collected under this article shall be as set by resolution of Borough
Council,85 per unit, provided that there be not more than an average
accumulation of two twenty-gallon containers of municipal waste per
unit per collection. Public notice of the fee schedule shall be made by
the Borough Manager upon revision thereto and not less frequently
than annually.
B. For purposes of billing, a single-family dwelling shall be billed as one
unit, a double-family dwelling shall be billed as two units, apartment or
multifamily dwellings shall be billed for as many units as the number of
apartment or family units contained therein, and rooming/boarding
houses shall be billed for the calculated number of residential units
contained therein. The remaining uses listed in the definition of
"residential units" shall each be billed as one unit. If there is a
combination of any of the aforesaid residential units as defined, they
shall be billed cumulatively.
C. Payment.
(1) All bills for the collection and disposal service provided under this
article shall be rendered annually and shall thereupon be due and
payable in accordance with the schedule set forth herein.
(2) The total annual bill shall be presented on January 1 of each year.
The total annual bill shall be due and payable in three equal
periodic installments, with the installments due on the last day of
February, April and June, respectively. All accounts shall be
considered delinquent if the installment is not paid by the due date
for that installment, and accounts which are considered delinquent
shall be subject to a penalty of 15% of the amount of the installment
which is considered delinquent. If a delinquent account is not paid
by July 1 of the year for which the bill is presented, the Borough
Manager shall refer the account to the Borough Solicitor with
85.Editor's Note: See Ch. A285, Fees.
§ 220-8 CATASAUQUA CODE § 220-9
170:392
§ 220-10. Violations and penalties; additional remedies.
instructions to proceed for the collection of such unpaid charges,
together with all penalties thereon, by an action in assumpsit or, at
the election of the Borough, in any other manner provided by law
for the collection of a municipal claim.
(3) Any property owner may elect to pay the full annual bill in one
installment by the last day of February. Any property owner who
elects to so pay the annual bill shall be entitled to a discount equal
to 5% of the current year's annual bill, which discount shall be
deducted from the amount paid by the property owner. No property
owner shall be entitled to the aforementioned discount if the total
bill is not paid in full by the last day of February.
D. Senior citizens who qualify shall be entitled to a discount on the refuse
bill for the unit in which they reside only, of an amount as set by
resolution of Borough Council.86 To qualify, senior citizens must:
(1) Be in excess of 62 years of age as of 1/1 of the year in which the
discount is requested;
(2) Live alone or with a spouse only; senior citizens living with other
family members shall not be eligible;
(3) Own the home in which they are residing;
(4) Meet income requirements as set by resolution of Council.
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article or of any
regulations made by Council or the Borough Manager under the
provisions hereof shall, upon conviction by a District Justice, be subject
to a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $300, together with
the costs of prosecution and imprisonment in the Lehigh County jail for
a period of not more than 30 days. Every violator of the provisions of
this article shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and
every day such violation shall continue and shall be subject to the
penalty imposed by this section for each and every such separate
offense.
B. In addition to the foregoing penalty, the Borough may require the owner
or occupant of a property to remove any accumulation of solid waste
and should said person fail to remove such solid waste after 10 days
following written notice, the Borough may cause the solid waste to be
collected and disposed of with the costs for such actions to be charged
to the owner or occupant of the property in a manner provided by law.
86.Editor's Note: The current resolution, containing the amount of the discount and income
and eligibility requirements, is on file in the Borough offices. Said resolution may contain
additional eligibility requirements.
§ 220-9 JUNKYARDS § 220-10
170:393
§ 220-11. Effect of other provisions; amendment.
C. Any person found guilty of violating an ordinance shall be assessed
court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in
the enforcement proceedings. [Added 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1288]
A. This article shall be subject to all applicable federal, state and local
laws, ordinances, rules and regulations including the rules and
regulations as set forth by the Department of Environmental Protection,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. This article or any part thereof may be amended from time to time in
accordance with the procedures established by law.
§ 220-10 CATASAUQUA CODE § 220-11
170:394
ARTICLE II
Recycling
[Adopted 10-4-1993 by Ord. No. 1004 (Ch. VIII, Part 2, of the 1962
Code)]
§ 220-12. Title; construction; when effective.
§ 220-13. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when appearing in the text of this article,
shall have the meaning given to them in this section, unless the context
clearly indicates otherwise:
ALUMINUM CANS — Any empty containers used for food or beverage,
consisting entirely of aluminum.
BIMETALLIC CONTAINERS — Empty containers consisting of either steel
only or steel and aluminum, which were used to contain either food or
beverage or both.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Catasauqua, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania,
including the Borough Council, Borough Manager, the Borough staff and
others when duly authorized.
COATED PAPER — Any paper which has a shiny or glossy finish or
appearance, resulting from treatment of the surface or application of a
coating of kaolin, clay or other chemicals. The term includes the advertising
inserts which are often intermingled or distributed with newspapers.
COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY — All business, commercial, education, industrial,
institutional or municipal establishments and community activities and all
multifamily housing of 11 or more residential dwellings. If any commercial
A. Title. This article shall be known as the "Borough of Catasauqua
Mandatory Recycling Ordinance."
B. Construction.
(1) The various headings used throughout this article are intended
only as an aid to its organization, in order to facilitate ease of
reading and are not to be considered a substantive part of this
article.
(2) In this article, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
(a) The singular shall include the plural.
(b) The plural shall include the singular.
(c) The masculine shall include the feminine and neuter.
C. Effective date. Mandatory recycling for all residential dwellings in the
Borough of Catasauqua shall commence 30 days after the enactment of
this article.
§ 220-12 JUNKYARDS § 220-13
170:395
activity occurs in a residential establishment, the entire establishment shall
be deemed a commercial property.
CORRUGATED PAPER — The fabricated or manufactured structural paper
material with an inner core shaped in rigid parallel furrows and ridges,
with one or more outer liners, often consisting of a material known as kraft
paper.
CURBSIDE — The following location on the adjoining public street or road,
and where the Borough usually picks up garbage:
CURBSIDE RECYCLING PROGRAM — The regularly scheduled Borough
operation which provides labor, equipment and services to collect
recyclable materials from the curbside of designated residential
establishments within the Borough.
GLASS CONTAINERS — Bottles and jars made of clear, green or brown
glass. Excluded are plate glass, automotive glass, blue glass and porcelain
and ceramic products.
HIGH GRADE OFFICE PAPER — Any white paper of the type commonly
used for letter writing, stationery, note paper, plain paper for photocopying
machines, computer printers and other general purpose paper, whether or
not any printed or written matter is contained thereon. It does not include
newspaper, magazines, corrugated paper or any coated paper.
LEAD ACID BATTERIES — Includes, but is not limited to, automotive, truck
and industrial batteries that contain lead.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves from trees, bushes and all other plants, garden
residues, shrubbery, tree trimmings and similar material but not including
grass clippings.
MAGAZINES — Printed matter on coated paper containing miscellaneous
written pieces published at fixed or varying intervals, also known as
periodicals and includes telephone directories. Expressly excluded are
newspaper and all other paper products of any nature whatsoever.
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING — Any 11 or more condominiums, apartments or
other residential dwellings, regardless of the form of ownership, tenancy
or other physical arrangement of the structure, which are owned under a
single deed.
NEWSPAPERS — Paper of the type commonly referred to as newsprint and
distributed at fixed intervals, having printed thereon news and opinions,
containing advertisements and other matters of public interest. Expressly
On or just in back of the curb or curbline at the edge of the cartway, for
streets or roads which have curbs.
A.
For streets or roads which do not have curbs, within reasonable safe
proximity of the paved cartway.
B.
As otherwise established by regulation of the Borough Manager, where
the above locations are not clear or satisfactory.
C.
§ 220-13 CATASAUQUA CODE § 220-13
170:396
excluded are advertising inserts printed on coated paper which are often
distributed or intermingled with newspapers.
PLASTIC BEVERAGE CARRIER — The plastic rings or similar plastic
connectors used as holding devices in the packaging of beverages including,
but not limited to, all carbonated beverages, liquors, wines, fruit juices,
mineral waters, soda and beer.
PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Containers of all varieties, types and chemical
compositions of plastic.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Materials identified by the Borough to be
recycled including, but not limited to, the materials listed in § 1501 of Act
101.87
RECYCLING FACILITY — A facility employing a technology that is a process
that separates or classifies municipal waste and creates or recovers
reusable materials that can be sold to or reused by a manufacturer as a
substitute for or a supplement to virgin raw materials. The term "recycling
facility" shall not mean transfer stations or landfills for solid waste nor
composting facilities or resource recovery facilities.
REGULATIONS — The rules, regulations, standards, specifications, orders,
licenses, permits, interpretations, schedules, zones, routes and waivers
established from time to time by the Borough pursuant to the authority of
this article. Such regulations shall be deemed to be a part of this article and
included by reference as if written herein.
RESIDENTIAL ESTABLISHMENT —
SOURCE SEPARATE — To separate recyclable materials from municipal
solid waste for the purpose of recycling.
WASTE — A material whose original purpose has been completed and which
is directed to a disposal or processing facility or is otherwise disposed,
whether municipal, residual or hazardous waste or otherwise. The term
does not include source separated recyclable materials or materials
approved by the Department for beneficial use.
A. A single-family dwelling.
B. Each structure containing 10 or fewer dwelling units.
These definitions shall apply regardless of either the form of ownership
or tenancy, or the physical arrangement of the structure. If any
commercial activity occurs in a residential establishment, except for
a home occupation or business office in the home for an off-premises
business as provided for and approved by the Zoning Ordinance88 and/
or the Zoning Hearing Board, the entire establishment shall be deemed
to be a commercial activity.
C.
87.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
88.Editor's Note: See Ch. 280, Zoning.
§ 220-13 JUNKYARDS § 220-14
170:397
§ 220-14. Recyclable materials.
The following materials are hereby designated as "recyclable materials"
within the Borough of Catasauqua:
§ 220-15. General operation of program and requirements.
A. Residential. For all residential establishments, including multifamily
housing, as defined by this article:
(1) Clear glass.
(2) Brown or green glass.
(3) Aluminum cans.
(4) Bimetallic and steel cans.
(5) Newspaper.
(6) Leaf waste.
(7) Plastic containers of the varieties, types and chemical compositions
as specified by the Borough Manager.
B. Commercial. For all other commercial activities, except multifamily
housing, as defined in this article:
(1) Clear glass.
(2) Brown or green glass.
(3) Aluminum cans.
(4) Bimetallic and steel cans.
(5) Corrugated paper.
(6) High grade officer paper.
(7) Leaf waste.
(8) Newspaper.
A. Recyclable materials. Every person in the Borough of Catasauqua shall
be required to separate each of the recyclable materials listed in
§ 220-14, Recyclable materials, of this article, in accordance with the
use of property occupied by such person for the purpose of recycling,
from all of the other municipal solid waste and other waste generated
by that person. No person may dispose of recyclable materials with any
other municipal solid waste or other waste.
B. Batteries. Lead acid batteries shall not be disposed of or included with
any municipal solid waste or recyclable materials. Lead acid batteries
§ 220-14 CATASAUQUA CODE § 220-15
170:398
§ 220-16. Residential establishments.
All persons owning, occupying or operating residential establishments
within the Borough of Catasauqua shall comply with the following
requirements:
§ 220-17. Recycling containers.
One set of recycling containers shall be acquired by each residential
establishment, except multifamily housing. The Borough shall have the
power to require that each recycling container be identified with the
residential establishment to which it is assigned.
shall be disposed only in accordance with § 1510 of Act 101 and
otherwise prevailing commonwealth law and regulations.
C. Plastic beverage carriers. Plastic beverage carriers which are not
degradable shall not be used, as required by § 1701(c) of Act 101.
D. Other waste. All other municipal solid waste and other waste materials,
whether residual, hazardous or otherwise, shall be generated, stored,
separated, placed, collected and disposed of in accordance with all
applicable federal, commonwealth, county and Borough laws,
ordinances, rules, regulations, specifications, standards, orders,
permits and licenses.
A. Separation. Separate the recyclable materials and maintain the
materials in the separated condition until collected by the Borough. The
separation shall be performed by the time those materials are placed at
curbside for collection.
B. Preparation. Prepare for recycling all of the recyclable materials
generated by that person, in accordance with the regulations for each
respective material as established by the Borough, by the time that
those recyclable materials are placed for collection, and maintain those
materials in that condition.
C. Recycling containers. Place recyclable materials in the separate official
Borough of Catasauqua recycling container or other containers
authorized by the Borough, in accordance with regulations established
by the Borough. Each residential establishment shall acquire and use a
set of the official Borough of Catasauqua recycling containers for this
purpose.
D. Placement and time. Each recyclable materials, in their proper
recycling containers, shall be placed or set out at curbside, and empty
recycling containers shall be removed from curbside on the scheduled
day for collection, in accordance with the times and schedules
established by the Borough.
A. Purchase fee amount. A purchase fee as set from time to time by
resolution of Borough Council89 per each recycling container (or for the
§ 220-15 JUNKYARDS § 220-17
170:399
§ 220-18. Collection by Borough.
official set of two containers) is hereby established, to provide for the
replacement of each of the Borough's official recycling containers. The
amount of the purchase fee shall be set and may be subsequently
changed from time to time by resolution of Borough Council and shall
be adequate in amount to reimburse the Borough for the cost of
purchasing or replacement for any such container.90
B. Time of purchase and payment. The purchase fee shall be paid to the
Borough for all official Borough of Catasauqua recycling containers
which are supplied to the residential establishments after the effective
date of this article.
C. Loss, theft or damage.
(1) The owner, occupant and operator of each residential
establishment is responsible for and shall bear the risk of loss, theft
or damage to the official recycling containers supplied for the use
of that establishment.
(2) If any official recycling container for a residential establishment is
either lost, stolen or damaged, the owner, occupant or operator
shall pay a replacement cost to the Borough for replacement in
kind of the official recycling container, which shall be the same as
the purchase fee amount, as otherwise specified in this section.
A. Duty to collect. The Borough shall collect and transport any designated
recyclable materials which have been properly prepared, separated and
placed at curbside in time for collection on the scheduled date or
brought to a designated drop off center. The Borough shall have no
obligation to collect any materials which do not conform to this article
or regulations. Catasauqua shall collect all recyclable materials which
are placed at curbside by each residential establishment, except
multifamily housing, on at least one occasion per calendar month, in
accordance with zones and schedules established by the Borough
Manager.
B. Curbside recycling program. The Borough of Catasauqua shall collect
recyclable materials designated for curbside collection which are
placed at curbside by each residential establishment, except
multifamily housing, on at least one occasion per calendar month. The
Borough Manager shall establish zones, schedules and materials to be
collected.
C. Drop off centers. The Borough may operate "drop off" centers at various
locations within the Borough for the collection of recyclable materials
as designated by § 220-14 of this article. The Borough shall establish
89.Editor's Note: See Ch. A285, Fees.
90.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 220-17 CATASAUQUA CODE § 220-18
170:400
the location, operating hours, recyclable materials accepted and other
details of the operation of the drop off centers.
D. Leaf waste. The Borough of Catasauqua shall collect leaf waste during
the months of October, November and December of each calendar year,
weather permitting, in accordance with a schedule established by the
Borough Manager.
E. Sale and marketing.
(1) Recyclable materials that are collected shall be recycled unless
markets for them do not exist.
(2) The Borough shall transport, process, sell, market and dispose of
all recyclable materials collected by the Borough in any manner
that the Borough Manager sees fit, in his discretion, except that
there shall be no cash transactions involving recyclable materials.
(3) The Borough Manager shall establish and keep necessary records
and report at least annually to Borough Council the quantity, price,
total amount and to whom the recyclable materials are sold,
processed, marketed or disposed.
(4) The Borough shall accord consideration for the collection,
marketing and disposition of recyclable materials to persons
engaged in the business of recycling on the effective date of Act
101, whether or not the persons were operating for profit, as
required by § 1501(f) of Act 101.
(5) Dealers that market the Borough's recyclable materials must
provide written documentation that either said materials are
recycled or that markets for those materials do not exist.
F. Borough organization. The Borough Manager shall establish an
appropriate administrative organization and system for the collection,
transportation, separation, processing, sale, marketing and disposition
of recyclable materials in accordance with this article.
G. Contracting out. Nothing in this article shall prohibit the Borough from
entering into agreements or contracts with any person or agency to
collect, separate and/or market recyclable materials from within the
Borough.
(1) Power. The Borough shall have the power to enter into contracts
with other persons for the collection, transportation, separation,
processing, sale, marketing or disposition of materials as required
by Act 101 and this article.
(2) Allocation of functions. Any such contract shall state in writing
which functions, rights and duties of the Borough under this article
are to be performed by the contracting person and which functions,
rights and duties are to remain with the Borough.
§ 220-18 JUNKYARDS § 220-18
170:401
§ 220-19. Borough ownership of recyclables.
All recyclable materials shall become property of and shall be owned by
the Borough of Catasauqua, or its authorized agents or contractors when
such materials are picked up from the curbside or delivered to the drop off
center. Nothing in this article shall be deemed to impair the ownership of
recyclable materials by the person who generated them before such pickup
or delivery. Collections of recyclable materials by persons not authorized by
the Borough is prohibited by Article I of this chapter, as the same may be
amended.
§ 220-20. Multifamily housing.
All multifamily housing, as defined in this article, shall recycle all recyclable
materials generated by either of the two following methods:
§ 220-21. Commercial activities.
(3) Substitution and interpretation. To the extent that any contracting
person takes the place of the Borough of Catasauqua in the
performance of functions, rights and duties under this article,
"Borough of Catasauqua" and "Borough" shall be deemed to mean
that contracting person.
(4) Responsibility. A person who enters into a contract under this
subsection shall be responsible with the Borough of Catasauqua for
implementation of this article, to the extent of such contract.
A. Contract. Contracting with a commercial solid waste hauler or
otherwise providing for the recycling, as defined by Act 101, of all of the
recyclable materials generated within that multifamily housing, in
accordance with this article.
B. On-site system. Multifamily rental housing properties may establish a
collection system for recyclable material at each property, as required
by § 1501(c)(1)(ii) of Act 101, which collection system shall consist of
the following:
(1) Suitable containers for collecting and sorting material.
(2) Easily accessible locations for the containers.
(3) Written instructions to the occupants concerning the use and
availability of the collection.
(4) The Borough may establish regulations defining compliance with
these requirements.
(5) Owners, landlords and agents of owners and landlords who comply
with this subsection shall not be liable for the noncompliance of the
occupants of their buildings.
§ 220-18 CATASAUQUA CODE § 220-21
170:402
§ 220-22. Commercial solid waste haulers.
Any commercial solid waste hauler contracted, engaged or hired for
recycling in the Borough of Catasauqua shall comply with the following
requirements:
A. Recycling. Every person owning, occupying or operating a commercial
activity, as defined by this article, within the Borough of Catasauqua
shall comply with this article by separating and storing in enclosed
building or closed container or as otherwise approved by the Borough,
until collection for recycling, by contract with a commercial solid waste
hauler or otherwise, all of the recyclable materials designated in
§ 220-14B of this article which are generated by that commercial
activity.
B. Exemption report.
(1) Persons occupying business, commercial, education, industrial,
institutional and municipal establishments shall be exempt from
this article if those persons have, by contract with a commercial
solid waste hauler or otherwise, provided for the recycling of the
designated recyclable materials. Community activities may not be
exempted.
(2) To be eligible for this exemption, a business, commercial,
educational, industrial, institutional and municipal establishment
must annually provide written documentation to the Borough of the
total of tons recycled.
C. Compliance with hauler regulations. If a commercial solid waste hauler
is contracted, engaged or hired for recycling, then the commercial
activity shall comply with all regulations of the commercial solid waste
hauler for recyclable materials with regard to the following:
(1) Separation.
(2) Preparation.
(3) Storage and placement in containers.
(4) Placement for pickup.
(5) Timing of placement and pickup.
D. Violation of these regulations shall be reported to the Borough and the
persons owning, occupying or operating the commercial activity which
commits a violation shall be subject to the penalties provided by this
article.
A. Licensing. Every commercial solid waste hauler shall be licensed by the
Borough of Catasauqua as required by Article I of this chapter.
§ 220-21 JUNKYARDS § 220-22
170:403
§ 220-23. Regulations and administration by Borough.
B. Comply with laws. Every commercial solid waste hauler shall comply
with this article, Act 101 and all other applicable laws and regulations.
C. Separation. Every commercial solid waste hauler shall keep the several
types of recyclable materials which are designated for collection and
collected separate from each other, unless the hauler can demonstrate
in writing that a market exists for the commingled recyclable materials.
D. Recycling. Every commercial solid waste hauler shall either:
(1) Process and recycle all the recyclable materials.
(2) Transport, process, market, sell or deliver all of the recyclable
materials to dealers in those materials, and document such delivery
in writing.
(3) Provide written proof that markets for those materials do not exist.
E. Quarterly reports. Every commercial solid waste hauler shall submit
quarterly reports to the Borough. Reports shall be submitted within two
months of the end of each quarter. Each report shall state for that
quarter:
(1) The quantity of tons of each recyclable material collected by that
hauler in the Borough of Catasauqua.
(2) The total quantity in tons of all garbage, trash and refuse collected
by that hauler in the Borough of Catasauqua.
(3) To whom or where and how each recyclable material was sold or
delivered for processing or recycling.
(4) Reporting noncompliance. Every commercial solid waste hauler
shall report all instances of apparent noncompliance, with either
this article or its regulations, to the Borough within 72 hours of
becoming aware of that noncompliance.
A. Regulations. The Borough Manager shall have the power to establish
regulations for the following parts of the Borough's recycling program,
including any subsequent changes and amendments which shall
become effective 30 days after public advertisement, provided that the
Borough Council concurs with the proposed regulations by resolution:
(1) Plastic containers: varieties, types and chemical compositions to be
collected for recycling, both in the Borough's curbside recycling
program and at any drop off centers, or otherwise disposed in
municipal solid waste.
(2) Designation of those materials to be collected at curbside.
(3) Separating, preparation of, placing and combining recyclable
materials in the official Borough recycling bins.
§ 220-22 CATASAUQUA CODE § 220-23
170:404
§ 220-24. Public information and education program.
§ 220-25. Recycling facility permits.
Any person seeking to establish a recycling facility within the boundaries
of the Borough of Catasauqua must first obtain all necessary approvals
in accordance with the terms and conditions the Borough of Catasauqua
Zoning Ordinance,91 as subsequently amended from time to time, and must
obtain all necessary approval and permits from any federal, state, county or
local agency having jurisdiction.
(4) Exact locations for curbside pickup, where those locations are not
established or otherwise unsatisfactory.
(5) Zones, routes and schedules for collection days.
(6) Times to set out and bring in the official Borough recycling bins.
(7) Drop off center locations, operating hours, materials accepted and
other details.
B. Suspension.
(1) Less than 30 days. The Borough Manager shall have the power to
alter or suspend any such regulation in the event of good cause
shown or emergency including, but not limited to, snow storms and
floods, without prior notice, for a period not longer than 30 days.
(2) Longer than 30 days. Any alteration or suspension existing longer
than 30 days shall require the express concurrence of the Borough
Council.
A. Notice. The Borough of Catasauqua shall notify the occupants of
residential establishments and commercial, institutional and municipal
establishments within the boundaries of the Borough, of the
requirements of this article.
B. Timing. Notification shall occur at least 30 days prior to the initiation of
the mandatory recycling program and at least once every six months
thereafter.
C. Education programs. Education programs shall be furnished
periodically or upon request through the schools and other
organizations.
D. Other methods. The Borough Manager shall have the power to comply
with the public information and education requirements of Act 101, as
may be satisfactory and adequate in the circumstances.
91.Editor's Note: See Ch. 280, Zoning.
§ 220-23 JUNKYARDS § 220-26
170:405
§ 220-26. Enforcement; incentives; violations and penalties.
The Borough Manager shall be responsible for monitoring and enforcing
compliance with this article and regulations.
A. Incentives.
(1) The Borough Manager shall have the power to establish incentives
to promote compliance with this article, as may be appropriate
from time to time. The Borough Manager shall report at least
annually on the incentives which have been established and when
and to whom those incentives have been granted.
(2) Procurement options. The Borough may utilize the provisions of Act
101, § 1507, "Procurement Procedures for Local Public Agencies,"
and § 1508, "Procurement Options for Local Public Agencies and
Commonwealth Agencies," if the Borough elects to do so.
B. Administrative action and enforcement. For violations of this article by
either the owners, occupants or operators of residential
establishments, the Borough shall comply with the following
administrative actions and enforcement procedures before
commencing any action before the District Judges:
(1) Tagging. For the first two violations by the same person (owner,
occupant and/or operator) within any consecutive twelve-month
period, commencing on the date of the first violation and which
shall be separate violations on different dates, any municipal solid
waste or recyclable material which does not comply with the
provisions of this article shall be left at curbside and shall be
tagged with instructions on proper recycling. The address at which
the violation occurs shall be recorded by the Borough.
(2) Letter. For the third separate violation on a different date within
any consecutive twelve-month period, the owner, occupant or
operator shall be notified by registered letter of the penalties for
continued noncompliance with this article.
C. Enforcement before District Justice.
(1) Any commercial activity, as defined by this article; or commercial
solid waste hauler; or any owner, occupant or operator of a
residential establishment who has been previously subjected to all
of the administrative action and enforcement procedures of this
section within the twelve-month period as set forth above.
(2) Each day that a violation of this article continues shall be deemed
to be a separate violation. Each violation shall be deemed to be a
separate violation.
(3) Shall, upon conviction by a District Justice, be subject to a fine of
not less than $100 and not more than $300, together with the costs
of prosecution and imprisonment in the Lehigh Jail for a period of
§ 220-26 CATASAUQUA CODE § 220-26
170:406
not more than 30 days. Every violator of the provisions of this
article shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and
every day such violation shall continue and shall be subject to the
penalty imposed by this section for each and every such separate
offense.
(4) Any person found guilty of violating an ordinance shall be assessed
court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough
in the enforcement proceedings. [Added 4-1-2013 by Ord. No.
1288]
§ 220-26 JUNKYARDS § 220-26
170:407
Chapter 225
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform codes — See Ch. 130.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 145.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 210.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
235.
Water — See Ch. 265.
Wellhead protection — See Ch. 275.
Zoning — See Ch. 280.
§ 220-26 CATASAUQUA CODE § 220-26
170:408
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 225-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Catasauqua Creek
Watershed Act 167 Stormwater Management Ordinance."
§ 225-2. Statement of findings.
The Council of the Borough of Catasauqua finds that:
§ 225-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and
welfare within the Catasauqua Creek Watershed by minimizing the damages
and maximizing the benefits described in § 225-2 of this chapter by
provisions designed to:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated runoff of stormwater resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases flood flows and
velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, changes the
natural hydrologic patterns, destroys aquatic habitat, elevates aquatic
pollutant concentrations and loadings, overtaxes the carrying capacity
of streams and storm sewers, greatly increases the cost of public
facilities to carry and control stormwater, undermines floodplain
management and flood control efforts in downstream communities,
reduces groundwater recharge, and threatens public health and safety.
B. A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including
reasonable regulation of development and activities causing
accelerated erosion and loss of natural infiltration, is fundamental to
the public health, safety and welfare and the protection of the people of
the Borough and all of the people of the Commonwealth, their resources
and the environment.
C. Stormwater can be an important resource by providing groundwater
recharge for water supplies and baseflow of streams, which also
protects and maintains surface water quality.
D. Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an
essential component in successfully addressing stormwater.
E. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are
required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their
separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES).
F. Nonstormwater discharges to municipal separate storm sewer systems
can contribute to pollution of waters of the Commonwealth by the
Borough.
§ 225-1 JUNKYARDS § 225-3
170:409
§ 225-4. Statutory authority.
The Borough of Catasauqua is empowered to regulate these activities by the
authority of the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32 P.S. § 680.1
et seq., as amended, the "Stormwater Management Act" and the Borough
Code, 53 P.S. § 46202 and 53 P.S. § 47201.
§ 225-5. Applicability.
A. Manage stormwater runoff impacts at their source by regulating
activities which cause such problems.
B. Utilize and preserve the desirable existing natural drainage systems.
C. Encourage infiltration of stormwater, where appropriate, to maintain
groundwater recharge, to prevent degradation of surface and
groundwater quality and to otherwise protect water resources.
D. Maintain the existing flows and quality of streams and watercourses in
the Borough of Catasauqua and the Commonwealth.
E. Preserve and restore the flood-carrying capacity of streams.
F. Provide for proper maintenance of all permanent stormwater
management BMPs that are implemented in the Borough of
Catasauqua.
G. Provide review procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning, design and management.
H. Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source which requires a
minimum of structures and relies on natural processes.
I. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93.4a, to protect and maintain
existing uses and maintain the level of water quality to support those
uses in all streams and to protect and maintain water quality in special
protection streams.
J. Prevent scour and erosion of streambanks and streambeds.
K. Provide standards to meet the NPDES permit requirements.
A. This chapter shall apply to all areas of the Borough of Catasauqua. A
map of the Catasauqua Creek Watershed at a reduced scale is included
in Appendix A for general reference.92
B. The following activities are defined as regulated activities and shall be
governed by this chapter:
(1) Land development.
92.Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 225-3 CATASAUQUA CODE § 225-5
170:410
§ 225-6. Exemptions.
(2) Subdivision.
(3) Construction of new or additional impervious surfaces (driveways,
parking lots, etc.).
(4) Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings.
(5) Diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream channel.
(6) Installation of stormwater systems or appurtenances thereto.
(7) Regulated earth disturbance activities.
A. Impervious cover. Any proposed regulated activity, except those defined
in § 225-5B(5) and (6), which would create 10,000 square feet or less of
additional impervious cover is exempt from the drainage plan
preparation provisions of this chapter. All of the impervious cover
added incrementally to a site above the initial 10,000 square feet shall
be subject to the drainage plan preparation provisions of this chapter. If
a site has previously received an exemption and is proposing additional
development such that the total impervious cover on the site exceeds
10,000 square feet, the total impervious cover on the site proposed
since the original ordinance date must meet the provisions of this
chapter.
(1) The date of the Borough ordinance adoption of the original
Catasauqua Creek Act 167 Stormwater Management Ordinance,
October 4, 2004, shall be the starting point from which to consider
tracts as "parent tracts" in which future subdivisions and
respective impervious area computations shall be cumulatively
considered.
(2) For development taking place in stages, the entire development
plan must be used in determining conformance with these criteria.
(3) Additional impervious cover shall include, but not be limited to,
additional indoor living spaces, decks, patios, garages, driveways,
storage sheds and similar structures, any roof, parking or driveway
areas and any new streets and sidewalks constructed as part of or
for the proposed regulated activity.
(4) Any additional areas proposed to initially be gravel, crushed stone,
porous pavement, etc., shall be assumed to be impervious for the
purposes of comparison to the exemption criteria. Any existing
gravel, crushed stone or hard-packed soil areas on a site shall be
considered as pervious cover for the purpose of exemption
evaluation.
B. Prior drainage plan approval. Any regulated activity for which a
drainage plan was previously prepared as part of a subdivision or land
development proposal that received preliminary plan approval from the
§ 225-5 JUNKYARDS § 225-6
170:411
§ 225-7. Repealer.
Any ordinance of the Borough of Catasauqua inconsistent with any of the
provisions of this chapter is hereby repealed to the extent of the
inconsistency only. Ordinance Number 1170, the prior Stormwater
Management Ordinance for the Borough, is specifically repealed.
§ 225-8. Severability.
Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of
any of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
§ 225-9. Compatibility with other ordinance requirements.
Approvals issued pursuant to this chapter do not relieve the applicant of
the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities
regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act or ordinance.
§ 225-10. Duty of persons engaged in development of land.
Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter, including exemption and
waiver provisions, any landowner and any person engaged in the alteration
or development of land which may affect stormwater runoff characteristics
shall implement such measures as are reasonably necessary to prevent
Borough prior to the effective date of this chapter is exempt from the
drainage plan preparation provisions of this chapter, except as cited
in Subsection C, provided that the approved drainage plan included
design of stormwater facilities to control runoff from the site currently
proposed for regulated activities consistent with ordinance provisions
in effect at the time of approval and the approval has not lapsed under
the Municipalities Planning Code. If significant revisions are made to
the drainage plan after both the preliminary plan approval and the
effective date of this chapter, preparation of a new drainage plan,
subject to the provisions of this chapter, shall be required. Significant
revisions would include a change in control methods or techniques,
relocation or redesign of control measures or changes necessary
because soil or other conditions are not as stated on the original
drainage plan.
C. These exemptions shall not relieve the applicant from implementing
such measures as are necessary to protect health, safety, property, and
state water quality requirements. These measures include adequate
and safe conveyance of stormwater on the site and as it leaves the site.
These exemptions do not relieve the applicant from the responsibility to
secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any
other applicable code, rule, act or ordinance.
D. No exemptions shall be provided for regulated activities as defined in
§ 225-5B(5) and (6).
§ 225-6 CATASAUQUA CODE § 225-10
170:412
injury to health, safety or other property. Such measures shall include such
actions as are required to manage the rate, volume, direction and quality
of resulting stormwater runoff in a manner which otherwise adequately
protects health and property from possible injury.
§ 225-10 JUNKYARDS § 225-10
170:413

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 225-11. Definitions; word usage.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein
shall be interpreted as follows:
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the
singular number includes the plural, and the plural number
includes the singular; words of masculine gender include feminine
gender; and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
(2) The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
(3) The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land
through the combined action of human activities and natural processes
at a rate greater than would occur because of natural processes alone.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — Activities, facilities,
measures or procedures used to manage stormwater quantity and
quality impacts from the regulated activities listed in § 225-5 to meet
state water quality requirements, to promote groundwater recharge
and to otherwise meet the purposes of this chapter.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE
PLAN — Documentation, included as part of a drainage plan, detailing
the proposed BMPs, how they will be operated and maintained and who
will be responsible.
BIORETENTION — Densely vegetated, depressed features that store
stormwater and filter it through vegetation, mulch, planting soil, etc.
Ultimately stormwater is evapotranspirated, infiltrated, or discharged.
Optimal bioretention areas mimic natural forest ecosystems in terms of
species diversity, density, distribution, use of native plants, etc.
BOROUGH — Borough of Catasauqua, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania.
Also "Borough" or "Catasauqua."
BUFFER —
STREAMSIDE BUFFER — A zone of variable width located along
a stream that is vegetated and is designed to filter pollutants from
runoff.
(1)
SPECIAL GEOLOGIC FEATURE BUFFER — A required isolation
distance from a special geologic feature to a proposed BMP needed
(2)
§ 225-11 JUNKYARDS § 225-11
170:415
CAPTURE/REUSE — Stormwater management techniques such as
cisterns and rain barrels which direct runoff into storage devices,
surface or subsurface, for later reuse, such as for irrigation of gardens
and other planted areas. Because this stormwater is utilized and no
pollutant discharge results, water quality performance is superior to
other noninfiltration BMPs.
CARBONATE BEDROCK — Rock consisting chiefly of carbonate
minerals, such as limestone and dolomite; specifically a sedimentary
rock composed of more than 50% by weight of carbonate minerals that
underlies soil or other unconsolidated, superficial material.
CISTERN — An underground reservoir or tank for storing rainwater.
CLOSED DEPRESSION — A distinctive bowl-shaped depression in the
land surface. It is characterized by internal drainage, varying
magnitude, and an unbroken ground surface.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Lehigh County Conservation
District.
CONSTRUCTED WETLANDS — Constructed wetlands are similar to
wet ponds (see below) and consist of a basin which provides for
necessary stormwater storage as well as a permanent pool or water
level, planted with wetland vegetation. To be successful, constructed
wetlands must have adequate natural hydrology (both runoff inputs
as well as soils and water table which allow for maintenance of a
permanent pool of water). In these cases, the permanent pool must be
designed carefully, usually with shallow edge benches, so that water
levels are appropriate to support carefully selected wetland vegetation.
CULVERT — A pipe, conduit or similar structure including appurtenant
works which carries surface water.
DAM — An artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works,
constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or another
fluid or semifluid or a refuse bank, fill or structure for highway, railroad
or other purposes which does or may impound water or another fluid or
semifluid.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGN STORM — The depth and time distribution of precipitation
from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence (e.g., onehundred-
year storm) and duration (e.g., twenty-four-hour) and used in
computing stormwater management control systems.
DETENTION BASIN — A basin designed to retard stormwater runoff
by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at the appropriate
release rate.
to reduce the risk of sinkhole formation due to stormwater
management activities.
§ 225-11 CATASAUQUA CODE § 225-11
170:416
DEVELOPER — A person, partnership, association, corporation or other
entity, or any responsible person therein or agent thereof, that
undertakes any regulated activity of this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT SITE (SITE) — The specific tract of land for which a
regulated activity is proposed.
DIFFUSED DRAINAGE — See "sheet flow."
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a land owner to a grantee
allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes.
DRAINAGE PLAN — The documentation of the proposed stormwater
quantity and quality management controls to be used for a given
development site, including a BMP operations and maintenance plan,
the contents of which are established in § 225-21.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human
activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited
to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavations, embankments, road
maintenance, building construction and the moving, depositing,
stockpiling or storing of soil, rock or earth materials.
EROSION — The removal of soil particles by the action of water, wind,
ice, or other geological agents.
EXISTING USES — Those uses actually attained in the water body on
or after November 28, 1975, whether or not they are included in the
water quality standards (25 Pa. Code Chapter 93.1).
FILL — Man-made deposits of natural soils or rock products and waste
materials.
FILTER STRIPS — See "vegetated buffers."
FREEBOARD — The incremental depth in a stormwater management
structure, provided as a safety factor of design, above that required to
convey the design runoff event.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies.
HARDSHIP WAIVER REQUEST — A written request for a waiver
alleging that the provisions of this chapter inflict unnecessary hardship
upon the applicant. A hardship waiver does not apply to and is not
available from the water quality provisions of this chapter and should
not be granted.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) — Soils are classified into four
HSGs (A, B, C and D) to indicate the minimum infiltration rates, which
are obtained for bare soil after prolonged wetting. The Natural
Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the US Department of
Agriculture defines the four groups and provides a list of most of the
soils in the United States and their group classification. The soils in the
area of the development site may be identified from a soil survey report
§ 225-11 JUNKYARDS § 225-11
170:417
that can be obtained from local NRCS offices or conservation district
offices. Soils become less permeable as the HSG varies from A to D.
HOT SPOT LAND USES — A land use or activity that generates higher
concentrations of hydrocarbons, trace metals or other toxic substances
than typically found in stormwater runoff. These land uses are listed in
§ 225-15P.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS COVER) — A surface which
prevents the percolation of water into the ground.
INFILTRATION PRACTICE — A practice designed to direct runoff into
the ground, e.g., french drain, seepage pit, seepage trench or
bioretention area.
KARST — A type of topography or landscape characterized by
depressions, sinkholes, limestone towers and steep-sided hills,
underground drainage and caves. Karst is usually formed on carbonate
rocks, such as limestones or dolomites and sometimes gypsum.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
LOADING RATE — The ratio of the land area draining to the system, as
modified by the weighting factors in § 225-18B, compared to the base
area of the infiltration system.
LOCAL RUNOFF CONVEYANCE FACILITY — Any natural channel or
man-made conveyance system which has the purpose of transporting
runoff from the site to the mainstem.
LOW-IMPACT DEVELOPMENT — A development approach that
promotes practices that will minimize postdevelopment runoff rates
and volumes, thereby minimizing needs for artificial conveyance and
storage facilities. Site design practices include preserving natural
drainage features, minimizing impervious surface area, reducing the
hydraulic connectivity of impervious surfaces and protecting natural
depression storage.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving a group of two or more
residential or nonresidential buildings, whether proposed initially
or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on a lot or lots
regardless of the number of occupants or tenure; or the division
or allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively,
between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants
by means of or for the purpose of streets, common areas,
leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other features.
(1)
(2) A subdivision of land.
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.93
(3)
93.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503.
§ 225-11 CATASAUQUA CODE § 225-11
170:418
MAINSTEM (MAIN CHANNEL) — Any stream segment or other
conveyance used as a reach in the Catasauqua Creek hydrologic model.
MANNING EQUATION (MANNING FORMULA) — A method for
calculation of velocity of flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g.,
cubic feet per second) in open channels based upon channel shape,
roughness, depth of flow and slope. Open channels may include closed
conduits so long as the flow is not under pressure.
MARYLAND STORMWATER DESIGN MANUAL — A stormwater design
manual written by the Maryland Department of the Environment and
the Center for Watershed Protection. As of January 2004, the manual
can be obtained through the following website: www.mde.state.md.us.
MINIMUM DISTURBANCE/MINIMUM MAINTENANCE PRACTICES
(MD/MM) — Site design practices in which careful limits are placed
on site clearance prior to development allowing for maximum retention
of existing vegetation (woodlands and other), minimum disturbance
and compaction of existing soil mantle and minimum site application
of chemicals postdevelopment. Typically, MD/MM includes disturbance
setback criteria from buildings as well as related site improvements
such as walkways, driveways, roadways, and any other improvements.
These criteria may vary by community context as well as by type of
development being proposed. Additionally, MD/MM also shall include
provisions (e.g., deed restrictions, conservation easements) to protect
these areas from future disturbance and from application of fertilizers,
pesticides, and herbicides.
NO-HARM OPTION — The option of using a less restrictive runoff
quantity control if it can be shown that adequate and safe runoff
conveyance exists and that the less restrictive control would not
adversely affect health, safety and property.
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
NRCS — Natural resources conservation service - U.S. Department of
Agriculture. (Formerly the Soil Conservation Service.)
OIL/WATER SEPARATOR — A structural mechanism designed to
remove free oil and grease (and possibly solids) from stormwater
runoff.
OUTFALL — "Point source" as described in 40 CFR § 122.2 at the point
where the Borough's storm sewer system discharges to surface waters
of the Commonwealth.
OWNER — One with an interest in and often dominion over a property.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of flow of stormwater runoff
at a given location and time resulting from a specified storm event.
PENN STATE RUNOFF MODEL (PSRM) — The computer-based
hydrologic modeling technique adapted to each watershed for the Act
167 Plans. The model was calibrated to reflect actual flow values by
adjusting key model input parameters.
§ 225-11 JUNKYARDS § 225-11
170:419
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association
or corporation, firm, trust, estate, Borough, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law
as the subject of rights and duties.
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance,
including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel or conduit
from which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in state
regulations at 25 Pa. Code § 92.1.
PRELIMINARY SITE INVESTIGATION — The determination of the
depth to bedrock, the depth to the seasonal high-water table and the
soil permeability for a possible infiltration location on a site through the
use of published data and on-site surveys. In carbonate bedrock areas,
the location of special geologic features must also be determined along
with the associated buffer distance to the possible infiltration area. See
Appendix G.94
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLIER — A person who owns or operates a public
water system.
PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM — A system which provides water to the
public for human consumption which has at least 15 service
connections or regularly serves an average of at least 25 individuals
daily at least 60 days out of the year. (See 25 Pa. Code Chapter 109.)
QUALIFIED GEOTECHNICAL PROFESSIONAL — A licensed
professional geologist or a licensed professional engineer who has a
background or expertise in geology or hydrogeology.
RATIONAL METHOD — A method of peak runoff calculation using
a standardized runoff coefficient (rational 'c'), acreage of tract and
rainfall intensity determined by return period and by the time
necessary for the entire tract to contribute runoff. The rational method
formula is stated as follows: Q = ciA, where "Q" is the calculated
peak flow rate in cubic feet per second, "c" is the dimensionless runoff
coefficient (see Appendix C95), "i" is the rainfall intensity in inches per
hour, and "A" is the area of the tract in acres.
REACH — Any of the natural or man-made runoff conveyance channels
used for watershed runoff modeling purposes to connect the subareas
and transport flows downstream.
RECHARGE VOLUME (REv) — The portion of the water quality volume
(WQv) used to maintain groundwater recharge rates at development
sites. (See § 225-15J).
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Actions or proposed actions which impact
upon proper management of stormwater runoff and which are governed
by this chapter as specified in § 225-5.
94.Editor's Note: Appendix G is included at the end of this chapter.
95.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 225-11 CATASAUQUA CODE § 225-11
170:420
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Earth disturbance
activity other than agricultural plowing or tilling of one acre or more
with a point source discharge to surface waters or to the Borough's
storm sewer system or earth disturbance activity of five acres or more
regardless of the planned runoff. This includes earth disturbance on
any portion of, part or during any stage of a larger common plan of
development.
RELEASE RATE — The percentage of the predevelopment peak rate of
runoff for a development site to which the postdevelopment peak rate
of runoff must be controlled to avoid peak flow increases throughout
the watershed.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval in years over which an event
of a given magnitude can be expected to recur. For example, the twentyfive-
year-return-period rainfall or runoff event would be expected to
recur on the average once every 25 years.
ROAD MAINTENANCE — Earth disturbance activities within the
existing road cross section such as grading and repairing existing
unpaved road surfaces, cutting road banks, cleaning or clearing
drainage ditches and other similar activities.
RUNOFF — That part of precipitation which flows over the land.
SEDIMENT TRAPS/CATCH BASIN SUMPS — Chambers which provide
storage below the outlet in a storm inlet to collect sediment, debris and
associated pollutants, typically requiring periodic cleanout.
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled
with loose stone or similar material and into which surface water is
directed for infiltration into the ground.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm
drains) primarily used for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff.
SHEET FLOW — Stormwater runoff flowing in a thin layer over the
ground surface.
SOIL-COVER-COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by NRCS which is based upon relating soil type and land use/
cover to a runoff parameter called a "curve number."
SPECIAL GEOLOGIC FEATURES — Carbonate bedrock features,
including but not limited to closed depressions, existing sinkholes,
fracture traces, lineaments, joints, faults, caves, pinnacles, and
geologic contacts between carbonate and noncarbonate bedrock which
may exist and must be identified on a site when stormwater
management BMPs are being considered.
SPILL PREVENTION AND RESPONSE PROGRAM — A program that
identifies procedures for preventing and, as needed, cleaning up
§ 225-11 JUNKYARDS § 225-11
170:421
potential spills and makes such procedures known and the necessary
equipment available to appropriate personnel.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — As defined under state
regulations, protection of designated and existing uses (see 25 Pa. Code
Chapters 93 and 96), including:
STORAGE INDICATION METHOD — A method of routing or moving
an inflow hydrograph through a reservoir or detention structure. The
method solves the mass conservation equation to determine an outflow
hydrograph as it leaves the storage facility.
STORM DRAINAGE PROBLEM AREAS — Areas which lack adequate
stormwater collection and/or conveyance facilities and which present a
hazard to persons or property. These areas are either documented in
Appendix B of this chapter96 or identified by the Borough or Borough
Engineer.
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes or other conduits which carries
intercepted surface runoff, street water and other wash waters or
drainage, but excludes domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER — The surface runoff generated by precipitation
reaching the ground surface.
STORMWATER FILTERS — Any number of structural mechanisms such
as multichamber catch basins, sand/peat filters, sand filters, and so
forth which are installed to intercept stormwater flow and remove
pollutants prior to discharge. Typically, these systems require periodic
maintenance and clean out.
Each stream segment in Pennsylvania has a designated use, such
as cold-water fishes or potable water supply, which is listed in
Chapter 93. These uses must be protected and maintained under
state regulations.
(1)
Existing uses are those attained as of November 1975, regardless
whether they have been designated in Chapter 93. Regulated earth
disturbance activities must be designed to protect and maintain
existing uses and maintain the level of water quality necessary to
protect those uses in all streams, and to protect and maintain water
quality in special protection streams.
(2)
Water quality involves the chemical, biological and physical
characteristics of surface water bodies. After regulated earth
disturbance activities are complete, these characteristics can be
impacted by addition of pollutants, such as sediment, and changes
in habitat through increased flow volumes and/or rates as a result
of changes in land surface area from those activities. Therefore,
permanent discharges to surface waters must be managed to
protect the stream bank, streambed and structural integrity of the
waterway to prevent these impacts.
(3)
96.Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 225-11 CATASAUQUA CODE § 225-11
170:422
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The plan for managing
stormwater runoff adopted by Lehigh and/or Northampton County for
the Catasauqua Creek Watershed as required by the Act of October 4,
1978, P.L. 864, (Act 167), as amended, and known as the "Stormwater
Management Act."97
STREAM — A watercourse.
SUBAREA — The smallest unit of watershed breakdown for hydrologic
modeling purposes for which the runoff control criteria have been
established in the stormwater management plan.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building
or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by lease
of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres,
not involving any new street or easement of access or any residential
dwelling, shall be exempted.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers,
streams, creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm
sewers, lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs and all other
bodies or channels of conveyance of surface water, or parts thereof,
whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this
Commonwealth.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface
water runoff. See also "vegetated swale."
TECHNICAL BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE MANUAL AND
INFILTRATION FEASIBILITY REPORT, NOVEMBER 2002 — The report
written by Cahill Associates that addresses the feasibility of infiltration
in carbonate bedrock areas in the Little Lehigh Creek Watershed. The
report is available at the Lehigh Valley Planning Commission offices.
TRASH/DEBRIS COLLECTORS — Racks, screens or other similar
devices installed in a storm drainage system to capture coarse
pollutants (trash, leaves, etc.).
VEGETATED BUFFERS — Gently sloping areas that convey stormwater
as sheet flow over a broad, densely vegetated earthen area, possibly
coupled with the use of level spreading devices. Vegetated buffers
should be situated on minimally disturbed soils, have low-flow velocities
and extended residence times.
VEGETATED ROOFS — Vegetated systems installed on roofs that
generally consist of a waterproof layer, a root-barrier, drainage layer
(optional), growth media, and suitable vegetation. Vegetated roofs store
97.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. 680-1 et seq.
§ 225-11 JUNKYARDS § 225-11
170:423
and eventually evapotranspirate the collected rooftop rainfall;
overflows may be provided for larger storms.
VEGETATED SWALES —
WATERCOURSE — Any channel of conveyance of surface water having
defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
WATER QUALITY INSERTS — Any number of commercially available
devices that are inserted into storm inlets to capture sediment, oil,
grease, metals, trash, debris, etc.
WATER QUALITY VOLUME (WQv) — The volume needed to capture and
treat 90% of the average annual rainfall volume. (See § 225-15B.)
WATERSHED — The entire region or area drained by a river or other
body of water, whether natural or artificial.
WET DETENTION PONDS — Basins that provide for necessary
stormwater storage as well as a permanent pool of water. To be
successful, wet ponds must have adequate natural hydrology (both
runoff inputs as well as soils and water table which allow for
maintenance of a permanent pool of water) and must be able to support
a healthy aquatic community so as to avoid creation of mosquito and
other health and nuisance problems.
Vegetated earthen channels designed to convey stormwater. These
swales are not considered to be water quality BMPs.
(1)
Broad, shallow, densely vegetated, earthen channels designed to
treat stormwater while slowly infiltrating, evapotranspirating, and
conveying it. Swales should be gently sloping with low-flow
velocities to prevent erosion. Check dams may be added to enhance
performance.
(2)
§ 225-11 CATASAUQUA CODE § 225-11
170:424
ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management Requirements
§ 225-12. General requirements.
A. All regulated activities in the Borough of Catasauqua shall be subject to
the stormwater management requirements of this chapter.
B. Storm drainage systems shall be provided to permit unobstructed flow
in natural watercourses except as modified by stormwater detention
facilities, recharge facilities, water quality facilities, pipe systems or
open channels consistent with this chapter.
C. The existing locations of concentrated drainage discharge onto
adjacent property shall not be altered without written approval of the
affected property owner(s).
D. Areas of existing diffused drainage discharge onto adjacent property
shall be managed such that, at minimum, the peak diffused flow does
not increase in the general direction of discharge, except as otherwise
provided in this chapter. If diffused flow is proposed to be concentrated
and discharged onto adjacent property, the developer must document
that there are adequate downstream conveyance facilities to safely
transport the concentrated discharge to the point of predevelopment
flow concentration, to the stream reach or otherwise prove that no
harm will result from the concentrated discharge. Areas of existing
diffused drainage discharge shall be subject to any applicable release
rate criteria in the general direction of existing discharge, whether they
are proposed to be concentrated or maintained as diffused drainage
areas.
E. Where a site is traversed by watercourses other than those for which a
one-hundred-year floodplain is defined by the Borough, there shall be
provided drainage easements conforming substantially with the line of
such watercourses. The width of any easement shall be adequate to
provide for unobstructed flow of storm runoff based on calculations
made in conformance with § 225-18 for the one-hundred-year return
period runoff and to provide a freeboard allowance of 0.5 foot above the
design water surface level. The terms of the easement shall prohibit
excavation, the placing of fill or structures, and any alterations which
may adversely affect the flow of stormwater within any portion of the
easement. Also, periodic maintenance of the easement to ensure proper
runoff conveyance shall be required. Watercourses for which the onehundred-
year floodplain is formally defined are subject to the applicable
municipal floodplain regulations.
F. When it can be shown that, due to topographic conditions, natural
drainage swales on the site cannot adequately provide for drainage,
open channels may be constructed conforming substantially to the line
and grade of such natural drainage swales. Capacities of open channels
shall be calculated using the Manning Equation.
§ 225-12 JUNKYARDS § 225-12
170:425
§ 225-13. Permit requirements by other government entities.
The following permit requirements apply to certain regulated and earth
disturbance activities and must be met prior to commencement of regulated
and earth disturbance activities, as applicable:
G. Postconstruction BMPs shall be designed, installed, operated and
maintained to meet the requirements of the Clean Streams Law98 and
implementing regulations, including the established practices in 25 Pa.
Code Chapter 102 and the specifications of this chapter as to prevent
accelerated erosion in watercourse channels and at all points of
discharge.
H. No earth disturbance activities associated with any regulated activities
shall commence until approval by the Borough of a plan which
demonstrates compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
I. Techniques described in Appendix F (Low-Impact Development)99 of
this chapter are encouraged because they reduce the costs of
complying with the requirements of this chapter and the state water
quality requirements.
J. Infiltration for stormwater management is encouraged where soils and
geology permit, consistent with the provisions of this chapter and,
where appropriate, the Recommendation Chart for Infiltration
Stormwater Management BMPs in Carbonate Bedrock in Appendix
D.100
A. All regulated and earth disturbance activities subject to permit
requirements by DEP under regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
B. Work within natural drainageways subject to permit by DEP under 25
Pa. Code Chapter 102 and Chapter 105.
C. Any stormwater management facility that would be located in or
adjacent to surface waters of the Commonwealth, including wetlands,
subject to permit by DEP under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105.
D. Any stormwater management facility that would be located on a state
highway right-of-way or require access from a state highway shall be
subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PENNDOT).
E. Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which must pass
or convey flows from the tributary area and any facility which may
constitute a dam subject to permit by DEP under 25 Pa. Code Chapter
105.
98.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
99.Editor's Note: Appendix F is included at the end of this chapter.
100. Editor's Note: Appendix D is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 225-12 CATASAUQUA CODE § 225-14
170:426
§ 225-14. Erosion and sediment control during regulated earth
disturbance activities.
§ 225-15. Postconstruction water quality criteria.
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the Borough shall
commence until approval by the Borough of an erosion and sediment
control plan for construction activities. Written approval by DEP or a
delegated County Conservation District shall satisfy this requirement.
B. An erosion and sediment control plan is required by DEP regulations for
any earth disturbance activity of 5,000 square feet or more under Pa.
Code § 102.4(b).
C. A DEP NPDES Stormwater Discharges Associated with Construction
Activities Permit is required for regulated earth disturbance activities
under Pa. Code Chapter 92.
D. Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance
activities from the appropriate DEP regional office or County
Conservation District must be provided to the Borough before the
commencement of an earth disturbance activity.
E. A copy of the erosion and sediment control plan and any permit, as
required by DEP regulations, shall be available at the project site at all
times.
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the Borough shall
commence until approval by the Borough of a drainage plan which
demonstrates compliance with this chapter. This chapter provides
standards to meet NPDES permit requirements associated with
construction activities and MS4 permit requirements.
B. The water quality volume (WQv) shall be captured and treated. The
WQv shall be calculated two ways.
(1) First, WQv shall be calculated using the following formula:
WQv = (c)(P)(A)/12
Where
WQv = Water quality volume in acre-feet
c = Rational Method postdevelopment runoff coefficient
for the two-year storm
P = 1.25 inches
A = Area in acres of proposed regulated activity
(2) Second, the WQv shall be calculated as the difference in runoff
volume from predevelopment to postdevelopment for the two-yearreturn-
period storm. The effect of closed depressions on the site
shall be considered in this calculation. The larger of these two
calculated volumes shall be used as the WQv to be captured and
§ 225-14 JUNKYARDS § 225-15
170:427
treated, except that in no case shall the WQv be permitted to
exceed 1.25 inches of runoff over the site area. This standard does
not limit the volume of infiltration an applicant may propose for
purposes of water quantity/peak rate control.
C. The WQv shall be calculated for each postdevelopment drainage
direction on a site for sizing BMPs. Site areas having no impervious
cover and no proposed disturbance during development may be
excluded from the WQv calculations and do not require treatment.
D. If an applicant is proposing to use a dry extended detention basin, wet
pond, constructed wetland or other BMP that ponds water on the land
surface and may receive direct sunlight, the discharge from that BMP
must be treated by infiltration, a vegetated buffer, filter strip,
bioretention, vegetated swale or other BMP that provides a thermal
benefit to protect the high-quality waters of the Catasauqua Creek from
thermal impacts.
E. The WQv for a site as a result of the regulated activities must either be
treated with infiltration or two acceptable BMPs such as those listed in
Subsection O, except for minor areas on the periphery of the site that
cannot reasonably be drained to an infiltration facility or other BMP.
F. Infiltration BMPs shall not be constructed on fill unless the applicant
demonstrates that the fill is stable and otherwise meets the infiltration
BMP standards of this chapter.
G. The applicant shall document the bedrock type(s) present on the site
from published sources. Any apparent boundaries between carbonate
and noncarbonate bedrock shall be verified through more detailed site
evaluations by a qualified geotechnical professional.
H. For each proposed regulated activity in the watershed where an
applicant intends to use infiltration BMPs, the applicant shall conduct a
preliminary site investigation, including gathering data from published
sources, a field inspection of the site, a minimum of one test pit and a
minimum of two percolation tests, as outlined in Appendix G.101 This
investigation will determine depth to bedrock, depth to the seasonal
high-water table, soil permeability and location of special geologic
features, if applicable. This investigation may be done by a certified
sewage enforcement officer (SEO) except that the location(s) of special
geologic features shall be verified by a qualified geotechnical
professional.
I. Sites where applicants intend to use infiltration BMPs must meet the
following criteria:
(1) Depth to bedrock below the invert of the BMP is greater than or
equal to two feet.
101. Editor's Note: Appendix G is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 225-15 CATASAUQUA CODE § 225-15
170:428
(2) Depth to seasonal high-water table below the invert of the BMP is
greater than or equal to three feet; except for infiltration of
residential roof runoff where the seasonal high-water table must be
below the invert of the BMP. (If the depth to bedrock is between
two feet and three feet and the evidence of the seasonal high-water
table is not found in the soil, no further testing to locate the depth
to seasonal high-water table is required.)
(3) Soil permeability (as measured by the adapted 25 PA Code § 73.15
percolation test in Appendix G102) is greater than or equal to 0.5
inch/hour and less than or equal to 12 inches per hour.
(4) Setback distances or buffers as follows:
(a) One hundred feet from water supply wells.
(b) Fifteen feet downgradient or 100 feet upgradient from building
foundations; except for residential development where the
required setback is 15 feet downgradient or 40 feet upgradient
from building foundations.
(c) Fifty feet from septic system drainfields; except for residential
development where the required setback is 25 feet from septic
system drainfields.
(d) Fifty feet from a geologic contact with carbonate bedrock
unless a preliminary site investigation is done in the carbonate
bedrock to show the absence of special geologic features
within 50 feet of the proposed infiltration area.
(e) One hundred feet from the property line unless documentation
is provided to show that all setbacks from existing or potential
future wells, foundations and drainfields on neighboring
properties will be met; except for one- and two-family
residential dwellings, where the required setback is 40 feet
unless documentation is provided to show that all setbacks
from existing or potential future wells, foundations and
drainfields on neighboring properties will be met.
J. For entirely noncarbonate sites, the recharge volume (REv) shall be
infiltrated unless the applicant demonstrates that it is infeasible to
infiltrate the REv for reasons of seasonal high-water table, permeability
rate, soil depth or setback distances; or except as provided in
Subsection U.
(1) The REv shall be calculated as follows:
REv = (0.25) * (I)/12
Where:
REv = Recharge volume in acre-feet
102. Editor's Note: Appendix G is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 225-15 JUNKYARDS § 225-15
170:429
I = impervious area in acres
(2) The preliminary site investigation described in Subsection H is
required and shall continue on different areas of the site until a
potentially suitable infiltration location is found or the entire site is
determined to be infeasible for infiltration. For infiltration areas
that appear to be feasible based on the preliminary site
investigation the additional site investigation and testing as
outlined in Appendix G103 shall be completed.
(3) If an applicant proposes infiltration, the Borough may determine
infiltration to be infeasible if there are known existing conditions or
problems that may be worsened by the use of infiltration.
(4) The site must meet the conditions listed in Subsection I.
(5) If it is not feasible to infiltrate the full REv, the applicant shall
infiltrate that portion of the REv that is feasible based on the site
characteristics. If none of the REv can be infiltrated, REv shall be
considered as part of the WQv and shall be captured and treated as
described in Subsection O.
(6) If REv is infiltrated, it may be subtracted from the WQv required to
be captured and treated.
K. In entirely carbonate areas, where the applicant intends to use
infiltration BMPs, the preliminary site investigation described in
Subsection H shall be conducted. For infiltration areas that appear
feasible based on the preliminary site investigation, the applicant shall
conduct the additional site investigation and testing as outlined in
Appendix G.104 The soil depth, percolation rate and proposed loading
rate, each weighted as described in § 225-18, along with the buffer from
special geologic features shall be compared to the Recommendation
Chart for Infiltration Stormwater Management BMPs in Carbonate
Bedrock in Appendix D105 to determine if the site is recommended for
infiltration. In addition to the recommendation from Appendix D, the
conditions listed in Subsection I are required for infiltration in
carbonate areas. Applicants are encouraged to infiltrate the REv, as
calculated in Subsection J, but are not required to use infiltration BMPs
on a carbonate site even if the site falls in the recommended range on
the chart in Appendix D. Any amount of volume infiltrated can be
subtracted from the WQv to be treated by noninfiltration BMPs. If
infiltration is not proposed, the full WQv shall be treated by two
acceptable BMPs, as specified in Subsection O.
L. If a site has both carbonate and noncarbonate areas, the applicant shall
investigate the ability of the noncarbonate portion of the site to fully
103. Editor's Note: Appendix G is included at the end of this chapter.
104. Editor's Note: Appendix G is included at the end of this chapter.
105. Editor's Note: Appendix D is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 225-15 CATASAUQUA CODE § 225-15
170:430
meet this chapter to meet the requirements for REv for the whole
site through infiltration. If that proves infeasible, infiltration in the
carbonate area as described in Subsection K or two other
noninfiltration BMPs as described in Subsection O must be used. No
infiltration structure in the noncarbonate area shall be located within
50 feet of a boundary with carbonate bedrock, except when a
preliminary site investigation has been done showing the absence of
special geologic features within 50 feet of the proposed infiltration
area.
M. If infiltration BMPs are proposed in carbonate areas, the
postdevelopment two-year runoff volume leaving the site shall be 80%
or more of the predevelopment runoff volume for the carbonate portion
of the site to prevent infiltration of volumes far in excess of the
predevelopment infiltration volume.
N. Site areas proposed for infiltration shall be protected from disturbance
and compaction except as necessary for construction of infiltration
BMPs.
O. If infiltration of the entire WQv is not proposed, the remainder of the
WQv shall be treated by two acceptable BMPs in series for each
discharge location. Sheet flow draining across a pervious area can be
considered as one BMP. Sheet flow across impervious areas and
concentrated flow shall flow through two BMPs. If sheet flow from an
impervious area is to be drained across a pervious area as one BMP, the
length of the pervious area must be equal to or greater than the length
of impervious area. In no case may the same BMP be employed
consecutively to meet the requirement of this section. Acceptable BMPs
are listed below along with the recommended reference for design:
Best Management Practice
Design Reference
NumberC
BioretentionA 4, 5, 11, 16
Capture/reuseB 4, 14
Constructed wetlands 4, 5, 8, 10, 16
Dry extended detention ponds 4, 5, 8, 12, 18
Minimum disturbance/minimum
maintenance practices
1, 9
Significant reduction of existing
impervious cover
N/A
Stormwater filtersA (sand, peat, compost,
etc.)
4, 5, 10, 16
Vegetated buffers/filter strips 2, 3, 5, 11, 16, 17
Vegetated roofs 4, 13
Vegetated swalesA 2, 3, 5, 11, 16, 17
§ 225-15 JUNKYARDS § 225-15
170:431
Best Management Practice
Design Reference
NumberC
Water quality inletsD 4, 7, 15, 16, 19
Wet detention ponds 4, 5, 6, 8
NOTES:
A This BMP could be designed with or without an infiltration
component. If infiltration is proposed, the site and BMP will be subject
to the testing and other infiltration requirements in this chapter.
B If this BMP is used to treat the entire WQv, then it is the only BMP
required because of this BMP's superior water quality performance.
C See table below.
D Water quality inlets include such BMPs as oil/water separators,
sediment traps/catch basin sumps, and trash/debris collectors in catch
basins.
NumberDesign Reference Title
1 "Conservation Design For Stormwater Management — A
Design Approach to Reduce Stormwater Impacts From Land
Development and Achieve Multiple Objectives Related to
Land Use," Delaware Department of Natural Resources and
Environmental Control, The Environmental Management
Center of the Brandywine Conservancy, September 1997.
2 "A Current Assessment of Urban Best Management Practices:
Techniques for Reducing Nonpoint Source Pollution in the
Coastal Zone," Schueler, T. R., Kumble, P. and Heraty, M.,
Metropolitan Washington Council of Governments, 1992.
3 "Design of Roadside Channels with Flexible Linings," Federal
Highway Administration, Chen, Y. H. and Cotton, G. K.,
Hydraulic Engineering Circular 15, FHWA-IP-87-7, McLean,
Virginia, 1988.
4 "Draft Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,"
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection,
January 2005.
5 "Evaluation and Management of Highway Runoff Water
Quality," Federal Highway Administration, FHWA-PD-96-032,
Washington, D.C., 1996.
6 "Evaporation Maps of the United States," U.S. Weather
Bureau (now NOAA/National Weather Service) Technical
Paper 37, published by Department of Commerce,
Washington D.C., 1959.
§ 225-15 CATASAUQUA CODE § 225-15
170:432
NumberDesign Reference Title
7 "Georgia Stormwater Manual," AMEC Earth and
Environmental, Center for Watershed Protection, Debo and
Associates, Jordan Jones and Goulding, Atlanta Regional
Commission, Atlanta, Georgia, 2001.
8 "Hydraulic Design of Highway Culverts, "Federal Highway
Administration, FHWA HDS 5, Washington, D.C., 1985
(revised May 2005).
9 "Low Impact Development Design Strategies, An Integrated
Design Approach," Prince Georges County, Maryland
Department of Environmental Resources, June 1999.
10 "Maryland Stormwater Design Manual," Maryland
Department of the Environment, Baltimore, Maryland, 2000.
11 "Pennsylvania Handbook of Best Management Practices for
Developing Areas," Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, 1998.
12 "Recommended Procedures for Act 167 Drainage Plan
Design," LVPC, revised 1997.
13 "Roof Gardens History, Design, and Construction,"
Osmundson, Theodore. New York: W.W. Norton & Company,
1999.
14 "The Texas Manual on Rainwater Harvesting," Texas Water
Development Board, Austin, Texas, Third Edition, 2005.
15 "VDOT Manual of Practice for Stormwater Management,"
Virginia Transportation Research Council, Charlottesville,
Virginia, 2004.
16 "Virginia Stormwater Management Handbook," Virginia
Department of Conservation and Recreation, Richmond,
Virginia, 1999.
17 "Water Resources Engineering," Mays, L.W., John Wiley &
Sons, Inc., 2005.
18 "Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds," Technical Report
55, US Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources
Conservation Service, 1986.
19 US EPA, Region 1 New England website (as of August 2005)
http://www.epa.gov/NE/assistance/ceitts/stormwater/techs/
html.
P. Stormwater runoff from hot spot land uses shall be pretreated. In no
case, may the same BMP be employed consecutively to meet this
requirement and the requirement in Subsection O.
(1) Acceptable methods of pretreatment are listed below.
§ 225-15 JUNKYARDS § 225-15
170:433
Hot Spot Land Use Pretreatment Methods
Vehicle maintenance and
repair facilities including
auto parts stores
Water quality inlets
Use of drip pans and/or dry sweep
material under vehicles/equipment
Use of absorbent devices to reduce
liquid releases
Spill prevention and response
program
Vehicle fueling stations Water quality inlets
Spill prevention and response
program
Storage areas for public
works
Water quality inlets
Use of drip pans and/or dry sweep
material under vehicles/equipment
Use of absorbent devices to reduce
liquid releases
Spill prevention and response
program
Diversion of stormwater away from
potential contamination areas
Outdoor storage of liquids Spill prevention and response
program
Commercial nursery
operations
Vegetated swales/filter strips
Constructed wetlands
Stormwater collection and reuse
Salvage yards and
recycling facilities*
BMPs that are a part of a stormwater
pollution prevention plan under an
NPDES permit
Fleet storage yards and
vehicle cleaning facilities*
BMPs that are a part of a stormwater
pollution prevention plan under an
NPDES permit
Facilities that store or
generate regulated
substances*
BMPs that are a part of a stormwater
pollution prevention plan under an
NPDES permit
Marinas* BMPs that are a part of a stormwater
pollution prevention plan under an
NPDES permit
§ 225-15 CATASAUQUA CODE § 225-15
170:434
Hot Spot Land Use Pretreatment Methods
Certain industrial uses
(listed under NPDES)*
BMPs that are a part of a stormwater
pollution prevention plan under an
NPDES permit
NOTES:
* Regulated under the NPDES Stormwater Program.
(2) Design references for the pretreatment methods, as necessary, are
listed below. If the applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the Borough that the proposed land use is not a hot spot, then the
pretreatment requirement would not apply.
Pretreatment Method Design ReferenceA
Constructed wetlands 4, 5, 8, 10, 16
Diversion of stormwater away from
potential contamination areas
4, 11
Stormwater collection and reuse
(especially for irrigation)
4, 14
Stormwater filters (sand, peat,
compost, etc.)
4, 5, 10, 16
Vegetated swales 2, 3, 5, 11, 16, 17
Water quality inlets 4, 7, 15, 16, 19
NOTES:
A These numbers refer to the design reference title chart in
Subsection O above.
Q. The use of infiltration BMPs is prohibited on hot spot land use areas.
R. Stormwater infiltration BMPs shall not be placed in or on a special
geologic feature(s). Additionally, stormwater runoff shall not be
discharged into existing on-site sinkholes.
S. Applicants shall request, in writing, public water suppliers to provide
the Zone I wellhead protection radius, as calculated by the method
outlined in the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
Wellhead Protection Regulations, for any public water supply well
within 400 feet of the site. In addition to the setback distances specified
in Subsection I, infiltration is prohibited in the Zone I radius as defined
and substantiated by the public water supplier in writing. If the
applicant does not receive a response from the public water supplier,
the Zone I radius is assumed to be 100 feet.
T. The volume and rate of the net increase in stormwater runoff from the
regulated activities must be managed to prevent the physical
degradation of receiving waters from such effects as scour and
§ 225-15 JUNKYARDS § 225-15
170:435
§ 225-16. Stormwater management districts.
streambank destabilization, to satisfy state water quality requirements,
by controlling the two-year-postdevelopment runoff to a thirty-percent
release rate.
U. The Borough may, after consultation with DEP, approve alternative
methods for meeting the state water quality requirements other than
those in this section, provided that they meet the minimum
requirements of and do not conflict with state law including but not
limited to the Clean Streams Law.106
A. Mapping of stormwater management districts. To implement the
provisions of the Catasauqua Creek Watershed Stormwater
Management Plan, the Borough is hereby divided into stormwater
management districts consistent with the Catasauqua Creek Release
Rate Map presented in the plan update. The boundaries of the
stormwater management districts are shown on an official map which is
available for inspection at the Borough office. A copy of the official map
at a reduced scale is included in Appendix A for general reference.107
B. Description of stormwater management districts. Two types of
stormwater management districts may be applicable to the Borough,
namely Conditional/Provisional No Detention Districts and Dual
Release Rate Districts as described below.
(1) Conditional/provisional no detention districts. Within these
districts, the capacity of the local runoff conveyance facilities (as
defined in Article II) must be calculated to determine if adequate
capacity exists. For this determination, the developer must
calculate peak flows assuming that the site is developed as
proposed and that the remainder of the local watershed is in the
existing condition. The developer must also calculate peak flows
assuming that the entire local watershed is developed per current
zoning and that all new development would use the runoff controls
specified by this chapter. The larger of the two peak flows
calculated will be used in determining if adequate capacity exists.
If adequate capacity exists to safely transport runoff from the site
to the main channel (as defined in Article II), these watershed areas
may discharge postdevelopment peak runoff without detention
facilities. If the capacity calculations show that the local runoff
conveyance facilities lack adequate capacity, the developer shall
either use a one-hundred-percent release rate control or provide
increased capacity of downstream elements to convey increased
peak flows consistent with § 225-17P. Any capacity improvements
must be designed to convey runoff from development of all areas
tributary to the improvement consistent with the capacity criteria
specified in § 225-17D. By definition, a storm drainage problem
106. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
107. Editor's Note: Said Map is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 225-15 CATASAUQUA CODE § 225-16
170:436
§ 225-17. Stormwater management district implementation
provisions.
area associated with the local runoff conveyance facilities indicates
that adequate capacity does not exist. Sites in these districts are
still required to meet all of the water quality requirements in
§ 225-15.
(2) Dual release rate districts. Within these districts, the two-year
postdevelopment peak discharge must be controlled to 30% of the
predevelopment two-year runoff peak. Further, the ten-year,
twenty-five-year, and one-hundred-year postdevelopment peak
runoff must be controlled to the stated percentage of the
predevelopment peak. Release rates associated with the ten-year
through one-hundred-year events vary from 50% to 100%
depending upon location in the watershed. (For the Monocacy
Creek and Nancy Run Watersheds, the original single release rate
districts become dual release rate districts due to the channel
protection standard requiring developments to meet a two-yearthirty-
percent release rate.)
A. Applicants shall provide a comparative preconstruction and
postconstruction stormwater management hydrograph analysis for
each direction of discharge and for the site overall to demonstrate
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Any stormwater management controls required by this chapter and
subject to a dual release rate criteria shall meet the applicable release
rate criteria for each of the two-, ten-, twenty-five-, and one-hundredyear-
return-period runoff events consistent with the calculation
methodology specified in § 225-18.
C. The exact location of the stormwater management district boundaries
as they apply to a given development site shall be determined by
mapping the boundaries using the two-foot topographic contours
provided as part of the drainage plan. The district boundaries as
originally drawn coincide with topographic divides or, in certain
instances, are drawn from the intersection of the watercourse and a
physical feature such as the confluence with another watercourse or a
potential flow obstruction (e.g., road, culvert, bridge, etc.). The physical
feature is the downstream limit of the subarea and the subarea
boundary is drawn from that point up slope to each topographic divide
along the path perpendicular to the contour lines.
D. Any downstream capacity analysis conducted in accordance with this
chapter shall use the following criteria for determining adequacy for
accepting increased peak flow rates:
(1) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey
the increased runoff associated with a two-year-return-period event
§ 225-16 JUNKYARDS § 225-17
170:437
within their banks at velocities consistent with protection of the
channels from erosion.
(2) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey
the increased twenty-five-year-return-period runoff without
creating any hazard to persons or property.
(3) Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which must
pass or convey flows from the tributary area must be designed in
accordance with DEP Chapter 105 regulations (if applicable) and,
at minimum, pass the increased twenty-five-year-return-period
runoff.
E. For a proposed development site located within one release rate
category subarea, the total runoff from the site shall meet the
applicable release rate criteria. For development sites with multiple
directions of runoff discharge, individual drainage directions may be
designed for up to a one-hundred-percent release rate so long as the
total runoff from the site is controlled to the applicable release rate.
F. For a proposed development site located within two or more release
category subareas, the peak discharge rate from any subarea shall be
the predevelopment peak discharge for that subarea multiplied by the
applicable release rate. The calculated peak discharges shall apply
regardless of whether the grading plan changes the drainage area by
subarea. An exception to the above may be granted if discharges from
multiple subareas recombine in proximity to the site. In this case, peak
discharge in any direction may be a one-hundred-percent release rate
provided that the overall site discharge meets the weighted average
release rate.
G. For a proposed development site located partially within a release rate
category subarea and partially within a conditional/provisional no
detention subarea, the size of the predevelopment drainage area on a
site may not be changed post-development to create potentially adverse
conditions on downstream properties except as part of a no harm or
hardship waiver procedure.
H. No portion of a site may be regraded between the Catasauqua Creek
Watershed and any adjacent watershed except as part of a no harm or
hardship waiver procedure.
I. Within a release rate category area, for a proposed development site
which has areas which drain to a closed depression(s), the design
release from the site will be the lesser of (a) the applicable release rate
flow assuming no closed depression(s), or (b) the existing peak flow
actually leaving the site. In cases where (b) would result in an
unreasonably small design release, the design discharge of less than or
equal to the release rate will be determined by the available
downstream conveyance capacity to the main channel calculated using
Subsection D and the minimum orifice criteria.
§ 225-17 CATASAUQUA CODE § 225-17
170:438
J. Off-site areas which drain through a proposed development site are not
subject to release rate criteria when determining allowable peak runoff
rates. However, on-site drainage facilities shall be designed to safely
convey off-site flows through the development site using the capacity
criteria in Subsection D and the detention criteria in § 225-18.
K. For development sites proposed to take place in phases, all detention
ponds shall be designed to meet the applicable release rate(s) applied
to all site areas tributary to the proposed pond discharge direction. All
site tributary areas will be assumed as developed, regardless of
whether all site tributary acres are proposed for development at that
time. An exception shall be sites with multiple detention ponds in series
where only the downstream pond must be designed to the stated
release rate.
L. Where the site area to be impacted by a proposed development activity
differs significantly from the total site area, only the proposed impact
area shall be subject to the release rate criteria. The impact area
includes any proposed cover or grading changes.
M. Development proposals which, through groundwater recharge or other
means, do not increase either the rate or volume of runoff discharged
from the site compared to predevelopment are not subject to the
release rate provisions of this chapter.
N. No harm water quantity option.
(1) For any proposed development site not located in a conditional
provisional no detention district, the developer has the option of
using a less restrictive runoff control (including no detention) if the
developer can prove that special circumstances exist for the
proposed development site and that no harm would be caused by
discharging at a higher runoff rate than that specified by the plan.
Special circumstances are defined as any hydrologic or hydraulic
aspects of the development itself not specifically considered in the
development of the plan runoff control strategy. Proof of no harm
would have to be shown from the development site through the
remainder of the downstream drainage network to the confluence
of the creek with the Delaware or Lehigh River. Proof of no harm
must be shown using the capacity criteria specified in Subsection D
if downstream capacity analysis is a part of the no harm
justification.
(2) Attempts to prove no harm based upon downstream peak flow
versus capacity analysis shall be governed by the following
provisions:
(a) The peak flow values to be used for downstream areas for the
design return period storms (two-, ten-, twenty-five-, and onehundred-
year) shall be the values from the calibrated PSRM
Model for the Catasauqua Creek or as calculated by an
applicant using an alternate method acceptable to the
§ 225-17 JUNKYARDS § 225-17
170:439
Borough. The flow values from the PSRM Model would be
supplied to the developer by the Borough upon request.
(b) Any available capacity in the downstream conveyance system
as documented by a developer may be used by the developer
only in proportion to his development site acreage relative to
the total upstream undeveloped acreage from the identified
capacity (i.e., if his site is 10% of the upstream undeveloped
acreage, he may use up to 10% of the documented downstream
available capacity).
(c) Developer-proposed runoff controls which would generate
increased peak flow rates at storm drainage problem areas
would, by definition, be precluded from successful attempts to
prove no harm, except in conjunction with proposed capacity
improvements for the problem areas consistent with
Subsection P.
(3) Any no harm justifications shall be submitted by the developer as
part of the drainage plan submission per Article IV. Developers
submitting no harm justifications must still meet all of the water
quality requirements in § 225-15.
O. Regional detention alternatives. For certain areas within the study
area, it may be more cost-effective to provide one control facility for
more than one development site than to provide an individual control
facility for each development site. The initiative and funding for any
regional runoff control alternatives are the responsibility of prospective
developers. The design of any regional control basins must incorporate
reasonable development of the entire upstream watershed. The peak
outflow of a regional basin would be determined based on the required
release rate at the point of discharge.
P. Capacity improvements.
(1) In certain instances, primarily within the conditional/provisional no
detention areas, local drainage conditions may dictate more
stringent levels of runoff control than those based upon protection
of the entire watershed. In these instances, if the developer could
prove that it would be feasible to provide capacity improvements to
relieve the capacity deficiency in the local drainage network, then
the capacity improvements could be provided by the developer in
lieu of runoff controls on the development site. Peak flow
calculations shall be done assuming that the local watershed is in
the existing condition and then assuming that the local watershed
is developed per current zoning and using the specified runoff
controls. Any capacity improvements would be designed using the
larger of the above peak flows and the capacity criteria specified in
Subsection D. All new development in the entire subarea(s) within
which the proposed development site is located shall be assumed to
implement the developer's proposed discharge control, if any.
§ 225-17 CATASAUQUA CODE § 225-17
170:440
§ 225-18. Calculation methodology.
(2) Capacity improvements may also be provided as necessary to
implement any regional detention alternatives or to implement a
modified no harm option which proposes specific capacity
improvements to provide that a less stringent discharge control
would not create any harm downstream.
A. Stormwater runoff from all development sites shall be calculated using
either the rational method or the soil-cover-complex methodology.
B. Infiltration BMP loading rate percentages in the Recommendation
Chart for Infiltration Stormwater Management BMPs in Carbonate
Bedrock in Appendix D108 shall be calculated as follows:
(Area tributary to infiltration BMP/Base area of infiltration BMP)*100%
The area tributary to the infiltration BMP shall be weighted as follows:
All disturbed areas to be made impervious: weight at 100%
All disturbed areas to be made pervious: weight at 50%
All undisturbed pervious areas: weight at 0%
All existing impervious areas: weight at 100%
C. Soil thickness is to be measured from the bottom of any proposed
infiltration system.
(1) The effective soil thickness in the Recommendation Chart for
Infiltration Stormwater Management BMPs in Carbonate Bedrock
in Appendix D109 is the measured soil thickness multiplied by the
thickness factor based on soil permeability (as measured by the
adapted 25 Pa. Code § 73.15 percolation test in Appendix G110, as
follows:
Permeability Range*
(inches/hour) Thickness Factor
6.0 to 12.0 0.8
2.0 to 6.0 1.0
1.0 to 2.0 1.4
0.75 to 1.0 1.2
0.5 to 0.75 1.0
108. Editor's Note: Appendix D is included at the end of this chapter.
109. Editor's Note: Appendix D is included at the end of this chapter.
110. Editor's Note: Appendix G is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 225-17 JUNKYARDS § 225-18
170:441
NOTES:
* If the permeability rate (as measured by the adapted 25 Pa. Code
§ 73.15 percolation test in Appendix G) falls on a break between
two thickness factors, the smaller thickness factor shall be used.
(2) Sites with soil permeability greater than 12.0 inches/hour or less
than 0.5 inch/hour, as measured by the adapted 25 Pa. Code § 73.15
percolation test in Appendix G, are not recommended for
infiltration.
D. The design of any detention basin intended to meet the requirements of
this chapter shall be verified by routing the design storm hydrograph
through the proposed basin using the storage indication method or
other methodology demonstrated to be more appropriate. For basins
designed using the Rational Method technique, the design hydrograph
for routing shall be either the Universal Rational hydrograph or the
Modified Rational Method trapezoidal hydrograph which maximizes
detention volume. Use of the Modified Rational hydrograph shall be
consistent with the procedure described in Section "PIPE.RAT" of the
Users' Manual for the Penn State Urban Hydrology Model (1987).
E. BMPs designed to store or infiltrate runoff and discharge to surface
runoff or pipe flow shall be routed using the storage indication method.
F. BMPs designed to store or infiltrate runoff and discharge to surface
runoff or pipe flow shall provide storage volume for the full WQv below
the lowest outlet invert.
G. Wet detention ponds designed to have a permanent pool for the WQv
shall assume that the permanent pool volume below the primary outlet
is full at the beginning of design event routing for the purposes of
evaluating peak outflows.
H. All stormwater detention facilities shall provide a minimum 1.0 foot
freeboard above the maximum pool elevation associated with the twoyear
through twenty-five-year runoff events. A 0.5 foot freeboard shall
be provided above the maximum pool elevation of the one-hundred-year
runoff event. The freeboard shall be measured from the maximum pool
elevation to the invert of the emergency spillway. The two-year through
one-hundred-year storm events shall be controlled by the primary
outlet structure. An emergency spillway for each basin shall be
designed to pass the one-hundred-year-return-frequency-storm-peakbasin-
inflow rate with a minimum 0.5 foot freeboard measured to the
top of basin. The freeboard criteria shall be met considering any off-site
areas tributary to the basin as developed, as applicable. If this
detention facility is considered to be a dam as per DEP Chapter 105, the
design of the facility must be consistent with the Chapter 105
regulations, and may be required to pass a storm greater than the onehundred-
year event.
§ 225-18 CATASAUQUA CODE § 225-18
170:442
I. The minimum circular orifice diameter for controlling discharge rates
from detention facilities shall be three inches. Designs where a lessersize
orifice would be required to fully meet release rates shall be
acceptable with a three-inch orifice provided that as much of the site
runoff as practical is directed to the detention facilities. The minimum
three-inch diameter does not apply to the control of the WQv.
J. Runoff calculations using the soil-cover-complex method shall use the
Natural Resources Conservation Service Type II twenty-four-hour
rainfall distribution. The twenty-four-hour rainfall depths for the
various return periods to be used consistent with this chapter may be
taken from NOAA Atlas 14, Volume 2 Version 2.1, 2004 or the PennDOT
Intensity/Duration/Frequency Field Manual (PDT-IDF) (May 1986) for
Region 4.
(1) The following values are taken from the PDT-IDF Field Manual:
Return Period
24-Hour Rainfall Depth
(inches)
1-year 2.40
2-year 3.00
5-year 3.60
10-year 4.56
25-year 5.52
50-year 6.48
100-year 7.44
(2) A graphical and tabular presentation of the Type II twenty-fourhour
distribution is included in Appendix C.111
K. Runoff calculations using the Rational Method shall use rainfall
intensities consistent with appropriate times of concentration and
return periods and NOAA Atlas 14, Volume 2 Version 2.1, 2004 or the
Intensity-Duration-Frequency Curves as presented in Appendix C.112
L. Runoff curve numbers (CN's) to be used in the soil-cover-complex
method shall be based upon the matrix presented in Appendix C.113
M. Runoff coefficients for use in the Rational Method shall be based upon
the table presented in Appendix C.114
N. All time of concentration calculations shall use a segmental approach
which may include one or all of the flow types below:
111. Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
112. Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
113. Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
114. Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 225-18 JUNKYARDS § 225-18
170:443
(1) Sheet flow (overland flow) calculations shall use either the NRCS
average velocity chart (Figure 3-1, Technical Release-55, 1975) or
the modified kinematic wave travel time equation (equation 3-3,
NRCS TR-55, June 1986). If using the modified kinematic wave
travel time equation, the sheet flow length shall be limited to 50
feet for designs using the Rational Method and limited to 150 feet
for designs using the soil-cover-complex method.
(2) Shallow concentrated flow travel times shall be determined from
the watercourse slope, type of surface and the velocity from Figure
3-1 of TR-55, June 1986.
(3) Open channel flow travel times shall be determined from velocities
calculated by the Manning Equation. Bankfull flows shall be used
for determining velocities. Manning 'n' values shall be based on the
table presented in Appendix C.115
(4) Pipe flow travel times shall be determined from velocities
calculated using the Manning Equation assuming full flow and the
Manning 'n' values from Appendix C.116
O. If using the Rational Method, all predevelopment calculations for a
given discharge direction shall be based on a common time of
concentration considering both on-site and any off-site drainage areas.
If using the Rational Method, all postdevelopment calculations for a
given discharge direction shall be based on a common time of
concentration considering both on-site and any off-site drainage areas.
P. The Manning Equation shall be used to calculate the capacity of
watercourses. Manning 'n' values used in the calculations shall be
consistent with the table presented in Appendix C117 or other
appropriate standard engineering 'n' value resources. Pipe capacities
shall be determined by methods acceptable to the Borough.
Q. The Pennsylvania DEP, Chapter 105, Rules and Regulations, apply to
the construction, modification, operation or maintenance of both
existing and proposed dams, water obstructions and encroachments
throughout the watershed. Criteria for design and construction of
stormwater management facilities according to this chapter may differ
from the criteria that are used in the permitting of dams under the Dam
Safety Program.
115. Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
116. Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
117. Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 225-18 CATASAUQUA CODE § 225-18
170:444
ARTICLE IV
Drainage Plan Requirements
§ 225-19. General requirements.
For any of the regulated activities of this chapter, prior to the final approval
of subdivision and/or land development plans, or the issuance of any permit,
or the commencement of any regulated earth disturbance activity, the
owner, subdivider, developer or his agent shall submit a drainage plan and
receive municipal approval of the plan.
§ 225-20. Exemptions.
Exemptions from the drainage plan requirements are as specified in
§ 225-6.
§ 225-21. Drainage plan contents.
The following items shall be included in the drainage plan:
A. General.
(1) General description of project.
(2) General description of proposed permanent stormwater controls.
(3) The name and address of the project site, the name and address of
the owner of the property and the name of the individual or firm
preparing the drainage plan.
B. Map(s) of the project area showing:
(1) The location of the project relative to highways, municipalities or
other identifiable landmarks.
(2) Existing contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slopes
(greater than 15%), five-foot contour intervals may be used. Off-site
drainage areas impacting the project including topographic detail.
(3) Streams, lakes, ponds or other bodies of water within the project
area.
(4) Other features including flood hazard boundaries, existing
drainage swales, wetlands, closed depressions, sinkholes and areas
of natural vegetation to be preserved.
(5) Location of proposed underground utilities, sewers and water lines.
The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary sewers
and water lines within 50 feet of property lines of the project site.
(6) An overlay showing soil types and boundaries based on the Lehigh
or Northampton County Soil Survey, as applicable, latest edition.
Any hydric soils present on the site should be identified as such.
§ 225-19 JUNKYARDS § 225-21
170:445
(7) An overlay showing geologic types, boundaries and any special
geologic features present on the site.
(8) Proposed changes to land surface and vegetative cover.
(9) Proposed structures, roads, paved areas and buildings.
(10) Final contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slopes
(greater than 15%), five-foot contour intervals may be used.
(11) Stormwater management district boundaries applicable to the site.
(12) Clear identification of the location and nature of permanent
stormwater BMPs.
(13) An adequate access easement around all stormwater BMPs that
would provide municipal ingress to and egress from a public rightof-
way.
(14) A schematic showing all tributaries contributing flow to the site
and all existing man-made features beyond the property boundary
that would be affected by the project.
(15) The location of all public water supply wells within 400 feet of the
project and all private water supply wells within 100 feet of the
project.
C. Stormwater management controls and BMPs.
(1) All stormwater management controls and BMPs shall be shown on
a map and described, including:
(a) Groundwater recharge methods such as seepage pits, beds or
trenches. When these structures are used, the locations of
septic tank infiltration areas and wells shall be shown.
(b) Other control devices or methods such as roof-top storage,
semipervious paving materials, grass swales, parking lot
ponding, vegetated strips, detention or retention ponds, storm
sewers, etc.
(2) All calculations, assumptions and criteria used in the design of the
BMPs shall be shown.
(3) All site testing data used to determine the feasibility of infiltration
on a site.
(4) All details and specifications for the construction of the stormwater
management controls and BMPs.
D. The BMP operations and management plan, as required in Article VII,
describing how each permanent stormwater BMP will be operated and
maintained and the identity of the person(s) responsible for operations
and maintenance. A statement must be included, signed by the
§ 225-21 CATASAUQUA CODE § 225-21
170:446
§ 225-22. Plan submission.
landowner, acknowledging that the stormwater BMPs are fixtures that
cannot be altered or removed without approval by the Borough.
E. Environmental resources site design assessment.
(1) An environmental resources site design assessment that describes
the following:
(a) The extent to which the proposed grading and impervious
cover avoid disturbance of significant environmental resources
and preserve existing site hydrology.
(b) An assessment of whether alternative grading and impervious
cover site design could lessen the disturbance of significant
environmental resources and/or make better use of the site
hydrologic resources.
(c) A description of how the proposed stormwater management
controls and BMPs serve to mitigate any adverse impacts on
environmental resources on the site.
(2) Significant environmental resources considered in the site design
assessment include, but are not limited to, steep slopes, ponds,
lakes, streams, wetlands, hydric soils, floodplains, riparian
vegetation, native vegetation and special geologic features.
A. For regulated activities specified in § 225-5B(1) and (2):
(1) The drainage plan shall be submitted by the developer to the
Borough secretary (or other appropriate person) as part of the
preliminary plan submission for the subdivision or land
development.
(2) Four copies of the drainage plan shall be submitted.
(3) Distribution of the drainage plan will be as follows:
(a) One copy to the Borough governing body.
(b) One copy to the Borough engineer.
(c) Two copies to the Lehigh Valley Planning Commission, except
for drainage plans involving less than 10,000 square feet of
additional impervious cover.
(4) Drainage plans involving more than 10,000 square feet of
additional impervious cover shall be submitted by the developer
(possibly through the Borough) to the Lehigh Valley Planning
Commission as part of the preliminary plan submission. The Lehigh
Valley Planning Commission will conduct an advisory review of the
drainage plan for consistency with the Catasauqua Creek
Watershed Stormwater Management Plan. The LVPC will not
§ 225-21 JUNKYARDS § 225-22
170:447
§ 225-23. Drainage plan review.
review details of the erosion and sedimentation plan or the BMP
operations and maintenance plan.
(a) Two copies of the drainage plan shall be submitted.
(b) The LVPC will provide written comments to the developer and
the Borough, within a time frame consistent with established
procedures under the Municipalities Planning Code, as to
whether the drainage plan has been found to be consistent
with the stormwater management plan.
B. For regulated activities specified in § 225-5B(3) and (4), the drainage
plan shall be submitted by the developer to the Borough Building
Permit Officer as part of the building permit application.
C. For regulated activities specified in § 225-5B(5), (6) and (7):
(1) The drainage plan shall be submitted by the developer to the
Lehigh Valley Planning Commission for coordination with the DEP
permit application process under Chapter 105 (Dam Safety and
Waterway Management), Chapter 106 (Floodplain Management) of
DEP's Rules and Regulations and the NPDES regulations.
(2) One copy of the drainage plan shall be submitted.
D. Earthmoving for all regulated activities under § 225-5 shall be
conducted in accordance with the current federal and state regulations
relative to the NPDES and DEP Chapter 102 regulations.
A. The Borough shall review the drainage plan, including the BMP
operations and maintenance plan, for consistency with the adopted
Catasauqua Creek Watershed Stormwater Management Plan as
embodied by this chapter and with any permits issued by DEP. The
Borough shall also review the drainage plan against any additional
storm drainage provisions contained in the Borough subdivision and
land development or zoning ordinance, as applicable.118
B. The Borough shall notify the applicant in writing whether the drainage
plan, including the BMP operations and maintenance plan, is approved.
C. The Borough shall not approve any subdivision or land development
[regulated activities § 225-5B(1) and (2)] or building permit application
[regulated activities § 225-5B(3) and (4)] if the drainage plan has been
found to be inconsistent with the stormwater management plan.
D. The Borough may require an as-built survey of all stormwater BMPs and
an explanation of any discrepancies with the drainage plan.
118. Editor's Note: See Ch. 235, Subdivision and Land Development, and Ch. 280, Zoning.
§ 225-22 CATASAUQUA CODE § 225-24
170:448
§ 225-24. Modification of plans.
A modification to a submitted drainage plan for a proposed development
site which involves a change in control methods or techniques, or which
involves the relocation or redesign of control measures, or which is
necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated on the drainage
plan (as determined by the Borough) shall require a resubmission of the
modified drainage plan consistent with § 225-22 subject to review per
§ 225-23 of this chapter.
§ 225-25. Hardship waiver procedure.
A. The Borough may hear requests for waivers where it is alleged that the
provisions of this chapter inflict unnecessary hardship upon the
applicant. The waiver request shall be in writing and accompanied by
the requisite fee based upon a fee schedule adopted by the Borough. A
copy of the waiver request shall be provided to each of the following:
Borough, Borough Engineer, Borough solicitor and Lehigh Valley
Planning Commission. The request shall fully document the nature of
the alleged hardship.
B. The Borough may grant a waiver provided that all of the following
findings are made in a given case:
(1) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity of lot size or shape, or exceptional
topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the
particular property, and that the unnecessary hardship is due to
such conditions, and not the circumstances or conditions generally
created by the provisions of this chapter in the stormwater
management district in which the property is located;
(2) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is
no possibility that the property can be developed in strict
conformity with the provisions of this chapter, including the no
harm provisions, and that the authorization of a waiver is therefore
necessary to enable the reasonable use of the property;
(3) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
applicant;
(4) That the waiver, if authorized, will represent the minimum waiver
that will afford relief and will represent the least modification
possible of the regulation in issue; and
(5) That financial hardship is not the criteria for granting of a hardship
waiver.
C. In granting any waiver, the Borough may attach such conditions and
safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this
chapter. If a hardship waiver is granted, the applicant must still manage
§ 225-24 JUNKYARDS § 225-25
170:449
the quantity, velocity, direction and quality of resulting storm runoff as
is necessary to prevent injury to health, safety or other property.
D. For regulated activities described in § 225-5B(1) and (2), Borough
Council shall hear requests for and decide on hardship waiver requests
on behalf of the Borough.
E. For regulated activities in § 225-B(3), (4), (5), (6) and (7), the Zoning
Hearing Board shall hear requests for and decide on hardship waiver
requests on behalf of the Borough.
F. The Borough shall not waive the water quality provisions of this
chapter.
§ 225-25 CATASAUQUA CODE § 225-25
170:450
ARTICLE V
Inspections
§ 225-26. Schedule of inspections.
A. DEP or its designees (e.g., County Conservation District) normally
ensure compliance with any permits issued, including those for
stormwater management. In addition to DEP compliance programs, the
Borough or its designee may inspect all phases of the construction,
operations, maintenance and any other implementation of stormwater
BMPs.
B. During any stage of the regulated earth disturbance activities, if the
Borough or its designee determines that any BMPs are not being
implemented in accordance with this chapter, the Borough may
suspend or revoke any existing permits issued by the Borough or other
approvals issued by the Borough until the deficiencies are corrected.
§ 225-26 JUNKYARDS § 225-26
170:451

ARTICLE VI
Fees and Expenses
§ 225-27. General.
The Borough may charge a reasonable fee for review of the drainage plan,
including the BMP operations and maintenance plan, to defray review costs
incurred by the Borough. The applicant shall pay all such fees.
§ 225-28. Expenses covered by fees.
The fees required by this chapter shall at a minimum cover:
A. The review of the drainage plan, including the BMP operations and
maintenance plan, by the Borough.
B. The site inspection.
C. The inspection of required controls and improvements during
construction.
D. The final inspection upon completion of the controls and improvements
required in the plan.
E. Any additional work required to monitor and enforce any permit
provisions regulated by this chapter, correct violations, and assure the
completion of stipulated remedial actions.
F. Administrative and clerical costs.
§ 225-27 JUNKYARDS § 225-28
170:453

ARTICLE VII
Stormwater BMP Operations and Maintenance Plan Requirements
§ 225-29. General requirements.
No regulated earth disturbance activities within the Borough shall
commence until approval by the Borough of the BMP operations and
maintenance plan which describes how the permanent (e.g.,
postconstruction) stormwater BMPs will be properly operated and
maintained.
§ 225-30. Responsibilities for operations and maintenance of BMPs.
§ 225-31. Adherence to approved BMP operations and maintenance
plan.
It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any permanent stormwater BMP
required by an approved BMP operations and maintenance plan or to
allow the property to remain in a condition which does not conform to
an approved BMP operations and maintenance plan unless an exception is
granted in writing by the Borough.
§ 225-32. Operations and maintenance agreement for privately
owned stormwater BMPs.
A. The BMP operations and maintenance plan for the project site shall
establish responsibilities for the continuing operation and maintenance
of all permanent stormwater BMPs, as follows:
(1) If a plan includes structures or lots which are to be separately
owned and in which streets, sewers and other public improvements
are to be dedicated to the Borough, stormwater BMPs may also be
dedicated to and maintained by the Borough;
(2) If a plan includes operations and maintenance by a single owner or
if sewers and other public improvements are to be privately owned
and maintained, then the operation and maintenance of stormwater
BMPs shall be the responsibility of the owner or private
management entity.
B. The Borough shall make the final determination on the continuing
operations and maintenance responsibilities. The Borough reserves the
right to accept or reject the operations and maintenance responsibility
for any or all of the stormwater BMPs.
A. The property owner shall sign an operations and maintenance
agreement with the Borough covering all stormwater BMPs that are to
be privately owned. The agreement shall be substantially the same as
the agreement in Appendix E of this chapter.119
119. Editor's Note: Appendix E is included at the end of this 38 chapter.
§ 225-29 JUNKYARDS § 225-32
170:455
§ 225-33. Stormwater management easements.
Stormwater management easements shall be provided by the property
owner if necessary for access for inspections and maintenance or for
preservation of stormwater conveyance, infiltration, detention areas and
other BMPs by persons other than the property owner. The purpose of the
easement shall be specified in any agreement under § 225-32.
§ 225-34. Recording of approved BMP operations and maintenance
plan and related agreements.
§ 225-35. Borough stormwater BMP operations and maintenance
fund.
B. Other items may be included in the agreement where determined by the
Borough to be reasonable or necessary to guarantee the satisfactory
operation and maintenance of all permanent stormwater BMPs. The
agreement shall be subject to the review and approval of the Borough.
A. The owner of any land upon which permanent BMPs will be placed,
constructed or implemented, as described in the BMP operations and
maintenance plan, shall record the following documents in the Office of
the Recorder of Deeds for Lehigh or Northampton County, as
applicable, within 90 days of approval of the BMP operations and
maintenance plan by the Borough:
(1) The operations and maintenance plan or a summary thereof.
(2) Operations and maintenance agreements under § 225-32.
(3) Easements under § 225-33.
B. The Borough may suspend or revoke any approvals granted for the
project site upon discovery of the failure of the owner to comply with
this section.
A. If stormwater BMPs are accepted by the Borough for dedication, the
Borough may require the applicant to pay a specified amount to the
Borough of Catasauqua Stormwater BMP Operations and Maintenance
Fund to help defray costs of operations and maintenance activities. The
amount may be determined as follows:
(1) If the BMP is to be owned and maintained by the Borough, the
amount shall cover the estimated costs for operation and
maintenance in perpetuity, as determined by the Borough.
(2) The amount shall then be converted to present worth of the annual
series values.
B. If a BMP is proposed that also serves as a recreation facility (e.g., ball
field, lake), the Borough may adjust the amount due accordingly.
§ 225-32 CATASAUQUA CODE § 225-35
170:456
ARTICLE VIII
Prohibitions
§ 225-36. Prohibited discharges.
A. No person in the Borough shall allow or cause to allow stormwater
discharges into the Borough's separate storm sewer system which are
not composed entirely of stormwater except as provided in Subsection
B below or as allowed under a state or federal permit.
B. Discharges that may be allowed based on the Borough finding that the
discharge(s) do not significantly contribute pollution to surface waters
of the Commonwealth are listed below:
(1) Discharges from fire-fighting activities.
(2) Potable water sources, including dechlorinated water line and fire
hydrant flushings.
(3) Irrigation drainage.
(4) Routine external building washdown which does not use detergents
or other compounds.
(5) Air-conditioning condensate.
(6) Water from individual residential car washing.
(7) Springs.
(8) Water from crawl space pumps.
(9) Uncontaminated water from foundation or footing drains.
(10) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(11) Lawn watering.
(12) Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used.
(13) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
(14) Uncontaminated groundwater.
C. In the event that the Borough determines that any of the discharges
identified in Subsection B significantly contribute to pollution of waters
of the Commonwealth or is so notified by DEP, the Borough will notify
the responsible person to cease the discharge.
D. Upon notice provided by the Borough under Subsection C, the
discharger will have a reasonable time, as determined by the Borough,
to cease the discharge consistent with the degree of pollution caused by
the discharge.
§ 225-36 JUNKYARDS § 225-36
170:457
§ 225-37. Prohibited connections.
The following connections are prohibited, except as provided in § 225-36B
above:
§ 225-38. Roof drains.
§ 225-39. Alteration of BMPs.
E. Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's responsibilities under
state law.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process
wastewater and wash water to enter the separate storm sewer system
and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and
sinks.
B. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the separate storm sewer system which has not been
documented in plans, maps or equivalent records and approved by the
Borough.
A. Roof drains shall not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers
or roadside ditches, except as provided in Subsection B.
B. When it is more advantageous to connect directly to streets or storm
sewers, connections of roof drains to streets or roadside ditches may be
permitted by the Borough.
C. Roof drains shall discharge to infiltration areas or vegetative BMPs to
the maximum extent practicable.
A. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape or alter any existing
stormwater BMP without the written approval of the Borough unless it
is part of an approved maintenance program.
B. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping or vegetation into
a stormwater BMP or within a drainage easement which would limit or
alter the functioning of the BMP without the written approval of the
Borough.
§ 225-36 CATASAUQUA CODE § 225-39
170:458
ARTICLE IX
Right of Entry; Notification and Enforcement
§ 225-40. Right of entry.
§ 225-41. Notification.
A. Upon presentation of proper credentials and with the consent of the
land owner, duly authorized representatives of the Borough may enter
at reasonable times upon any property within the Borough to inspect
the implementation, condition or operation and maintenance of the
stormwater BMPs or to investigate or ascertain the condition of the
subject property in regard to any aspect regulated by this chapter.
B. In the event that the land owner refuses admission to the property, duly
authorized representatives of the Borough may seek an administrative
search warrant issued by a district justice to gain access to the
property.
A. Whenever the Borough finds that a person has violated a prohibition or
failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the Borough may order
compliance by written notice to the responsible person. Such notice
may require without limitation:
(1) The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the Borough intends to take action.
(2) The location of the property in violation.
(3) The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting.
(4) The elimination of prohibited connections or discharges.
(5) Cessation of any violating discharges, practices or operations.
(6) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property.
(7) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs.
(8) The implementation of stormwater BMPs.
(9) Operation and maintenance of stormwater BMPs.
B. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and
establish a time limit for correction of the violation(s). Said notice may
further advise that should the violator fail to take the required action
within the established deadline, the work will be done by the Borough
or designee and the expense thereof, together with all related lien and
enforcement fees, charges and expenses, shall be charged to the
violator.
C. Failure to comply within the time specified shall also subject such
person to the penalty provisions of this chapter. All such penalties shall
§ 225-40 JUNKYARDS § 225-41
170:459
§ 225-42. Public nuisance.
§ 225-43. Suspension and revocation of permits and approvals.
§ 225-44. Violations and penalties.
be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the Borough from pursuing
any and all other remedies available in law or equity.
A. The violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby deemed a public
nuisance.
B. Each day that an offense continues shall constitute a separate violation.
A. Any building, land development or other permit or approval issued by
the Borough may be suspended or revoked by the Borough for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
permit.
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter.
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
construction or development which constitutes or creates a hazard
or nuisance, pollution or which endangers the life or property of
others.
B. A suspended permit or approval shall be reinstated by the Borough
when:
(1) The Borough or designee has inspected and approved the
corrections to the stormwater BMPs or the elimination of the
hazard or nuisance.
(2) The Borough is satisfied that the violation of the ordinance, law or
rule and regulation has been corrected.
(3) Payment of all municipal fees, costs and expenses related to or
arising from the violation has been made.
C. A permit or approval which has been revoked by the Borough cannot be
reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new permit under the
procedures outlined in this chapter.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a
civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Borough, pay a
judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs, including
reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough as a result thereof.
No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the
date of the determination of a violation by the district justice. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Borough
may enforce the judgment pursuant to a separate violation, unless the
§ 225-41 CATASAUQUA CODE § 225-44
170:460
§ 225-45. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any action of the Borough or its designee relevant
to the provisions of this chapter may appeal using the appeal procedures
established in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
district justice, determining that there has been a violation, further
determines that there was a good-faith basis for the person,
partnership, or corporation violating this chapter to have believed that
there was no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to
have been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date
of the determination of a violation by the district justice and thereafter
each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
B. The court of common pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay
upon cause shown, tolling the per-diem judgment pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the Borough the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
D. District justices shall have initial jurisdiction in proceedings brought
under this section.
E. In addition, the Borough, through its solicitor, may institute injunctive,
mandamus or any other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in
equity for the enforcement of this chapter. Any court of competent
jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary
or permanent injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate forms of
remedy or relief.
F. Any person found guilty of violating an ordinance shall be assessed
court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in
the enforcement proceedings. [Added 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1288]
§ 225-44 JUNKYARDS § 225-45
170:461
Chapter 230
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform codes — See Ch. 130.
Franchises — See Ch. 155.
Public property — See Ch. 205.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 210.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 225.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
235.
Trees — See Ch. 245.
§ 225-45 CATASAUQUA CODE § 225-45
170:462
ARTICLE I
Street Location and Naming
[Adopted 12-8-1903 by Ord. No. 126 (Ch. XVI, Secs. 1 to 3, of the
1962 Code)]
§ 230-1. Official Borough Map adopted. [Amended 5-7-1962 by Ord.
No. 457; 1-8-2007 by Ord. No. 1208]
The Official Map of the Borough of Catasauqua prepared by Urban Research
Development Corporation and dated 2004 is hereby adopted and declared
to be the Official Map of the Borough of Catasauqua.
§ 230-2. References to Borough Map in ordinances.
All ordinances hereafter enacted where reference is made to the Borough
Map, the same are hereby declared and construed to refer to the map
hereby adopted.
§ 230-3. Building permits not to conflict with streets and alleys.
No permit for the erection of buildings shall hereafter be granted which
conflict with the streets and alleys located on said map.
§ 230-1 JUNKYARDS § 230-3
170:463

ARTICLE II
Snow and Ice on Sidewalks
[Adopted 5-7-1962 by Ord. No. 481 (Ch. XVI, Part 2B, of the 1962
Code)]
§ 230-4. Time frame for snow and ice removal.
The owner, occupant or tenant of every property fronting upon or located
alongside any of the streets in the Borough of Catasauqua is hereby
required to remove or cause to be removed from all the sidewalks abutting
upon such property all snow or ice thereon fallen or formed, within 24 hours
after the same shall have ceased to fall or to be formed. The snow and ice
shall be removed so as to clear a path not less than three feet wide and not
more than five feet wide. The snow and ice removed from the sidewalk shall
not be dumped or piled onto any public street or alley to the extent that it
interferes with wheeled traffic. Provided: the owner of a property shall be
responsible for conforming to the requirements of this section where such
property is occupied by such owner, is vacant or unoccupied or consists of
more than one tenanted unit; the occupier or tenant shall be responsible
therefor where such property consists of a single unit, occupied by such
tenant or occupier only.
§ 230-5. Authority for Borough to do work; costs and additional
amounts.
In any case where the owner, occupant or tenant, as aforesaid, shall fail,
neglect or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of § 230-4 of this
article, within the time limit prescribed therein, the Borough authorities
may proceed immediately to clear all snow and/or ice from the sidewalk of
such delinquent, and to collect the expenses thereof, with any additional
amount allowed by law, from such owner, occupant or tenant, as the case
may be, which may be in addition to any fine or penalty imposed under
§ 230-6 of this article.
§ 230-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-7-1984 by Ord. No.
866; 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1288]
Any owner, occupant or tenant who shall fail to remove any snow or ice from
any sidewalk as required by § 230-4 of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof before the District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $25 nor more than $300 and costs of prosecution and, in default of
payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment in the County Jail for
not more than 90 days. Provided: such fine and costs of prosecution may
be in addition to any expenses and additional amounts authorized by law,
imposed as provided in the § 230-5. Any person found guilty of violating
an ordinance shall be assessed court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees
incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings.
§ 230-4 JUNKYARDS § 230-6
170:465

ARTICLE III
Sledding
[Adopted 5-7-1962 by Ord. No. 482 (Ch. XVI, Sec. 91, of the 1962
Code)]
§ 230-7. Sledding restrictions.
No person or persons shall coast or ride upon any sled or similar
conveyance upon any sidewalk in the Borough of Catasauqua, or upon any
street or alley in the Borough unless such street or alley shall have been set
apart and designated by the Mayor as a "play highway" and shall have been
blocked off or adequately guarded from vehicular traffic.
§ 230-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord. No.
1288]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof before the Mayor or any District Justice of the Borough,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $5 and costs of prosecution,
for each and every such violation. Any person found guilty of violating
an ordinance shall be assessed court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees
incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings.
§ 230-7 JUNKYARDS § 230-8
170:467

ARTICLE IV
Drainage Restrictions
[Adopted 5-7-1962 by Ord. No. 483 (Ch. XVI, Sec. 92, of the 1962
Code)]
§ 230-9. Restrictions on drainage into streets and sidewalks.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any property in the
Borough of Catasauqua to allow any water from the roof of any building
owned or occupied by him to drain or run into any street or alley in
the Borough except through a gutter or drain, not extending above the
sidewalk, leading into such street or alley.
§ 230-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord. No.
1288]
Any person or persons, firm or corporation, violating any of the provisions of
this article shall, for each and every such violation, upon conviction thereof
before the Mayor or any District Justice of the Borough, be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than $50 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of
payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment in the County Jail for not
more than 10 days. Provided: each week that any violation of this article
shall continue, after the owner of any property shall have been notified
thereof by the Borough, shall constitute a separate offense. Any person
found guilty of violating an ordinance shall be assessed court costs and
reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement
proceedings.
§ 230-9 JUNKYARDS § 230-10
170:469

ARTICLE V
Sidewalk, Curb and Gutter Construction and Repair
[Adopted 3-3-1969 by Ord. No. 615 (Ch. XVI, Secs. 60 to 69.1, of the
1962 Code)]
§ 230-11. Property owners to construct, reconstruct and repair;
noncompliance; Borough to do work.
Whenever it shall be directed and required by the Council of the Borough of
Catasauqua, it shall be the duty of the owner or owners of the lot or lots of
ground respectively fronting on the streets and alleys of the said Borough,
and they are hereby enjoined and required to construct, reconstruct or
repair sidewalks, curbs and gutters on said streets and alleys with such
material and in such manner as hereinafter provided, and on the neglect or
refusal of said owner or owners of the lot or lots, as aforesaid, to comply
with such requirements and directions within 30 days after having been
regularly notified so to do by written or printed notice from the Council
of said Borough, it shall be the duty of the said Council to cause the
construction, reconstruction or repair of sidewalks, curbs and gutters, as
aforesaid, at the cost of such owner or owners of the lot or lots aforesaid in
the manner hereinafter specified; and immediately upon the completion of
the same, said Council shall furnish the Borough Solicitor with an itemized
statement of the cost of the same, giving the name of the owner or owners
of the lot or lots of ground fronting as aforesaid, and said Solicitor shall
then proceed to collect the amount of said cost from such owner or owners,
and in case said owner or owners shall neglect or refuse to pay said amount
within 15 days after receiving statement for the work from said Solicitor, it
shall be the duty of said Solicitor, and he is hereby enjoined and directed to
collect said cost with 10% additional thereon together with all charges and
expenses by lien or by action of assumpsit.
§ 230-12. Manner of service of notice.
The notice provided for in § 230-11 of this article shall be served upon
the owner of the premises to which such notice refers if said owner be
a resident of the Borough. If said owner is not such resident, then said
notice may be served on the agent or tenant of said owner or upon the
occupant of said premises. If said owner has no agent or tenant or there be
no occupier of said premises, then by printed or written notice tacked upon
the premises.
§ 230-13. Sidewalk width and slope; curb radius at intersections.
A. All paving herein provided of all sidewalks shall not be less than five
feet in width on all streets and alleys over 20 feet wide, unless directed
otherwise by Council, and shall not be less than 2 1/2 feet in width on
all streets and alleys 20 feet and less than 20 feet wide, and shall have a
slope of 1/4 of an inch to one foot from the property line of the street to
the outer line of the curbing, unless the grade of the intersecting street
does not permit, and in such case the same shall be made as the
§ 230-11 JUNKYARDS § 230-13
170:471
§ 230-14. Specifications for sidewalks, curbs and gutters. [Amended
12-1-2008 by Ord. No. 1229]
In all cases, permanent sidewalks, curbs and gutters where required, shall
be constructed of concrete, except as provided for properties in Historic
Districts, in accordance with the following specifications:
Borough Engineer may direct. Since street widths are total and
inclusive of two sidewalk areas and a curb to curb actual street width,
the location of sidewalks on sidewalk designated areas shall be:
(1) For five-foot-width sidewalks: three feet minimum from outer edge
of curb for locations having sidewalk areas of eight feet or more,
such location to be constant within the limits of one block; flush
with the inner edge of the curb where the sidewalk area for the
location is less than eight feet wide;
(2) For two-and-one-half-foot-width sidewalks: flush with inner edge of
the curb.
(3) Where new sidewalks are required and within a block containing
existing sidewalks, such new sidewalks shall be located to match
the existing sidewalks.
(4) Other than for Subsection A(3) above, exceptions to location may
be requested by a property owner who shall, on his application for
a permit, state the location desired and attach to the application
approval of said location signed by property owners owning 3/4 or
more of the frontage within the limits of one block (street to street
or street to alley). The Borough Manager may approve such
variance and so note the permit after satisfying himself that the
request is valid and to minimize any unjust hardship or destruction
of existing property.
B. All intersections of streets shall be constructed with a curb having a
radius of not less than 20 feet for arterial or collector streets, 10 feet for
primary or residential streets. At intersections at which one or more of
the intersecting streets is less than 20 feet wide curb radius shall be six
feet.
A. Sidewalks shall be poured monolithically, tamped and screeded true to
grade and sectioned with sufficient mortar brought to the surface for
finishing with wood float. Round all edges, including those of separation
plates and expansion joints to one-quarter-inch radius.
B. Curbs shall be poured monolithically and templates and forms removed
as soon as practicable. Minor defects shall be corrected by patching
with mortar. All exposed concrete shall be rubbed to a smooth surface
and edges at joints finished with a suitable tool. Round street edge to
one-inch radius. Plastering is not permitted.
§ 230-13 CATASAUQUA CODE § 230-14
170:472
C. The concrete body of standard pedestrian sidewalk shall be five inches
in thickness, crossovers, when their construction has been permitted,
shall be six-inch thickness for standard residential uses and eight
inches reinforced with No. 6 gauge welded wire fabric (six inches mesh)
for service stations and other heavy-duty uses. The concrete shall be
mixed in the following proportions measured by volume: one part true
portland cement; two parts sand which shall be clean, hard, durable
and free from lumps of clay, and all vegetable and deleterious
substances; four parts of coarse aggregate which shall consist of clean,
durable crushed rock or limestone free from dust, vegetable or other
organic matter, and properly graded in size. Only enough water to
produce a plastic, workable mix shall be used. Water-cement ratio shall
be six gallons of water per bag of cement.
D. The concrete body of curb shall have a top width of six inches, shall
better to a bottom width of eight inches and shall have a depth of 22
inches and to be the same mix as for sidewalks.
E. Sidewalk slabs shall be not more than 30 square feet in area.
F. Expansion joints 1/2 inch in thickness shall be provided with premolded
filler at intervals of not more than 30 feet for curb, and at points of
tangency of street returns and intersecting curbs. Curbs are to be
constructed in uniform lengths of 10 feet and all sections shall be
separated by templates.
G. Sidewalk sections shall be separated by plates extending fall depth of
concrete. When these are removed, grooves shall be filled with dry,
sharp sand. Expansion joints of 1/2 inch each shall be provided with
premolded filler at intervals of not more than 30 feet.
H. Where existing structures such as light standards, poles, fire hydrants,
etc., are within the limits of the sidewalk area, the concrete around
such structures shall be scored in a square eight inches wider than the
maximum dimension of the structure at the sidewalk elevation. Prior to
placing the concrete around such structures, a premolded expansion
joint, 1/2 of an inch in thickness, shall be placed around the structure
for the full depth of the concrete in the sidewalk.
I. The subgrade for construction of curb or sidewalk shall be compacted
soil or crushed stone. If the soil is suitable for use as subgrade, it shall
be compacted by hand, a pneumatic compactor or a self-contained
compactor. Compaction shall continue until a firm, stable subgrade is
achieved.
J. If the soil is unsuitable for use as subgrade, then additional material
shall be removed and a minimum of six inches of Pennsylvania
Department of Highways No. 28 crushed stone shall be placed and
thoroughly compacted to the design subgrade elevation.
K. All forms shall be made of substantial material preferably of steel and
shall be smooth, free from warp and sufficiently rigid to resist springing
§ 230-14 JUNKYARDS § 230-14
170:473
§ 230-15. Property owner to maintain sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
From and after the passage of this article it shall be the responsibility of
the property owner to maintain sidewalks curbs and gutters abutting his
property.
§ 230-16. Barricades and lighting during construction work.
[Amended 12-1-2008 by Ord. No. 1229]
It shall be the duty of all owners of real estate and contractors, mechanics
and laborers employed by said owners, during the construction of
sidewalks, curb or gutter on any street or alley, to place barricades at the
ends of said construction and the sides of all construction where the length
of the construction area exceeds six feet, and to provide lighting devices
from sunset to sunrise on or at all required barricades. Said barricade
and lighting devices shall be in conformance with Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation regulations at Title 67, Chapter 203, Work Zone Traffic
Control. The color of the light emitted from any warning light shall be
yellow.
§ 230-17. Pedestrian passageways to be provided; watercourses to
be kept open; liability for damages.
Whenever any obstruction or obstructions are made by either excavation
or otherwise, under or across any part of any sidewalk for any purpose
whatsoever, a safe and convenient passage shall be provided around or
over the same for public travel, and the watercourses shall always be kept
open for the free passage of surface water and in all cases where such
obstructions are made by reason of private improvements, the owners of
property where such improvements shall be made shall be responsible for
any damages occasioned by any neglect of or refusal to comply with the
provisions of this article.
out of shape. Forms should be set to line and grades as established by
the Borough.
L. Brick, slate or flagstone.
(1) Where brick, slate or flagstone are permitted, the minimum
acceptable dimensions for new materials brought to the site shall
be as follows:
(a) For brick the minimum nominal dimensions shall be four
inches by eight inches by two inches.
(b) For slate or flagstone the minimum width shall be equal to the
full width of the sidewalk to be installed or repaired with a
minimum thickness of two inches.
(2) Screening or polymeric sand shall be swept between all joints.
§ 230-14 CATASAUQUA CODE § 230-18
170:474
§ 230-18. Materials to be used in construction of sidewalks and
curbs. [Amended 12-1-2008 by Ord. No. 1229]
§ 230-19. Conditions for requiring removal, repair, construction or
reconstruction.
The Borough Manager be empowered, and he is hereby enjoined and
directed, to order the removal, repair, construction or reconstruction of
curbs and sidewalks if any of the following conditions exist:
§ 230-20. Permit required. [Amended 10-6-1980 by Ord. No. 811]
A. Except as provided in Subsection B of this section, it shall be unlawful
to construct new, or to repair in kind, any brick, slate, or flagstone
sidewalk or brick, slate or flagstone curb within the public rights-ofway.
Any existing curbs or sidewalks of brick, slate, or flagstone within
the public rights-of-way which are in need of repair or otherwise not in
first class condition shall be removed and replaced with concrete curbs
and sidewalks in accordance with §§ 230-13 and 230-14 of the
Codification of Ordinances.
B. Properties in Historic Districts. Where a property is located in an
officially designated Historic District, a property owner is permitted to
use brick, slate or flagstone in repair or replacement of sidewalks
already constructed out of brick, slate or flagstone. A property owner
desiring to change the material from concrete to brick, slate or
flagstone must petition the Council for a review of the proposed project
and permission to use one of the aforesaid alternate materials. The
Public Works Committee shall review the application and make a
recommendation to the Council which can approve or deny the request.
A. Pedestrian or vehicular traffic patterns in areas of the Borough where
curbs and sidewalks were not previously required have, in the opinion
of the Street and Public Safety Committees, created safety hazards to
the public.
B. Any depression, crack, heaving or separation in curbs or sidewalks has
resulted in a lateral opening or any abrupt vertical differential
exceeding 1 1/2 inches.
C. Crumbled or deteriorated sidewalk surface area exceeding six square
inches and 1/2 inch in depth.
D. Any curb tilted into the gutter in excess of two inches from a vertical
gauge.
E. Crumbled or deteriorated curb sections affecting an area six inches in
any surface dimension.
A. It shall be the duty of all owners of lots as aforesaid, and they are
hereby enjoined and required, previous to the construction,
§ 230-18 JUNKYARDS § 230-20
170:475
§ 230-21. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord. No.
1288]
Any person or persons failing to comply with or violating any of the
provisions of this article shall upon conviction before the Mayor or any
District Justice of said Borough of Catasauqua pay a fine or penalty for each
and every such failure or violation of not less than $5 and not more than
$25. Any person found guilty of violating an ordinance shall be assessed
court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in the
enforcement proceedings.
reconstruction or repair of sidewalks, curb or gutter, to make
application for a permit therefor to the Borough Manager.
B. The cost of such permit shall be as set from time to time by resolution of
Borough Council,120 plus engineering costs, where applicable.
[Amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 1190]
120. Editor's Note: See Ch. A285, Fees.
§ 230-20 CATASAUQUA CODE § 230-21
170:476
ARTICLE VI
Sidewalk and Curbing on Certain Streets
[Adopted 4-7-1969 (Ch. XVI, Sec. 69.2, of the 1962 Code)]
§ 230-22. Construction of sidewalk and curbing on streets less than
16 feet wide.
Except as otherwise limited, the policy of said Borough with respect to
construction of curbing and sidewalk along streets having a width of less
than 16 feet and located in said Borough shall be as follows:
A. The hereinafter named streets having a width of less than 16 feet along
which there presently exists curbing and sidewalk shall be maintained
in their present condition, and owners abutting such streets shall be
required to maintain or construct such sidewalk and curbing in
accordance with the provisions of Ordinance No. 615,121 approved
March 3, 1969, or other applicable ordinances of the Borough.
Name of Street Location
Chestnut Street Entire length
Crane Street From Pine to Church
Currant Street Entire length
Liberty Street Entire length
Limestone Street From Peach to Wood Streets
Middle Street From Railroad to Second Streets
Mulberry Street Entire length
Railroad Street From Linen to Race
Church to Strawberry
Walnut to Chestnut
School Street Entire length
Strawberry Street Entire length
Walker Street Entire length
Willow Street From Second to Canal
B. The streets hereinafter listed having a width of less than 16 feet along
which there is presently no curbing or sidewalk shall remain uncurbed
and property owners abutting such streets, for reasons of public safety,
shall not be permitted to install curbing and sidewalk along said streets:
Name of Street Location
Blackberry Street Entire length
Berks Street Entire length
121. Editor's Note: See Art. V of this chapter.
§ 230-22 JUNKYARDS § 230-22
170:477
Name of Street Location
Crane Street From Borough line to Pine Street
Franklin Street Entire length
Green Street Entire length
Limestone Street Borough line to Bridge
Milton Street Entire length
Oak Street From Crane to Howertown Road
Pear Street Entire length
Pearl Street Entire length
Spring Street Entire length
Strawberry Street From Second to Third and from American
to Howertown Road
Tunnel Alley Entire length
Water Street Entire length
Williams Street Entire length
C. The streets hereinafter listed having a width of less than 16 feet, along
portions of which there is presently curbing and sidewalk, will not be
further curbed at the request of the Borough. However, property
owners abutting said streets will be permitted to install curbs and
sidewalks along the presently uncurbed portion of such streets as they
choose to do so.
Name of Street Location
Elm Street Entire length
Hickory Street From Second to Howertown Road
Limestone Street From Pine to Church Streets and Peach to
Howertown Road
Oak Street From Crane to Third
Railroad Street From Chapel to Chestnut; Walnut to
Bridge; and Wood to Linden Streets
Willow Street From Second to Limestone Streets
§ 230-22 CATASAUQUA CODE § 230-22
170:478
ARTICLE VII
Street Obstructions and Uses
[Adopted 11-2-1970 by Ord. No. 658 (Ch. XVI, Part 1C, of the 1962
Code)]
§ 230-23. Definitions.
The following words when used in this article shall, unless the context
clearly indicates otherwise, mean or include as follows:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Catasauqua.
PERSON — Any natural person, firm, copartnership, association or
corporation.
STREET — Every way or place of whatever nature within the Borough of
Catasauqua, open to the use of the public as a matter of right, for purpose
of vehicular travel.
VEHICLE — Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a public street.
§ 230-23.1. General street obstructions. [Added 3-5-2007 by Ord.
No. 1210]
A. Except as hereinafter provided in Subsection A of this § 230-23.1, no
person shall dump, deposit, or place any material, equipment, or
furniture within the cartway of any street or alley of the Borough,
including the parking lanes, whether it be to reserve a parking space,
for personal convenience or any other reason. Such placement is
declared to be a traffic obstruction and hazard.
B. Roll-off containers, dumpsters, and other containers used for the
collection and eventual disposal of building construction waste and
similar materials shall be allowed within the parking lane of any street
with a cartway width of more than 20 feet and may extend no more than
four feet into any street with a cartway width of less than 20 feet, upon
obtaining a permit from the Borough to do so. Containers must be
placed in a location at which a motor vehicle would be legally allowed to
park, and in no case will the placement of a container be allowed where
it would effectively, or actually, close a road to vehicular traffic. The
property owner shall ensure that reflective tape, cones, and/or flashers
are placed around all sides of any dumpster or other container placed
within the public right-of-way, either the sidewalk area or the cartway of
any road.
(1) Any permit issued under this subsection shall be for a period of 30
consecutive days with a maximum of two automatic consecutive
additional thirty-day permit periods hereby authorized. The fee for
each thirty-day permit, or any additional thirty-day period, shall be
set by resolution of Borough Council.
§ 230-23 JUNKYARDS § 230-23.1
170:479
§ 230-24. Snow and ice from private property not to be placed on
street right-of-way.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove snow or ice from private
property and to put, place or deposit or cause to be put, placed or deposited
snow or ice so removed upon the right-of-way of any street.
§ 230-25. Snow and ice from sidewalk or footway not to be placed
on cartway; exception.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or cause to be removed snow
or ice from any sidewalk or footway and put, place or deposit, or cause to
be put, placed or deposited snow or ice so removed upon that portion of
the street normally used for the travel of vehicles; however, this shall not
be intended to prohibit putting, placing or depositing snow or ice upon a
portion of the street normally used for vehicles where there is no available
private property within a reasonable distance upon which to put, place or
deposit the snow or ice so removed.
§ 230-26. Violations and penalties.
(2) Prior to the issuance of any permit under this subsection, the
property owner shall provide a certificate of insurance (or, upon
request, the full insurance policy) to the Borough covering all
claims that may arise in whole or in part from the placement or use
of the roll-off container, dumpster or other containers. The policy of
insurance shall name the Borough as an additional insured and it
shall specifically state that it is primary over any other applicable
Borough insurance. The amount of the liability insurance shall be a
minimum amount of $1,000,000, and there shall be no general
aggregate applicable to this insurance.
A. Any person violating § 230-24 of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, pay a fine or penalty of not less than $25, nor more than $300,
and costs, and in default of payment of fine and costs suffer
imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
B. Any person violating § 230-25 of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, pay a fine or penalty of $10 and costs, and in default of payment
of fine and costs, suffer imprisonment for not more than three days.
C. Any person violating § 230-23.1A or B shall, upon conviction thereof,
pay a fine or civil penalty of not less than $100 and not more than $300.
Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. [Added
3-5-2007 by Ord. No. 1210]
D. Any person found guilty of violating an ordinance shall be assessed
court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in
the enforcement proceedings. [Added 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1288]
§ 230-23.1 CATASAUQUA CODE § 230-26
170:480
ARTICLE VIII
Excavations in Borough Streets and Other Borough Properties
[Adopted 8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 1373122]
§ 230-27. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall apply to all persons who excavate or
perform work of any other nature in or on Borough streets, property or
rights-of-way, all as defined or otherwise stated herein. This article shall
not apply to sidewalks or curbs as otherwise addressed in Chapter 230 or
to work performed pursuant to a recorded land development plan under
Chapter 235.
§ 230-28. Definitions and interpretations.
A. The following words and terms, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances
where the context clearly indicates otherwise:
ACT — The Underground Utility Line Protection Law, Act of December
10, 1974 (P.L. 852, No. 287),123 as amended or supplemented from time
to time.
APPLICANT — Any person who submits, or is required by this article
to submit, an application for a permit to perform work falling within
the scope of this article. Applicants shall be limited to utility owners,
adjacent or abutting landowners and others granted approval by the
Borough, and with respect to all, their authorized agents, except that in
the case of an authorized agent, the principal shall be a coapplicant and
both the agent and principal shall be jointly and severally liable under
the permit.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Catasauqua, Lehigh County,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH MANAGER — The duly appointed manager of the Borough
of Catasauqua or his or her designee.
EXCAVATION — Any activity in the right-of-way of any Borough street
or other Borough property or right-of-way which involves cutting,
breaking, opening or disturbing the surface thereof.
PENNDOT — The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
PERMITTEE — Any person issued a permit in accordance with the
requirements of this article. The permitte shall be issued in the name of
the applicant(s).
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, limited-liability partnership,
firm, company, limited-liability company, corporation, association, joint-
122. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. VIII, Street Excavations, adopted
10-2-2001 by Ord. No. 1126 (Ch. XVI, Part 1B, of the 1962 Code), as amended.
123. Editor's Note: See 73 P.S. § 176 et seq.
§ 230-27 JUNKYARDS § 230-28
170:481
§ 230-29. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to excavate or perform work in or on
a Borough street, Borough property or other Borough right-of-way without
first securing a permit in accordance with this article.
§ 230-30. Application for permit.
stock company, trust, estate or any other legal entity (whether or not
for profit or nonprofit) and, with respect to all of the foregoing, its legal
representatives, agents, officers or assigns.
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS — The set of standard
construction details and specifications duly adopted by resolution of
Council and including any amendments thereto which are in force and
effect at the time of application for a permit or at the time of application
for renewal of a permit. Every permit issued in accordance with this
article shall be deemed to include, as a part thereof, the most recent
version of the Standard Construction Documents, as amended.
STREET — Any public street, avenue, road, square, alley, highway
or other public place located in the Borough of Catasauqua and
established for the use of vehicles. The term "street" shall not include
state highways.
TRAVEL LANE — The designated width of a street pavement to carry
through or turning traffic and to separate it from opposing traffic,
traffic in the same direction of flow but occupying other travel lanes,
a parking lane, or the shoulder. The travel lane may be designated by
pavement markings. If the travel lane is not designated on both sides
by pavement markings, the travel lane shall be 12 feet in width as
measured from an adjoining pavement marking or from the center line
of the road, or from the edge of another travel lane (should the road
contain more than two unmarked travel lanes).
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural, and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
A. Any person who shall desire to perform any excavation or work in or on
any Borough street, property or other right-of-way shall submit a
written application to the Borough Manager for that purpose. The
application shall be made on a form provided by the Borough and shall
set forth, among other things, the full name and address of the
applicant; the location, inclusive dates and purpose of the work; the
length, width, depth or other description of the excavation or the work
and a description of all measures to be taken to protect motorists,
pedestrians and others affected by the work. The applicant shall
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Borough Manager that it will
employ reasonable measures to minimize adverse impacts of its work
on Borough residents and businesses.
§ 230-28 CATASAUQUA CODE § 230-30
170:482
§ 230-31. Permit fee.
B. The application shall contain an agreement by the applicant that the
work shall be performed in compliance with all applicable laws,
regulations, ordinances, resolutions and the Standard Construction
Documents.
C. The application shall contain an agreement by the applicant to
indemnify, defend and hold harmless the Borough, Borough Council and
all of their elected and appointed officials, agents, servants, consultants
and employees of and from all actions, suits, judgments, demands,
payments, claims, costs and charges, including reasonable court,
attorney and consultant fees, which, in whole or in part, arise out of
relate to the permit, the performance of the work under the permit or
from any other matter, cause or thing relating thereto.
D. The form of the application shall be prepared by the Borough Manager,
and it may be revised from time to time by the Borough Manager to
require additional information which he shall deem appropriate. The
Borough Manager may impose reasonable conditions on the issuance of
a permit consistent with the purpose and intent of this article as
expressed herein and in the legislative findings.
E. The Borough Manager may forward the submitted application to the
Borough Engineer or Solicitor for review and comment.
F. The Borough Manager may reject an application which he determines
to be incomplete in any material respect.
A. At the time of application and as a part thereof, the applicant shall pay a
permit fee in a minimum amount as shall be set from time to time by
resolution of Council (the "minimum fee"). The minimum fee shall be in
an amount deemed necessary to cover the cost of processing and
issuing the application.
B. Where the work includes any longitudinal opening or excavation in
excess of 25 lineal feet, the applicant shall pay, in addition to the
minimum fee, an additional fee per foot as shall be set from time to time
by resolution of Council.
C. Where the work does not involve excavation as described in Subsection
B, above, but does involve occupancy of Borough property or right-ofway,
in addition to the minimum fee, the applicant shall pay a fee as set
from time to time by resolution of Council to occupy Borough property
or right-of-way for such work.
D. In addition to the fees set forth above, the applicant shall reimburse to
the Borough its actual cost incurred for observation and approval of the
work by the Borough Engineer. To meet its obligation hereunder, the
applicant shall establish and fund an escrow account in an amount
reasonably deemed necessary to reimburse the Borough. Upon
payment by the Borough to the Borough Engineer for services provided
§ 230-30 JUNKYARDS § 230-31
170:483
§ 230-32. Issuance of permits restricted.
An excavation permit shall be issued only to an applicant, as defined herein.
§ 230-33. Permit approval/disapproval.
A permit issued hereunder shall contain, at a minimum, the information
specified in § 230-30 and shall be accompanied by a fee calculated in
accordance with § 230-31. An application not meeting the requirements of
this article may be rejected at the discretion of the Borough Manager. If the
application is disapproved, written notice thereof containing the reasons
therefor shall be provided to the applicant.
§ 230-34. Responsibility to contact utilities.
The work authorized by the permit is subject to all the provisions of the
Act. It shall be the applicant's responsibility to contact the utilities that have
recorded their facilities in compliance with said Act.
§ 230-35. Refilling; restoration; defects.
Any person who shall perform excavation activities in accordance with
a permit issued in accordance with this article shall refill the opening
or excavation in accordance with the Standard Construction Documents,
this article and the permit. All work shall be performed in a good and
workmanlike manner and free of defects and in such a manner as to prevent
any settling thereafter. Unless otherwise agreed, in writing, by the Borough,
all surfaces shall be restored in such a manner as to conform to the proper
grade and be of the same surface material as that abutting the excavation.
If within two years following the date of approval of the restoration of the
surface as herein provided there shall occur defects in the workmanship,
the Borough shall notify the applicant, and the applicant shall repair the
same. If the applicant fails to commence the repair within 30 days of the
date of the notice of a defect, then the Borough may repair the same and
charge and collect all costs and fees incurred as a result thereof from the
applicant.
§ 230-36. Responsibility of permit holder for and right of Borough
to do certain work.
All other work in connection with permits issued hereunder, including
excavation, fill, maintenance, protection of vehicular, pedestrian and other
hereunder, the Borough may draw an equivalent sum from the escrow
account for reimbursement. It shall be the obligation of the applicant to
replenish the fund when the funds drop to less than 25% of the initial
amount. In the event that the applicant disputes the reasonableness or
necessity or necessity of the Borough Engineer's invoice it shall do so
by filing a request for a hearing before Council pursuant to applicable
law. Excess funds in the account at the completion and approval of the
work shall be reimbursed to the applicant.
§ 230-31 CATASAUQUA CODE § 230-36
170:484
forms of traffic, and temporary paving and other work shall be performed
by the applicant at his sole cost and expense and in a good and workmanlike
manner in accordance with the Standard Construction Documents, the
permit, this article and all other applicable laws, regulations and
ordinances. Such work shall be subject to the review and approval of the
designated Borough Manager, provided that the Borough Manager, may,
if deemed necessary to the proper and timely performance of the work,
require that excavation and backfilling be performed by the Borough, in
which event the applicant shall reimburse to the Borough the actual cost of
the work performed.
§ 230-37. Requirements for work; correction of unsatisfactory work;
completion of incomplete work.
A. No opening or excavation in any street shall extend from a travel lane
into an adjacent travel lane a distance greater than two feet before the
initial travel lane is refilled and its surface restored to an acceptable
temporary condition.
B. No excavation more than 100 feet longitudinally shall be opened in any
street at any one time, and no extension thereof shall occur without
Borough approval of the preceding opening.
C. The excavation shall be conducted so as not to damage, or interfere
with, water lines, sewer lines or any other lines or facilities (subsurface
or otherwise), or their connections to any structures, unless and until
permission of the owners or other proper authorities has been obtained.
D. No tunneling shall be permitted without the express permission of the
Borough Manager or his designee and as made a part of the permit.
Backfilling of a tunnel excavation shall be performed only in in a
method acceptable to the Borough and in the presence of the Borough
Manager or his/her designee.
E. All openings or excavations shall be backfilled promptly with materials,
all in accordance with the Standard Construction Documents.
F. Temporary pavement restoration shall conform to the Standard
Construction Documents and be maintained for a minimum period of 30
days following final restoration. The Borough, in its sole discretion, may
waive the required thirty-day waiting period. After the required waiting
period or following a waiver thereof, permanent pavement restoration
shall be performed as specified herein.
G. On concrete base streets, such base shall be replaced with concrete,
and the minimum size of the opening or excavation shall be 16 square
feet.
H. Unless otherwise specified in the permit, all permanent paving
restoration shall be completed within 90 days of the issuance of the
permit. Where an excavation is made within a travel lane, the entire
existing width of the travel lane shall receive the mill and overlay as
§ 230-36 JUNKYARDS § 230-37
170:485
specified in the Standard Construction Documents. Where an
excavation is made within 50 feet of any other opening or excavation
within the travel lane by the same, or substantially the same, person,
then that person shall perform additional mill and overlay for the full
existing width of the travel lane so as to include the entire longitudinal
distance between the outside limits of the openings or excavations.
I. During the making of any excavation, every necessary and reasonable
precaution shall be taken by the applicant to keep the street or other
area(s) in a safe and passable condition both day and night through the
use of traffic control measures including where appropriate, flagmen,
guards, barriers, lanterns and other devices in accordance with the
Standard Construction Documents.
J. The applicant shall notify the Borough Manager in advance of the
following work in sufficient time for the Borough to provide for the
presence of an on-site observer:
(1) When the excavation is ready for backfilling and before any
backfilling is done;
(2) When backfilling work is completed;
(3) When temporary restoration is complete; and
(4) When permanent restoration is complete.
K. With the consent of the Borough, a portion of the Borough street or
other property may be used for staging of equipment and materials
during the workday, provided that all materials and equipment must be
removed from the street right-of-way at the end of the day, unless
otherwise agreed to by the Borough Manager. Any areas within the
street right-of-way disturbed for the staging of equipment and/or
material shall be returned to its original condition no later than 30 days
following the date of final restoration.
L. In the event that the Borough Manager shall determine, in his sole
opinion, that any work performed by or for an applicant is
unsatisfactory and the work is not timely and properly corrected in
accordance with the directives of the Borough Manager or his designee,
or in the event that the work for which the permit was granted is not
completed within the time fixed herein or as specified by the permit, the
Borough shall have the right but not the obligation to correct the work
deemed unsatisfactory or complete any such work not completed timely
and charge to the applicant the cost thereof, plus 20%.
M. No work shall commence under a permit unless and until there has
occurred a preconstruction conference. The requirement of a
preconstruction conference may be waived by the Borough Manager in
writing.
§ 230-37 CATASAUQUA CODE § 230-37
170:486
§ 230-38. Emergency openings.
Where the Borough or a person owning, operating or controlling any facility
reasonably believes that there exists and emergency involving that facility
requiring immediate excavation, it shall be lawful for that person to
commence an excavation to remedy such condition before securing a
permit, provided that application for a permit shall be made not later
than the next business day following the emergency, and that such person
complies with all other requirements of this article. Nothing contained
herein shall preclude the Borough from taking such measures as are
deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare as shall
be deemed necessary by the Borough Manager or his designee the
circumstances of the particular case, and the Borough may perform such
work shall and charge the same on the basis of cost plus 20% to such
person.
§ 230-39. Restrictions regarding trees and shrubbery.
Except as set forth in the permit, the applicant shall not remove or destroy
trees or shrubbery within the work area except as set forth therein.
§ 230-40. Work necessitating opening or excavation to be done
prior to street improvement and not until five years thereafter;
exception.
§ 230-41. Permittee responsibilities for future relocation of work.
If following the completion of work by an applicant the Borough street
or right-of-way is widened or reconstructed or the alignment or grades
are changed, the applicant shall change or relocate all or any part of the
N. The applicant shall employ reasonable measures to minimize the
adverse impacts of its work on Borough residents and businesses.
A. Prior to the Borough undertaking the reconstruction and/or resurfacing
of any street or right-of-way, the Borough Manager shall give timely
notice to all persons owning property abutting on the street and to all
utility companies operating in the Borough, and all such persons and
utility companies shall perform all work which would involve the
excavation of the street(s). All such work shall be performed within 30
days from the date of the notice, unless such time is extended, in
writing, by the Borough Manager.
B. Except in the case of an emergency as set forth in § 230-38, new paving
performed by or on behalf of the Borough shall not be opened or
excavated for a period of five years after the completion thereof. If for
any reason other than an emergency a person seeks an application to
excavate within a Borough street or right-of-way within the five-year
period set forth above, the application shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Borough Council who may place reasonable conditions
on the approval thereof.
§ 230-37 JUNKYARDS § 230-41
170:487
facilities or structures covered by the prior permit(s) which interfere with
the improvement(s). Such work shall be at the applicant's sole cost and
expense.
§ 230-42. Conditions for laying and extending utility lines.
No new utility lines or facilities shall hereafter be laid or constructed,
and no such existing lines or facilities shall be extended in any of the
streets, rights-of-way or other properties of the Borough until an application
therefor shall have been first filed with the Borough and a permit issued.
The Borough Manager or his designee shall not approve the locating of any
such line or facility at a depth of less than 30 inches from the surface of the
street unless such depth is determined to be impossible or impractical.
§ 230-43. Bond and insurance requirements.
A. No permit shall be issued unless and until the applicant shall have
posted a bond or other security in a form and amount satisfactory to the
Borough. The posted security shall secure the faithful performance of
the work by the applicant and shall be in amount representing the cost
to the applicant to perform the work.
B. No permit shall be issued unless and until an applicant provides proof
of insurance on an occurrence basis as follows:
(1) General liability in an aggregate amount of $2,000,000;
(2) Completed operations in an aggregate amount of $2,000,000;
(3) Pollution coverage (if deemed necessary by the Borough);
(4) Auto coverage with a combined single limit of $1,000,000; and
(5) Umbrella coverage in an amount of $5,000,000.
C. The applicant shall name the Borough and all of its councils,
committees and commissions, and with respect to all, their elected and
appointed officials, consultants and employees, as additional insureds
for all claims which in whole or in part arise out of or relate to the
permit or the performance of the work under the permit. The additional
insurance shall be primary over all other applicable policies of
insurance maintained by the additional insureds.
D. Upon completion of the project, and as a condition of closing out the
permit, the applicant shall post a maintenance bond in the amount of
15% of the actual cost of the work performed in a Borough street, rightof-
way or other Borough property. The maintenance bond shall secure
for a period of 18 months the applicant's correction of any work or
materials deemed defective or otherwise in violation of the permit as
determined by the Borough Manager.
E. The bond and insurance requirements of this section may be waived in
whole or in part by Borough Council at the request of an applicant.
§ 230-41 CATASAUQUA CODE § 230-44
170:488
§ 230-44. Payment for work performed by Borough.
Payment for work performed by the Borough under the provisions of this
article shall be made by the applicant within 30 days of the date of the bill
issued for such work. Upon failure to pay or timely pay the amount due,
the same shall by collectible by the Borough by an action in assumpsit or in
the manner provided by law for the collection of municipal claims. Unpaid
amounts will carry interest from the date payment is due at the rate of 1.5%
per month, not to exceed 18% per annum. In an action brought to collect
sums due and owing under this article, the Borough shall be entitled to
recover all costs and reasonable attorney and consultant fees.
§ 230-45. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary criminal proceeding, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and/or to imprisonment
for a term not to exceed 90 days. Every day that a violation of this article
continues shall constitute a separate offense. In an action brought under
this section, the Borough shall be entitled to recover all costs and
reasonable attorney and consultant fees as matters of restitution.
§ 230-44 JUNKYARDS § 230-45
170:489
Chapter 235
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 60.
Uniform codes — See Ch. 130.
Fair housing — See Ch. 138.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 145.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 210.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 225.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 230.
Trees — See Ch. 245.
Water — See Ch. 265.
Wellhead protection — See Ch. 275.
Zoning — See Ch. 280.
§ 230-45 CATASAUQUA CODE § 230-45
170:490
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 235-1. Legislative authority.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority conferred by Pennsylvania
State Act No. 247, as amended, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.124
§ 235-2. Applicability. [Amended 6-5-1995 by Ord. No. 1031]
§ 235-3. Purpose.
This chapter has been adopted for the purpose of regulating subdivision
and land development within the Borough of Catasauqua in order to create
conditions favorable to the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
citizens of the Borough of Catasauqua through the provision of regulations
that will insure the harmonious development of the community.
A. All subdivisions included.
(1) This chapter shall apply to all subdivisions and land developments
located within the Borough limits of the Borough of Catasauqua
which are subdivided and/or submitted after the effective date of
this chapter and also to all subdivisions and land developments
previously approved by the Borough of Catasauqua in accordance
with Ordinance No. 484, the development of which has not been
completed within three years of said approval.
(2) No subdivision or land development of any lot, tract or parcel of
land shall be effected, and no street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer,
water main, or other facilities in connection therewith shall be laid
out, constructed, opened or dedicated for public use and travel, or
the common use of occupants of buildings abutting thereon, except
in strict accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Approval required before recording. All plans for subdivisions and land
developments shall be submitted first to the Borough Planning
Commission for review and recommendation. Following
recommendation by the Planning Commission, such plans shall be
submitted to Borough Council for review and possible approval, and
with respect thereto, Borough Council shall have the authority to deny,
approve or approve with conditions. In addition, the Borough Council
may refer the matter back to the Planning Commission for further
consideration and recommendations. [Amended 12-19-2011 by Ord.
No. 1274]
124. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 235-1 JUNKYARDS § 235-4
170:491
§ 235-4. Short title. [Amended 6-5-1995 by Ord. No. 1031]
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "The 1974 Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance of the Borough of Catasauqua."
§ 235-4 CATASAUQUA CODE § 235-4
170:492
ARTICLE II
Plan Submission Procedure
§ 235-5. General procedure for submission of all plans. [Amended
6-5-1995 by Ord. No. 1031]
A. Required plans.
(1) Preliminary and final plans and required fees and supporting data
for all proposed subdivisions and land developments of land lying
within the Borough limits shall be submitted by the subdivider to
the Borough for review by the Commission and Council. [Amended
12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 1274]
(2) In addition, the subdivider may prepare a sketch plan for informal
discussion with the Commission prior to submitting the official
preliminary plan for review. This plan shall be for the purpose of
establishing in advance, if possible, the extent to which the
proposed subdivision or land development conforms with the
design standards of this chapter.
B. County and other agency reviews. Copies of all plans submitted to the
Borough shall be forwarded to the County Planning Commission and to
other appropriate agencies upon their receipt, for review and advice by
these agencies within a period of 30 days. Approval of any subdivision
or land development application cannot be issued until comments from
the County Planning Commission are received or until the expiration of
30 days from the date the application was forwarded to the County
Planning Commission. [Amended 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 1274]
C. Consideration of plans. Subdivision and land development plans and
supporting data submitted to the Planning Commission will be
considered at the Commission's next regularly scheduled meeting,
provided that they are received at least 10 calendar days in advance of
said meeting. The Commission shall review the plan at said meeting,
and any revisions thereto at any additional meetings, and thereafter
issue a recommendation, in writing, to the Council. A copy of the
recommendation shall be provided to the developer or its agent.
[Amended 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 1274]
D. Notification to developer. Upon receipt of the Planning Commission
recommendation, the plan shall be placed on the next available agenda
of the Council, at which time Council shall take action on the plan. Such
action may include approval, denial, conditional approval or referral
back to the Planning Commission for further recommendation. The
decision of the Council shall be delivered to the developer in
accordance with the requirements of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended.125 [Amended 12-19-2011 by Ord. No.
1274]
125. Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 235-5 JUNKYARDS § 235-5
170:493
§ 235-6. Fees. [Amended 5-7-1984 by Ord. No. 869; 6-5-1995 by
Ord. No. 1031; 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 1274]
E. Public hearing. Before acting on any preliminary or final plan, the
Commission may hold a public hearing thereon after public notice.
F. Sketch plan submission. Where a developer files a sketch plan for the
purpose of informal discussion and review, no rights shall attach and no
deadlines for review shall apply. The developer may elect to limit the
scope of review of the sketch plan. A sketch plan is subject to review
only by the Planning Commission and Borough consultants and is not
governed by the procedure set forth in § 235-5D. [Amended
12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 1274]
G. Preliminary plan. The initial preliminary plan filed with the Borough
shall constitute the official preliminary plan, and it shall be reviewed in
accordance with all applicable ordinances and resolutions of the
Borough relating to the development and use of land and the
construction of improvements and common amenities. [Amended
12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 1274]
H. Final plan. After approval of the preliminary plan, or in conjunction
therewith, the developer may submit to the Borough a final plan for the
subdivision or land development. Review and approval of the final plan
shall be in accordance with the requirements of § 235-5C and D.
[Amended 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 1274]
I. Preliminary/final plan. Where a plan meets the requirements of §
235-11, the developer may file a preliminary/final plan for review
pursuant to § 235-5C and D and § 235-11. [Added 12-19-2011 by Ord.
No. 1274]
J. Recording of final plan. No later than 90 days after final plan approval
and full compliance with all conditions of preliminary and final plan
approval, the developer shall record the final plan in the appropriate
office of Lehigh County. The developer’s failure to so file may result in
the imposition of any penalties or preventative penalties specified in the
MPC126 and/or revocation of plan approval by the Borough Council.
[Added 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 1274]
A. In accordance with Sections 503(1) and 510(g) of the MPC,127 as
amended, relating to the authority of the municipality to incur and
collect from the developer reasonable and necessary professional
consultant and expert review fees in the course of plan review and
construction and any improvements agreement pursuant to § 235-16N
of this chapter, the developer shall reimburse the Borough for all
professional consultant or expert review fees relating to the review and
approval of the plan or the construction, observation, inspection, review
126. Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
127. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1) and 53 P.S. § 10510(g), respectively.
§ 235-5 CATASAUQUA CODE § 235-6
170:494
and approval of the public improvements and common amenities
contemplated by the plan and paid by the Borough.
B. Review fees.
(1) The phrase "review fees" as used in this section, shall mean all
professional consultant or expert fees, including attorney fees, paid
or incurred by the Borough in the course of preliminary or final
plan review and comment (including all review and comment
leading to final plan recording and the preparation of any
agreements required by the Borough) or paid or incurred by the
Borough and arising out of or relating to the construction,
observation, inspection, review and/or approval of the public
improvements or the common amenities contemplated by the
developer's preliminary or final plan.
(2) The rate(s) at which review fees are charged shall be approved by
resolution enacted or motion made and approved at a duly
advertised public meeting of the Borough Council. For the purpose
of this subsection, any such motion shall be reduced to writing,
given a resolution number and thereafter considered a
resolution.128
C. The term "consultant" shall mean all professional consultants, other
experts, attorneys and independent contractors retained by the
Borough to provide professional or expert advice or services to the
Borough in connection with the review and comment on the developer's
preliminary or final plan or the construction, observation, inspection,
review and/or approval of the public improvements and common
amenities contemplated by the developer's preliminary or final plan.
D. No construction of public improvements or common amenities
contemplated by a preliminary plan shall commence and no recording
of a final plan shall occur until all consultant review fees paid or
incurred by the Borough are paid by the developer in accordance with
this chapter, applicable resolutions and/or the improvements
agreement, as applicable.
E. Following plan approval and as a condition of recording a final plan, in
order to fund and secure the developer's obligations hereunder, the
developer shall enter into an appropriate agreement with the Borough
pursuant to § 235-16N of this chapter.
F. The provisions of this section shall apply to all sketch plans submitted in
accordance with this chapter.
G. If, in accordance with the requirements of the Municipalities Planning
Code, as amended,129 a developer disputes the reasonableness and
necessity of a consultant review fee, any appeal taken and perfected
128. Editor's Note: See Ch. A285, Fees.
129. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 235-6 JUNKYARDS § 235-6
170:495
pursuant thereto shall not stay the developer's obligation to pay or
reimburse the Borough hereunder, and the developer shall pay to the
Borough the full amount of the consultant review fees then due and
owing without deducting the sum in dispute.
H. Where established by resolution or an improvements agreement, the
developer shall at all times properly fund an escrow account. Any
failure of the Borough to notify the developer of a deficiency in an
escrow account and/or any failure to demand escrow account
replenishment shall not constitute a defense to, or waiver of, any claim
by the Borough to be reimbursed for consultant review fees paid or
incurred by the Borough in connection with the review and approval of
the developer's plan or the construction, observation, inspection,
review and approval of the public improvements and common amenities
contemplated by the developer's preliminary or final plan. At all times,
the Borough shall, at its sole discretion, have the right to bill a
developer directly for review fees paid or incurred.
I. A failure by the developer to timely replenish an escrow account or to
pay the Borough's bill for consultant review fees may, in the sole
discretion of the Borough, result in the imposition of any or all of the
preventive remedies found at Section 515.1 of the Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended,130 and/or the issuance of a stop-work
order. In addition to these remedies, the Borough shall retain the right
to initiate and prosecute actions at law or in equity to obtain payment
and/or reimbursement of consultant review fees. In the event that the
Borough shall initiate suit to recover consultant review fees, the
Borough shall be entitled to claim and recover all costs, witness fees,
expert witness fees and reasonable attorney fees relating to the
prosecution of the claim.
J. Where a developer has established more than one escrow account
relating to one or more projects involving the development or proposed
development of the same property or any part thereof, the Borough
may, at its sole discretion and with notice to the developer, combine
escrow accounts by transferring existing balances into one account.
Where a developer has established more than one escrow account
relating to one or more projects involving the development or proposed
development of the same property or any part thereof, and where there
exists a deficiency in an escrow account, or where sums are due and
owing for reimbursement of review fees paid or incurred, the Borough
may, at its sole discretion, transfer and combine any such balances in
one account and/or withdraw sums from any existing accounts to
reduce a deficiency or to pay for review fees incurred, provided that
written notice is provided thereof to the developer.
K. The mailing address provided by the developer on the land
development application shall be the address to which all escrow
communications and billings are mailed. If at any time in the land
130. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10515.1.
§ 235-6 CATASAUQUA CODE § 235-6
170:496
§ 235-7. Sketch plan.
Sketch plans are not required by this chapter but it is recommended that
the subdivider submit such a plan in order to establish, at an early stage
in the planning of the subdivision or land development, the basic conditions
required for the approval of a preliminary and a final plan.
§ 235-8. Official plan applications.
development process the developer's address shall change, then the
developer shall notify the Borough, in writing of the same.
A. Preliminary plan.
(1) Preliminary plans and supporting data shall comply with the
provisions of Article IV of this chapter.
(2) An original and 12 copies of the preliminary plan shall be submitted
by the subdivider to the Borough Manager, who shall act as the
official representative of the Commission. Additional copies may be
requested if required for submittal or reference to other
appropriate agencies. [Amended 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 1274]
(3) The Borough Manager shall transmit copies of all plans and
supporting data as follows: [Amended 12-19-2011 by Ord. No.
1274]
(a) One copy to each Planning Commission member;
(b) One copy each to the Borough Solicitor, Borough Engineer and
Mayor;
(c) One copy each to the Borough Planning and Zoning and Public
Works Committees; and
(d) One copy to such other agencies, departments, entities or
officials as the Borough Manager shall deem appropriate.
(4) The preliminary plan shall be reviewed in accordance with the
requirements of § 235-5. [Amended 12-19-2011 by Ord. No.
1274]
(5) The official action of Council with respect to the developer's plan
shall be taken at a public meeting of Council, and written notice of
that action shall be delivered to the developer in accordance with
§ 235-5D. [Amended 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 1274131]
B. Final plan.
(1) A final plan may be submitted after, or in conjunction with, the
filing of a preliminary plan, and in the case of the latter, the two
131. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection A(6), which immediately
followed, regarding approval of the preliminary plan.
§ 235-6 JUNKYARDS § 235-8
170:497
§ 235-9. Recording plats and deeds. [Amended 6-5-1995 by Ord. No.
1031]
may be reviewed and official action taken thereon simultaneously.
[Amended 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 1274]
(2) The final plan shall be reviewed in accordance with the
requirements of § 235-5. Where a final plan differs materially from
the approved preliminary plan, it shall be considered a revised
preliminary plan. [Amended 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 1274]
(3) The Council may permit submission of the final plan in sections or
stages, each covering a portion of the entire proposed subdivision
as shown on the preliminary plan. The Council may require that any
section or stage not completed within three years from the date of
preliminary plan approval may require a new preliminary plan
submission to reflect changing conditions or legal requirements
which may affect the subdivision or land development. [Amended
12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 1274]
(4) The final plan and supporting data shall comply with the provisions
of Article IV and § 235-16 of this chapter. Failure to do so shall be
cause for tabling the plan.
(5) An original and 12 copies of the final plan shall be distributed as
provided for in § 235-8A(3). [Amended 12-19-2011 by Ord. No.
1274]
(6) The final plan shall be reviewed in accordance with the
requirements of § 235-5. [Amended 12-19-2011 by Ord. No.
1274]
(7) The official action of Council with respect to the developer's final
plan shall be taken at a public meeting of Council, and written
notice of that action shall be delivered to the developer in
accordance with § 235-5D. [Amended 12-19-2011 by Ord. No.
1274]
(8) Prior to recording the final plan, the same shall be endorsed by the
Planning Commission Chairman and Secretary and the President of
Borough Council, whose signature shall be attested by the Borough
Secretary. The developer shall pay all costs of recording the final
plan and shall deliver a fully executed copy to the Borough
Manager. [Amended 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 1274]
(9) When both the Planning Commission and the Council have
approved the final plan, the Borough and the Planning Commission
shall endorse two copies of the final plan to that effect. one copy of
the endorsed final plan shall be kept in the Commission files and
the other returned to the subdivider. Additional copies may be
endorsed to meet the needs of the subdivider and other agencies.
§ 235-8 CATASAUQUA CODE § 235-9
170:498
§ 235-10. Effect of plat approval on Official Map. [Added 6-5-1995
by Ord. No. 1031]
After a plat has been approved and recorded as provided in this chapter, all
streets and public grounds on such plat shall be, and become a part of the
Official Map of the Borough without public hearing.
§ 235-11. Plans exempted from standard review procedures.
[Amended 6-5-1995 by Ord. No. 1031; 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 1274]
Where the proposed subdivision involves the creation of no more than
three residential lots, the developer may file a preliminary/final plan for
review and action. Except as modified by the combination of the preliminary
and final plans into one combined plan, all other procedures for review of
preliminary and final plans shall apply to the preliminary/final plan.
§ 235-12. Exemptions. [Added 6-5-1995 by Ord. No. 1031]
The following are exempt or partially exempt from the provisions of this
chapter:
A. Upon the approval of a final plat, the developer shall within 90 days of
such final approval record such plat in the office of the Recorder of
Deeds of the county in which the Borough is located. The Recorder of
Deeds shall not accept any plat for recording unless such plat officially
notes the approval of the Borough Council, and review by the county
planning agency.
B. The recording of the plat shall not constitute grounds for assessment
increases until such time as lots are sold or improvements are installed
on the land included within the subject plat.
A. The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or singlefamily
semidetached dwelling into not more than three residential
units, unless such units are intended to be a condominium;
B. The addition of a building or structure on a lot which is accessory to an
existing dwelling, as that term is defined in the Zoning Ordinance,132
provided that the dwelling contains no more than three dwelling units,
as that phrase is defined in the Zoning Ordinance. [Amended
12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 1274]
C. The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the confines of
an enterprise which would be considered an amusement park. For the
purposes of this subsection, an "amusement park" is defined as a tract
or area used principally as a location for permanent amusement
structures or rides. This exclusion shall not apply to newly acquired
acreage by an amusement park until initial plans for the expanded area
have been approved by proper authorities.
132. Editor's Note: See Ch. 280, Zoning, § 280-19, Definitions.
§ 235-9 JUNKYARDS § 235-12
170:499
D. The addition of a temporary building or structure on a lot which is
accessory to an existing principal use. For the purpose of this
subsection only, a building or structure shall be considered temporary,
provided that it is intended to remain on the lot for a period not to
exceed 90 days from the date that construction of the accessory
commences or the date that it is placed on the lot. [Added 12-19-2011
by Ord. No. 1274]
§ 235-12 CATASAUQUA CODE § 235-12
170:500
ARTICLE III
Design Standards and Required Improvements
§ 235-13. Design standards. [Amended 6-5-1995 by Ord. No. 1031]
The design standards listed below, and in Table 1,133 shall be incorporated
in all proposed plans:
A. Conformance with other requirements.
(1) All subdivisions and land developments shall comply fully with all
federal, state, county, Borough and other applicable laws and
regulations. Evidence of the receipt of any permits or approvals
required by such laws and regulations shall be submitted by the
subdivider and shall be a condition of the approval of any plan
submitted under this chapter.
(2) Where such other laws and regulations are more restrictive than
those contained herein, such other regulations shall be observed.
B. General design standards and comprehensive plan requirements.
(1) Land shall be suited to the purpose for which it is to be subdivided.
Land which is unsafe or unsuited for development due to flooding,
subsidence, underground fires, open quarries, unconsolidated fill,
steep slopes or other hazardous conditions shall not be subdivided
unless proper safeguards are provided and approved by the
Commission.
(2) Consideration shall be given in the design of all land developments
and subdivisions to the future development needs of the Borough
and the objectives established in any officially prepared Borough or
regional comprehensive or master plan for land use, streets and
thoroughfares, public utilities and facilities and to other
governmental plans affecting the subdivision and land
development.
(3) In reviewing subdivision plans, the Commission will consider the
adequacy of existing or proposed community facilities to serve the
additional dwellings proposed by the subdivision.
(4) Where a proposed park, playground, school or other public use
shown in the Comprehensive Plan is located in whole or in part in a
subdivision, the Commission may require the reservation of such
area as may be deemed reasonable. Where said area is not
dedicated, it shall be reserved for acquisition or initiation of
condemnation proceedings by the Borough for a period of one year,
after which such reservation shall lapse if action to acquire said
property has not been taken by the Borough.
133. Editor's Note: Table 1 is included at the end of this section.
§ 235-13 JUNKYARDS § 235-13
170:501
(5) Areas provided or reserved for such community facilities should be
adequate to provide for building sites, landscaping and off-street
parking as appropriate to the use proposed.
(6) The layout of the proposed subdivision shall be in general
conformity with the features or developments proposed in the
master plan of the Borough.
(7) All plan proposals shall be coordinated with existing and proposed
development on adjoining or adjacent land.
C. Street system layout.
(1) Proposed streets shall be designed to provide safe and efficient
access to all parcels, to create a functional street system including
major streets, collector streets and local streets where appropriate,
and to minimize street intersections and pedestrian-vehicular
conflicts.
(2) Where a subdivision abuts an existing street which has a narrow
width, improper alignment or other deficiency, the Commission
may require the dedication of additional right-of-way to correct the
existing deficiency.
(3) The street system layout shall make adequate provision for any
possible resubdivision or new additional subdivision of the area
being subdivided.
(4) Street dimensions and design standards shall be in accordance
with Table 1.134
(5) The location of all major streets in the proposed subdivision and
land development shall conform in general alignment to the traffic
plan adopted by the Borough Planning Commission.
(6) The proposed street layout shall provide for the continuation or
projection of existing streets in the surrounding area unless the
Commission deems such extension undesirable for specific reasons
of topography or design.
(7) Streets shall be logically related to the topography to produce
usable lots and reasonable grades.
(8) Minor streets shall be laid out to discourage through traffic, but
provision for street connections into and from adjacent areas will
generally be required.
(9) Proposed streets shall be extended to provide access to adjoining
property where necessary.
134. Editor's Note: Table 1 is included at the end of this section.
§ 235-13 CATASAUQUA CODE § 235-13
170:502
(10) Adequate street rights-of-way shall be provided as necessary where
lots in the proposal are large enough to permit resubdivision, or if a
portion of the tract is not subdivided.
(11) Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed
major traffic street, the Commission may require marginal access
streets, rear service alleys, reverse frontage lots or such other
treatment as will provide protection for abutting properties,
reduction in the number of intersections with the major street, and
separation of local and through traffic.
(a) Where residential reverse frontage lots are utilized, they shall
have a rear yard with a minimum depth of 75 feet to the
ultimate right-of-way of the major street on which they abut
and they shall have a planting screen easement at least 10 feet
wide across which there shall be no right of access.
(12)New half or partial streets will not be permitted, except where
essential to reasonable subdivision of a tract in conformance with
the other requirements and standards contained herein and where,
in addition, satisfactory assurance for dedication of the remaining
part of the street can be secured.
(13) Wherever a tract to be subdivided borders an existing half or
partial street, the other part of the street shall be plotted within
such tract.
(14) Dead-end streets shall be prohibited, except as stubs to permit
future street extension into adjoining tracts, or when designed as
culs-de-sac.
(15)New reserve strips, including those controlling access to streets,
shall be avoided.
D. Street intersections.
(1) Streets shall be laid out to intersect as nearly as possible at right
angles. No street shall intersect another at an angle of less than
60°.
(2) Multiple intersections involving junction of more than two streets
shall be avoided. Where this proves impossible, such intersections
shall be designed with extreme care for both pedestrian and
vehicular safety.
(3) Clear sight triangles shall be provided at all street intersections
within which no obstruction to vision shall be permitted between a
height of two to 10 feet above the center-line grade of each street.
Such clear sight triangles shall be established from the point
intersection of the center lines of the intersecting streets for a
distance of 75 feet where both streets are local streets, 100 feet
§ 235-13 JUNKYARDS § 235-13
170:503
where one or both streets are collector streets, and 150 feet where
one or both streets are major streets.
(4) To the fullest extent possible, intersection with major traffic streets
shall be located not less than 800 feet apart, measured from center
line to center line.
(5) Two streets intersecting a third street from opposite sides shall be
laid out directly opposite one another, or with a minimum center
line offset of 125 feet when all streets are minor streets, or with a
minimum center-line offset of 300 feet when one or more of the
streets is a collector street or a major traffic street.
(6) Minimum curb radii at street intersections shall be 20 feet for
intersections involving only minor streets, 30 feet for intersections
involving collector streets, and 40 feet for intersections involving
major traffic streets.
(7) Where the grade of any street at the approach to an intersection
exceeds 7%, a leveling area shall be provided having not greater
than four-percent grades for a distance of 25 feet measured from
the nearest right-of-way line of the intersecting street.
E. Cul-de-sac streets.
(1) Cul-de-sac streets, permanently designed as such, shall be
considered to be minor streets and they shall not exceed 600 feet in
length, and shall generally furnish access to not more than 25
dwelling units.
(2) Cul-de-sac streets shall be provided at the closed end with a paved
turnaround having a minimum radius to the outer pavement edge
or curbline of 40 feet and a minimum right-of-way radius of 50 feet.
(3) Unless future extension is clearly impractical or undesirable, a
turnaround right-of-way of the same width as the street shall be
carried to the property line in such a way as to permit future
extension of the street into the adjoining tract.
F. Lot design standards.
(1) Area and other dimensions of lots and parcels shall conform with
the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 280) of the
Borough of Catasauqua, as amended.
(2) All lots shall front upon a public street.
(3) The ratio of the depth of any lot to its width shall not be greater
than 2 1/2 to one, except as may be specified in the Zoning
Ordinance (Chapter 280) of the Borough.
(4) Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street
lines.
§ 235-13 CATASAUQUA CODE § 235-13
170:504
(5) If remnants of land exist after subdividing, they shall be
incorporated in existing or proposed lots, or dedicated to public use
if acceptable to the Borough.
(6) Double frontage lots are prohibited, except where employed to
prevent vehicular access to major traffic streets.
(7) Depth and width of parcels laid out or reserved for nonresidential
use shall be sufficient to provide satisfactory space for off-street
parking and unloading as required by the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance (Chapter 280).
G. Easements.
(1) Easements with a minimum width of 10 feet plus the width of any
required pipe or other improvement shall be provided as necessary
for utilities and drainage facilities.
(2) Aboveground utilities shall be placed along the rear or side lot lines
unless they are existing along the street prior to the submission of
the preliminary plan to the Planning Commission.
(3) To the fullest extent possible, easements shall be centered on or
adjacent to rear or side lot lines.
(4) Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, there shall be
provided a drainage easement or right-of-way conforming
substantially with the line of such watercourse and of such width as
will be adequate to preserve natural drainage.
H. Blocks.
(1) The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with due
regard to the following:
(a) Provision of adequate sites for buildings of the type proposed.
(b) Zoning requirements.
(c) Topography.
(d) Requirements for safe and convenient vehicular and
pedestrian circulation.
(2) Blocks shall have a minimum length of 750 feet and a maximum
length of 1,200 feet. In the design of blocks longer than 1,000 feet,
special consideration shall be given to the requirements of
satisfactory fire protection.
(3) Residential blocks shall be of sufficient depth to accommodate two
tiers of lots, except where reverse frontage lots bordering a major
traffic street are used, where special superblock, cluster design,
planned unit developments or other large scale, commercial or
§ 235-13 JUNKYARDS § 235-13
170:505
industrial developments are proposed, or where topographic or
other conditions prevent such a design.
(4) Pedestrian interior walks may be required where necessary to
assist circulation or provide access to community facilities. Such
crosswalks shall have a width of not less than 10 feet and a paved
walk of not less than four feet.
I. Driveways.
(1) Driveway widths shall be designed to properly and safely serve the
function for which they are intended. Such driveways shall
generally not be less than 10 feet wide or greater than 30 feet wide.
(2) Driveway entrances shall be clearly defined and shall provide a
minimum turning radii at the street intersection of five feet when
serving a single-family unit and 10 feet when serving a higher
density or more intensive development. Such turning radii shall be
properly constructed in relation to the type of curb provided.
(3) The number of driveways and driveway intersections on a major
traffic street shall be minimized and avoided where possible.
Permits for driveways intersecting with state roads or highways
shall be secured from the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation. Such driveway intersection shall generally not be
located closer than 70 feet from any street intersection right-of-way
line.
(4) Driveway grades shall not exceed 10% when access is to a collector
or local street, or 7% when access is with a major traffic street.
J. Mobile home park design standards. All subdivisions and land
developments designed as a mobile home park or mobile home court, in
accordance with the regulations of the Catasauqua Zoning Ordinance
(Chapter 280), shall also comply with all of the provisions, design
standards, required improvements, plan and plan submission
requirements and all other sections of this chapter and also with the
requirements of the State of Pennsylvania for such mobile home parks
or courts. The following additional requirements shall also apply to
mobile home parks:
(1) All mobile home parks shall provide and maintain a visual screen
along all property boundary lines consisting of a six-foot-high fence
and/or suitable natural plant materials. A planting plan specifying
the type, size and location of existing and proposed plant and fence
material shall be required.
(2) Mobile home stands shall be provided for each mobile home. Such
a mobile home stand shall be constructed of concrete or similar
material and shall be well drained to permit continued use under all
weather conditions. An adequate foundation for the placement and
tie-down of the mobile home shall also be provided for the purpose
§ 235-13 CATASAUQUA CODE § 235-13
170:506
of stabilizing the superstructure against uplift, sliding, rotation
and overturning. The mobile home stand shall be constructed in
a permanent manner and shall be provided with anchors and tiedowns
in order to secure the mobile home. Such anchors shall be
placed at least at the corner of the mobile home stand and shall be
able to sustain a total tensile load equal to four times the weight of
the particular mobile home.
(3) All mobile home parks shall be served with a system of common
walks providing convenient and safe pedestrian access to all parts
of the mobile home park.
(4) A central storage building shall be provided to serve all of the
mobile homes in the development or, in lieu thereof, a separate
storage shed shall be located on each mobile home lot so that every
mobile home unit will have adequate space for the storage of lawn,
garden and other equipment in an enclosed structure.
(5) All mobile home parks shall provide for the enclosure of the
foundation area on which the mobile home unit is situated.
(6) Each mobile home lot shall be provided with at least a four inch
diameter vertical riser pipe which connects the mobile home
sewage drain outlet to the sewer line. Provision shall be made for
plugging the sewer riser pipe when a mobile home does not occupy
the lot. Surface drainage shall be diverted away from the riser. The
rim of the riser pipe shall extend at least six inches above ground
elevation.
(7) Each mobile home lot shall have a water riser pipe which connects
the mobile home water system to the central water system. An
outside hose bib shall be supplied for each mobile home.
(8) All fuel supply lines and storage tanks shall be underground and
shall be constructed in accordance with appropriate state agency
regulations.
K. Storm drainage.
(1) Lots shall be laid out and graded to provide positive drainage away
from buildings.
(2) Storm sewers, culverts and related installations shall be provided:
(a) To permit unimpeded flow of natural watercourses.
(b) To insure adequate drainage of all low points along the line of
streets.
(c) To intercept stormwater runoff along streets at intervals
reasonably related to the extent and grade of the area drained.
§ 235-13 JUNKYARDS § 235-13
170:507
(3) In the design of storm sewerage installations, special consideration
shall be given to avoidance of problems which may arise from
concentration of stormwater runoff over adjacent properties.
(4) Storm drainage systems shall be designed separately from any
sanitary sewer systems and such storm systems shall be installed in
accordance with sound and established engineering practices as
determined by the Commission Engineer. Such storm systems shall
be designed to accommodate any storm discharges from the
property being subdivided and any additional runoff which may
occur from higher elevations within the same watershed when it is
fully developed. Such storm systems shall not overload existing
storm drainage systems or create flooding hazards.
L. Public water and sewer facilities. All subdivisions and land
developments located within the Borough of Catasauqua shall be
served with public water and sanitary sewer facilities unless the
Commission determines that such facilities are not required or that
suitable alternate facilities meeting the requirements of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection shall be
provided. Such public facilities shall be designed in accordance with the
requirements of the Borough of Catasauqua, subject to the review and
approval of the Commission Engineer.
M. Other utilities.
(1) A plan for providing all necessary utility services to the proposed
subdivision and land development shall be prepared by the
developer in cooperation with the appropriate public utility
companies and governmental agencies.
(2) In accordance with a Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission order
of July 8, 1970, all electric utility distribution lines shall be installed
underground in subdivisions or land developments of five or more
dwelling units. Wherever practicable, telephone and cable
television utilities shall also be installed underground.
(3) Wherever practicable, in accordance with good engineering
practice, utility easements and trenches shall be occupied jointly by
compatible electric, gas, water, sewage and communication
utilities.
N. Environmental protection standards. In the design of any subdivision
and land development the Commission shall require that maximum
consideration be given to the preservation and protection of the natural
environment so as to safeguard the public health, safety and welfare of
all residents of the Borough and to minimize any adverse effects
resulting from the proposed development. Where the development may
create an environmental problem the Commission may require and the
subdivider shall present a plan indicating the specific manner in which
the problem will be minimized or eliminated. No preliminary or final
plan application shall be considered effective until such a required plan
§ 235-13 CATASAUQUA CODE § 235-13
170:508
has been submitted. The Commission may refer such a plan to any
appropriate governmental or other agency or authority qualified to
review and/or determine if the plan meets the requirements and
objectives of this chapter and the requirements of any other federal,
state, county, Borough or other applicable law or regulation.
Environmental factors for which the Commission may require a plan
include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Erosion and sediment control.
(2) Soil conservation.
(3) Drainage and floodplain regulations.
(4) Natural feature preservation.
(5) Lake, stream and river frontage preservation.
(6) Tree preservation, removal and planting.
(7) Topographic and geologic factors.
(8) Topsoil protection.
Table 1
Design Standards for Streets and Sidewalks
Type of Street
Local
Marginal Access
Local
Design
SpecificationMajor Collector
Low
Densityd
Medium
Densitye
Two-
Way
One-
Way
Right-of-way
width
(feet)
80 60 50 50 40 30
Pavement
width
(feet)
40 36 28 34 28 20
Minimum
center-line
radii for
horizontal
curves
(feet)a
600 300 150 150 150 150
§ 235-13 JUNKYARDS § 235-13
170:509
§ 235-14. Required improvements.
Table 1
Design Standards for Streets and Sidewalks
Type of Street
Local
Marginal Access
Local
Design
SpecificationMajor Collector
Low
Densityd
Medium
Densitye
Two-
Way
One-
Way
Minimum
sight
distance
(feet)b
600 300 200 200 200 200
Maximum
grade
(%)c
5 7 10 10 10 10
Sidewalk
width
(feet)
5 5 4 5 3 3
NOTES:
a Whenever street lines are deflected in excess of 5°, connection
shall be made by horizontal curves. Except on minor streets, a
100-foot minimum tangent shall be required between curves.
b Vertical curves shall be used at changes of grade exceeding
1% and shall be designed in relation to the extent of the grade
change and to provide the minimum sight distances listed
above.
c To provide for adequate drainage, the minimum grade shall be
not less than 0.75%.
d Low density includes developments having a gross project
density of less than eight units per acre.
e Medium density includes developments having a gross project
density of eight units per acre or more.
A. Application.
(1) The minimum improvements required for all subdivisions and land
developments, which shall be provided by the subdivider, shall be
as set forth in this section. Such improvements shall be constructed
in accordance with the provisions of this section and with the
§ 235-13 CATASAUQUA CODE § 235-14
170:510
detailed construction specifications established by the Commission
Engineer which are on file at the office of the Borough Manager.
(2) Alternate improvement standards may be permitted if the
Commission deems them equal or superior in performance
characteristics to any specified improvements. Additional or higher
type improvements may be required in specific cases where the
Commission finds them to be necessary to create a condition
essential to the public health, safety and general welfare of the
citizens of the Borough of Catasauqua.
(3) All improvements are subject to the review, advice and inspection
of the Commission Engineer.
B. Summary of required improvements. Minimum improvements to be
required of the subdivider, where applicable, shall include paved
streets and driveway entrances, curbs, sidewalks, street trees, public
sanitary sewer, water, storm drainage and utility facilities, street signs,
street lighting, fire hydrants and monuments and markers.
C. Street construction standards.
(1) Streets shall be graded, surfaced and improved to the grades and
dimensions shown on the plans, profiles and cross-sections
submitted by the subdivider and approved by the Commission and
the Borough Council.
(2) The entire right-of-way width shall be graded to the approved
cross-section. All trees, stumps and other material deemed
unsuitable by the Commission Engineer shall be removed to a
depth of two feet below subgrade and the excavation shall be
backfilled and suitably compacted.
(a) The finished road surface, both tangent and curve, shall be
crowned at 1/4 inch per foot away from the center line.
(b) Prior to placing the street surface, the subgrade shall be
graded parallel to the finished crown to permit the proper
drainage of the subbase. The subbase shall be outletted to the
satisfaction of the Commission Engineer. Adequate subsurface
drainage for the streets and all subsurface utilities as
acceptable to the Commission shall be provided or installed by
the subdivider.
(c) Minimum slopes of banks measured perpendicular to the
center line of the street shall generally be two to one for cuts
and fills with actual slopes to be specified by the Commission
Engineer depending on the nature of the proposed
construction and on soil conditions.
(3) The pavement shall be placed on a well-compacted and prepared
subgrade. Subbase material shall be provided except that if the
§ 235-14 JUNKYARDS § 235-14
170:511
material has adequate bearing capacity and is well drained, the
subbase may be omitted as determined by the Commission
Engineer.
(4) In all respects in which standards for required improvements are
not set forth herein or specified by the Commission or the Borough
of Catasauqua, the applicable standard requirements of the
Pennsylvania State Department of Transportation shall govern and
all work shall be performed in the manner prescribed in the
standard specifications for road construction of said Department of
the type of construction under consideration.
(5) Driveway entrances or aprons within the street right-of-way shall
be surfaced to their full width, the type of surface to be portland
cement concrete.
D. Curbs and gutters. Curbs shall be provided on all roads proposed for
dedication. They shall be either portland cement concrete of the
vertical or rolled type or equivalent. All curb requirements shall be in
conformance with good engineering practice and subject to the
approval of the Engineer.
E. Sidewalks and crossovers. Sidewalks shall be located within the street
right-of-way and shall not be closer than one foot from the right-of-way
line. Sidewalks and crossovers shall be constructed of concrete or other
equivalent material in accordance with the requirements of detailed
specifications of the Commission Engineer.
F. Street trees. Street trees of a deciduous hardwood type with a minimum
caliper of two inches, as approved by the Planning Commission and by
the Catasauqua Shade Tree Commission, shall be planted in the public
right-of-way adjacent to the sidewalk at an average spacing of 50 feet in
a manner that will not adversely affect the sidewalk construction.
G. Public sanitary sewer, water, storm drainage and utility facilities. Public
sanitary sewer, water, storm drainage and utility facilities shall be
provided as required by § 235-13K, L, and M of this chapter, in
accordance with the requirements of the Borough of Catasauqua and
subject to the approval of the Commission Engineer.
H. Monuments and markers.
(1) Monuments shall be of concrete or stone with a minimum size of six
inches by six inches by 36 inches, and shall be marked on top with a
1/2 inch round brass pin, or a drilled hole. Markers shall consist of
iron pipes or iron or steel bars at least 15 inches long, and not less
than 3/4 inch in diameter.
(2) Monuments and markers shall be placed so that the scored or
marked point shall coincide exactly with the intersection of lines to
be marked, and shall be set so that the top of the monument or
marker is level with the surface of the surrounding ground.
§ 235-14 CATASAUQUA CODE § 235-14
170:512
§ 235-15. Park and recreation land. [Added 4-4-1988 by Ord. No.
929; amended 6-5-1995 by Ord. No. 1031; 12-19-2011 by Ord. No.
1274]
(3) Monuments shall be set in readily accessible locations at all angles
of the property or in the right-of-way of existing streets.
(4) Markers shall be set:
(a) At the beginning and ending of all curves along street property
lines.
(b) At all points where lot lines intersect curves, either front or
rear.
(c) At all angles in property lines of lots.
(d) At all other lot corners.
(5) Any monuments or markers that are removed shall be replaced by a
competent engineer at the expense of the person removing them.
I. Other improvements.
(1) Street name signs shall be installed at all street intersections.
(2) Street lighting shall be provided to adequately illuminate all
streets.
(3) Fire hydrants shall be provided to insure adequate fire protection
service.
(4) The above improvements are to be installed in accordance with the
requirements of the Borough of Catasauqua subject to the review
and recommendation of the Commission Engineer.
A. Every proposed residential subdivision of land or residential land
development plan regulated by this chapter and the Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended,135 shall provide land for dedication which
is suitable for park and/or recreation purposes.
B. The amount of land required to be dedicated shall be 1,500 square feet
for each lot that is part of an approved plan and is intended to
accommodate a single-family dwelling (whether attached or detached),
and for each lot that is part of an approved plan and is intended to
accommodate a dwelling other than a single-family dwelling, 10% of the
total lot area or 1,500 square feet per dwelling unit, whichever is
greater. If at the time of plan submission the developer is domiciled in a
dwelling unit in one of the lots in the proposed subdivision or
development, said lot or dwelling unit shall not be included in this
calculation.
135. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 235-14 JUNKYARDS § 235-15
170:513
C. All land proposed for dedication as park and/or recreation land shall
comply with the standards set forth in Subsection I below.
D. A developer shall dedicate land for park and recreation purposes. In
lieu thereof, the developer may propose the following, or a combination
of the following, subject to approval of the Council:
(1) Dedication of land for park and/or recreation purposes;
(2) Payment of a recreation fee;
(3) Construction of park and/or recreational facilities; or
(4) Private reservation of park and/or recreation land.
E. If the developer receives approval from the Council for the payment of a
fee in lieu of dedication of all or some of the required park and/or
recreation land, then the fee shall be calculated on the basis of the most
current fee schedule maintained by the Borough.136
F. If the developer elects to pay a fee in lieu of the dedication of park and/
or recreation land, then such payment, if approved by the Council, shall
be deemed a condition of plan approval and shall be paid to the
Borough at the time of execution of the improvements agreement, and
if no improvements agreement is required, then prior to recording the
approved plan.
G. All fees paid pursuant to this section shall be maintained in a separate,
interest-bearing account for the purpose of park and recreation. Such
funds shall not be used for any purpose inconsistent with the applicable
provisions of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.137
H. The requirements of this section shall be in addition to and not in lieu
of:
(1) Open space or other similar features required to be provided in
connection with certain uses, developments, subdivisions and/or
other residential living arrangements pursuant to the Zoning
Ordinance;138 and
(2) Any private park and/or recreation land provided by the developer
for the benefit of the residents thereof, unless approved by the
Council.
I. General standards for park and recreation land.
(1) Unless otherwise approved by the Council, where the developer
elects to fulfill the requirements of this section through an offer of
dedication of land to the Borough, the developer shall demonstrate
136. Editor's Note: See Ch. A285, Fees.
137. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
138. Editor's Note: See Ch. 280, Zoning.
§ 235-15 CATASAUQUA CODE § 235-15
170:514
§ 235-16. Completion of improvements or guarantee thereof
prerequisite to final plat approval. [Amended 12-6-1976 by Ord. No.
739; 5-3-1982 by Ord. No. 839; 6-5-1995 by Ord. No. 1031]
to the satisfaction of the Borough that the land will support a
legitimate park and recreation use considering, where relevant, the
following factors:
(a) Consistency with the Borough of Catasauqua Recreation, Park
and Open Space Plan, as may be amended from time to time;
(b) Consistency with the Borough's Official Map, as may be
amended from time to time;
(c) Availability for use of the public;
(d) Location entirely within the Borough;
(e) Means for public ingress and egress;
(f) Accessibility of essential utilities and services;
(g) Ability to accommodate adequate vehicle parking facilities;
(h) Suitability of land characteristics for the intended use,
including but not limited to configuration, natural features,
cultural features and man-made features;
(i) Compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood;
(j) Proximity to other community facilities; and
(k) Such other factors that the Borough may deem relevant.
A. No plat shall be finally approved unless the streets shown on such plat
have been improved to a mud-free or otherwise permanently passable
condition, or improved as may be otherwise required by this chapter
and any walkways, curbs, gutters, street lights, fire hydrants, shade
trees, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers and other
improvements as may be required by this chapter have been installed in
accordance with this chapter. In lieu of the completion of any
improvements required as a condition for the final approval of a plat,
including improvements or fees otherwise required by this chapter, the
developer may deposit with the Borough financial security in an amount
sufficient to cover the costs of such improvements or common amenities
including basins and other related drainage facilities, recreational
facilities, open space improvements, or buffer or screen plantings
which may be required.
B. When requested by the developer, in order to facilitate financing, the
Borough Council, shall furnish the developer with a signed copy of a
resolution indicating approval of the final plat contingent upon the
developer obtaining a satisfactory financial security. The final plat or
§ 235-15 JUNKYARDS § 235-16
170:515
record plan shall not be signed nor recorded until the financial
improvements agreement is executed. The resolution or letter of
contingent approval shall expire and be deemed to be revoked if the
financial security agreement is not executed within 90 days unless a
written extension is granted by the Borough Council; such extension
shall not be unreasonably withheld and shall be placed in writing at the
request of the developer.
C. Without limitation as to other types of financial security which the
Borough may approve, which approval shall not be unreasonably
withheld, federal or commonwealth chartered lending institution
irrevocable letters of credit and restrictive or escrow accounts in such
lending institutions shall be deemed acceptable financial security for
the purposes of this section.
D. Such financial security shall be posted with a bonding company or
federal or commonwealth chartered lending institution chosen by the
party posting the financial security, provided said bonding company or
lending institution is authorized to conduct such business within the
commonwealth.
E. Such bond, or other security shall provide for, and secure to the public,
the completion of any improvements which may be required on or
before the date fixed in the formal action of approval or accompanying
agreement for completion of the improvements.
F. The amount of financial security to be posted for the completion of the
required improvements shall be equal to 110% of the cost of completion
estimated as of 90 days following the date scheduled for completion by
the developer. Annually, the Borough may adjust the amount of the
financial security by comparing the actual cost of the improvements
which have been completed and the estimated cost for the completion
of the remaining improvements as of the expiration of the 90th day after
either the original date scheduled for completion or a rescheduled date
of completion. Subsequent to said adjustment, the Borough may require
the developer to post additional security in order to assure that the
financial security equals said 110%. Any additional security shall be
posted by the developer in accordance with this subsection.
G. The amount of financial security required shall be based upon an
estimate of the cost of completion of the required improvements,
submitted by the applicant or developer and prepared by a professional
engineer licensed as such in this commonwealth and certified by such
engineer to be a fair and reasonable estimate of such cost. The
Borough, upon the recommendation of the Borough Engineer, may
refuse to accept such estimate for good cause shown. If the applicant or
developer and the Borough are unable to agree upon an estimate, then
the estimate shall be recalculated and recertified by another
professional engineer licensed as such in this commonwealth and
chosen mutually by the Borough and the applicant or developer. The
estimate certified by the third engineer shall be presumed fair and
§ 235-16 CATASAUQUA CODE § 235-16
170:516
reasonable and shall be the final estimate. In the event that a third
engineer is so chosen, fees for the services of said engineer shall be
paid equally by the Borough and the applicant or developer.
H. If the party posting the financial security requires more than one year
from the date of posting of the financial security to complete the
required improvements, the amount of financial security may be
increased by an additional 10% for each one-year period beyond the
first anniversary date from posting of financial security or to an amount
not exceeding 110% of the cost of completing the required
improvements as reestablished on or about the expiration of the
preceding one-year period by using the above bidding procedure.
I. In the case where development is projected over a period of years, the
Borough Council may authorize submission of final plats by sections or
stages of development subject to such requirements or guarantees as to
improvements in future sections or stages of development as it finds
essential for the protection of any finally approved section of the
development.
J. As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the
party posting the financial security may request the Borough Council to
release or authorize the release, from time to time, of such portions of
the financial security necessary for payment to the contractor or
contractors performing the work. Any such requests shall be in writing
addressed to the Borough Council, and the Borough Council shall have
45 days from receipt of such request within which to allow the Borough
Engineer to certify, in writing, to the Borough Council that such portion
of the work upon the improvements has been completed in accordance
with the approved plat. Upon such certification the Borough Council
shall authorize release by the bonding company or lending institution of
an amount as estimated by the Borough Engineer fairly representing
the value of the improvements completed or, if the Borough Council
fails to act within said forty-five-day period, the Borough Council shall
be deemed to have approved the release of funds as requested. The
Borough Council may, prior to final release at the time of completion
and certification by its engineer, require retention of 10% of the
estimated cost of the aforesaid improvements.
K. Where the Borough Council accepts dedication of all or some of the
required improvements following completion, the Borough Council may
require the posting of financial security to secure structural integrity of
said improvements as well as the functioning of said improvements in
accordance with the design and specifications as depicted on the final
plat for a term not to exceed 18 months from the date of acceptance of
dedication. Said financial security shall be of the same type as
otherwise required in this section with regard to installation of such
improvements, and the amount of the financial security shall not exceed
15% of the actual cost of installation of said improvements.
§ 235-16 JUNKYARDS § 235-16
170:517
L. If water mains or sanitary sewer lines, or both, along with apparatus or
facilities related thereto, are to be installed under the jurisdiction and
pursuant to the rules and regulations of a public utility or municipal
authority separate and distinct from the Borough, financial security to
assure proper completion and maintenance thereof shall be posted in
accordance with the regulations of the controlling public utility or
municipal authority and shall not be included within the financial
security as otherwise required by this section.
M. If financial security has been provided in lieu of the completion of
improvements required as a condition for the final approval of a plat as
set forth in this section, the Borough shall not condition the issuance of
building, grading or other permits relating to the erection or placement
of improvements, including buildings, upon the lots or land as depicted
upon the final plat upon actual completion of the improvements
depicted upon the approved final plat. Moreover, if said financial
security has been provided, occupancy permits for any building or
buildings to be erected shall not be withheld following the improvement
of the streets providing access to and from existing public roads to such
building or buildings to a mud-free or otherwise permanently passable
condition, as well as the completion of all other improvements as
depicted upon the approved plat, either upon the lot or lots or beyond
the lot or lots in question if such improvements are necessary for the
reasonable use of or occupancy of the building or buildings.
N. Development agreement. All subdividers proposing any subdivision or
land development requiring the installation of improvements as
required herein shall be required to enter into a legally binding
development agreement with the Borough of Catasauqua guaranteeing
the installation of said improvements in accordance with all Borough
requirements. The development agreement shall be in a form suitable
for execution by the Borough Council and it shall consist of the
following, where applicable:
(1) The construction authorized by the approved final plans. All
improvements shall be proposed for construction in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter and with the requirements of
any other standard specifications in use by the Borough for
improvements of the type proposed.
(2) Construction of streets with related curbs, sidewalks, street trees,
etc.
(3) Installation of utility lines.
(4) Installation of underground street lighting cable and street lighting
poles.
(5) Dedication of streets, transfer of water and sewer lines and
easements.
(6) Prevention of erosion and water damage to adjacent properties.
§ 235-16 CATASAUQUA CODE § 235-16
170:518
§ 235-17. Release from improvement bond. [Added 6-5-1995 by Ord.
No. 1031]
(7) Developer's responsibilities for damage to other property.
(8) The cost of all Borough inspection to be borne by the developer.
(9) A work schedule, beginning and ending dates, for improvements
contained herein.
(10) The payment of all reasonable legal costs and expenses incurred by
the Borough including, but not limited to, the cost of preparing the
development agreement.
(11) The contractors' bid costs of the improvements and form and
amount of improvement security.
(12) Agreement to provide maintenance security, in the form of a bond
or escrow deposit or other security approved by the Borough
Solicitor, for the repair or reconstruction of all improvements which
are found by the Borough Engineer to be defective within 18
months from the date on which the Borough accepted or released
the same.
(13) The developer shall provide the Borough with a set of reproducible
"as built" plans.
(14) Provisions for violation of the development agreement.
(15) Developer shall secure or maintain public liability insurance.
(16) A save harmless clause.
(17) Liability of developer during warranty period.
(18)No improvements shall be commenced or work begun prior to the
execution of this agreement, the delivery of the bond or escrow
agreement and deposit and the recording of the final plan.
(19) Developer shall agree to abide by all requirements of this chapter,
and amendments hereto, together with the particular time frames
which may be set forth in this chapter.
(20) Other requirements.
A. When the developer has completed all of the necessary and appropriate
improvements, the developer shall notify the Borough Council, in
writing, by certified or registered mail, of the completion of the
aforesaid improvements and shall send a copy thereof to the Borough
Engineer. The Borough Council shall, within 10 days after receipt of
such notice, direct and authorize the Borough Engineer to inspect all of
the aforesaid improvements. The Borough Engineer shall, thereupon,
file a report in writing, with the Borough Council, and shall promptly
mail a copy of the same to the developer by certified or registered mail.
§ 235-16 JUNKYARDS § 235-17
170:519
The report shall be made and mailed within 30 days after receipt by
the Borough Engineer of the aforesaid authorization from the Borough
Council; said report shall be detailed and shall indicate approval or
rejection of said improvements, either in whole or in part, and if said
improvements, or any portion thereof, shall not be approved or shall be
rejected by the Borough Engineer, said report shall contain a statement
of reasons for such nonapproval or rejection.
B. The Borough Council shall notify the developer, within 15 days of
receipt of the Engineer's report, in writing by certified or registered
mail of the action of said Borough Council with relation thereto.
C. If the Borough Council or the Borough Engineer fails to comply with the
time limitation provisions contained herein, all improvements will be
deemed to have been approved and the developer shall be released
from all liability, pursuant to its performance guaranty bond or other
security agreement.
D. If any portion of the said improvements shall not be approved or shall
be rejected by the Borough Council, the developer shall proceed to
complete the same and, upon completion, the same procedure of
notification, as outlined herein, shall be followed.
E. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed in limitation of the
developer's right to contest or question by legal proceedings or
otherwise, any determination of the Borough Council or the Borough
Engineer.
F. Where herein reference is made to the Borough Engineer, he shall be as
a consultant thereto.
G. The applicant or developer shall reimburse the Borough for the
reasonable and necessary expense incurred for the inspection of
improvements according to a schedule of fees adopted by resolution of
the Borough Council139 and as from time to time amended. Such
expense shall be reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary and
customary fees charged by the Borough Engineer or consultant for
work performed for similar services in the community, but in no event
shall the fees exceed the rate or cost charged by the engineer or
consultant to the Borough when fees are not reimbursed or otherwise
imposed on applicants.
(1) In the event the applicant disputes the amount of any such expense
in connection with the inspection of improvements, the applicant
shall, within 10 working days of the date of billing, notify the
Borough that such expenses are disputed as unreasonable or
unnecessary, in which case the Borough shall not delay or
disapprove a subdivision or land development application or any
approval or permit related to development due to the applicant's
request over disputed engineer expenses.
139. Editor's Note: See Ch. A285, Fees.
§ 235-17 CATASAUQUA CODE § 235-17
170:520
§ 235-18. Remedies to effect completion of improvements. [Added
6-5-1995 by Ord. No. 1031]
In the event that any improvements which may be required have not been
installed as provided in this chapter or in accord with the approved final plat
the Borough Council is hereby granted the power to enforce any corporate
bond, or other security by appropriate legal and equitable remedies. If the
proceeds of such bond, or other security are insufficient to pay the cost of
installing or making repairs or corrections to all the improvements covered
by said security, the Borough Council may, at its option, install part of
such improvements in all or part of the subdivision or land development
and may institute appropriate legal or equitable action to recover the
moneys necessary to complete the remainder of the improvements. All of
the proceeds, whether resulting from the security or from any legal or
equitable action brought against the developer, or both, shall be used solely
for the installation of the improvements covered by such security, and not
for any other Borough purpose.
(2) If, within 20 days from the date of billing, the Borough and the
applicant cannot agree on the amount of expenses which are
reasonable and necessary, then the applicant and the Borough shall
jointly, by mutual agreement, appoint another professional
engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to
review the said expenses and make a determination as to the
amount thereof which is reasonable and necessary.
(3) The professional engineer so appointed shall hear such evidence
and review such documentation as the professional engineer in his
or her sole opinion deems necessary and render a decision within
50 days of the billing date. The applicant shall be required to pay
the entire amount determined in the decision immediately.
(4) In the event that the Borough and applicant cannot agree upon the
professional engineer to be appointed within 20 days of the billing
date, then, upon application of either party, the President Judge of
the Court of Common Pleas of the judicial district in which the
Borough is located (or if at the time there be no President Judge,
then the senior active judge then sitting) shall appoint such
engineer, who, in that case, shall be neither the Borough Engineer
nor any professional engineer who has been retained by, or
performed services for, the Borough or the applicant within the
preceding five years.
(5) The fee of the appointed professional engineer for determining the
reasonable and necessary expenses shall be paid by the applicant if
the amount of payment required in the decision is equal to or
greater than the original bill. If the amount of payment required in
the decision is less than the original bill by $1,000 or more, the
Borough shall pay the fee of the professional engineer, but
otherwise the Borough and the applicant shall each pay 1/2 of the
fee of the appointed professional engineer.
§ 235-17 JUNKYARDS § 235-19
170:521
§ 235-19. Effect of change in this chapter. [Added 6-5-1995 by Ord.
No. 1031]
Changes in this chapter shall affect plats as follows:
A. From the time an application for approval of a plat, whether preliminary
or final, is duly filed as provided in this chapter, and while such
application is pending approval or disapproval, no change or
amendment of this chapter, zoning or other governing ordinance or
plan shall affect the decision on such application adversely to the
applicant and the applicant shall be entitled to a decision in accordance
with the provisions of the governing ordinances or plans as they stood
at the time the application was duly approved. The applicant shall be
entitled to final approval in accordance with the terms of the approved
preliminary application as hereinafter provided. However, if an
application is properly and finally denied, any subsequent application
shall be subject to the intervening change in governing regulations.
B. When an application for approval of a plat, whether preliminary or final,
has been approved without conditions or approved by the applicant's
acceptance of conditions, no subsequent change or amendment in this
chapter, zoning or other governing ordinance or plan shall be applied to
affect adversely the right of the applicant to commence and to complete
any aspect of the approved development in accordance with the terms
of such approval within five years from such approval.
C. Where final approval is preceded by preliminary approval, the aforesaid
five -year period shall be counted from the date of the preliminary
approval. In the case of any doubt as to the terms of a preliminary
approval, the terms shall be construed in the light of the provisions of
this chapter or the governing ordinance or plans as they stood at the
time when the application for such approval was duly filed.
D. Where the landowner has substantially completed the required
improvements as depicted upon the final plat within the aforesaid fiveyear
limit, or any extension thereof as may be granted by the Borough
Council, no change of any ordinance or plan enacted subsequent to the
date of filing of the preliminary plat shall modify or revoke any aspect of
the approved final plat pertaining to zoning classification or density, lot,
building, street or utility location.
E. In the case of a preliminary plat calling for the installation of
improvements beyond the five-year period, a schedule shall be filed by
the landowner with the preliminary plat delineating all proposed
sections as well as deadlines within which applications for final plat
approval of each section are intended to be filed. Such schedule shall be
updated annually by the applicant on or before the anniversary of the
preliminary plat approval, until final plat approval of the final section
has been granted and any modification in the aforesaid schedule shall
be subject to approval of the Borough Council in its discretion.
§ 235-19 CATASAUQUA CODE § 235-19
170:522
F. Each section in any residential subdivision or land development, except
for the last section, shall contain a minimum of 25% of the total number
of dwelling units as depicted on the preliminary plan, unless a lesser
percentage is approved by the Borough Council in its discretion.
Provided the landowner has not defaulted with regard to or violated any
of the conditions of the preliminary plat approval, including compliance
with landowner's aforesaid schedule of submission of final plats for the
various sections, then the aforesaid protections afforded by
substantially completing the improvements depicted upon the final plat
within five years shall apply and for any section or sections, beyond the
initial section, in which the required improvements have not been
substantially completed within said five-year period the aforesaid
protections shall apply for an additional term or terms of three years
from the date of final plat approval for each section.
G. Failure of landowner to adhere to the aforesaid schedule of submission
of final plats for the various sections shall subject any such section to
any and all changes in this chapter, zoning, and other governing
ordinance enacted by the Borough subsequent to the date of the initial
preliminary plan submission.
§ 235-19 JUNKYARDS § 235-19
170:523

ARTICLE IV
Plan Requirements
§ 235-20. Sketch plan.
Sketch plans shall be legibly drawn at a scale of one inch to 100 or 200
feet and shall contain sufficient information to indicate the nature, scope
and concept of the proposed subdivision and land development, the major
problems to be resolved, the location of the subdivision tract, the name of
the land owner and other data considered essential by the subdivider in
presenting his proposal.
§ 235-21. Preliminary plan.
A. Scale. The preliminary plan shall be at a scale of not more than 100 feet
to the inch.
B. Plan information. The preliminary plan shall show or be accompanied
by the following information:
(1) Proposed subdivision name or identifying title.
(2) North point, scale and date.
(3) Name of the owner of the property and of the subdivider if different
from the owner.
(4) Name of the registered engineer, surveyor, architect or planner
responsible for the plan.
(5) Tract boundaries with bearings and distances and total number of
acres being subdivided.
(6) Contours at vertical intervals of two feet or at such lesser interval
as may be necessary for satisfactory study and planning of the
tract.
(7) Datum to which contour elevations refer. Where reasonably
practicable, data shall refer to known, established elevations.
(8) All existing watercourses, tree masses and other significant natural
features.
(9) All existing buildings, sewers, water mains, culverts, petroleum or
petroleum product lines, fire hydrants and other significant manmade
features.
(10) All existing streets on or adjacent to the tract, including name,
right-of-way width and pavement width.
(11) A location map for the purpose of locating the site to be subdivided
at a scale not more than 800 feet to the inch showing the relation of
the tract to adjoining property and to all streets, roads and
§ 235-20 JUNKYARDS § 235-21
170:525
§ 235-22. Final plan. [Amended 6-5-1995 by Ord. No. 1031]
municipal boundaries existing within 1,000 feet of any part of the
property proposed to be subdivided.
(12) All existing property lines, easements and rights-of-way, and the
purpose for which the easements or rights-of-way have been
established.
(13) Location and width of all proposed streets, alleys, rights-of-way and
easements; proposed lot lines with approximate dimensions;
playgrounds, public buildings, public areas and parcels of land
proposed to be dedicated or reserved for public use; proposed
public utilities and drainage facilities.
(14) Wherever practicable, the preliminary plan shall show the names of
owners of all abutting unplotted land and the names of all abutting
subdivisions.
(15) Where the preliminary plan covers only a part of the subdivider's
entire holdings, a sketch shall be submitted of the prospective
street layout for the remainder.
(16) Copies of the proposed deed restrictions, if any, shall be attached to
the preliminary plan.
A. Plan size and legibility.
(1) The subdivision plan submitted for final approval shall be a clear,
legible, white print of an ink drawing.
(2) Final plans shall be on sheets not larger than 36 inches by 48
inches overall. It is recommended that, as far as practicable, final
plan sheets be held to the following overall sizes:
(a) Eighteen inches by 24 inches.
(b) Twenty-four inches by 36 inches.
(c) Thirty-six inches by 48 inches.
(3) Where necessary to avoid sheets larger than the maximum size
prescribed above, final plans shall be drawn in two or more
sections accompanied by a key diagram showing relative location
of the sections.
B. Plan scale and required information.
(1) The final plan shall be at a scale of not more than 50 feet to the inch
and shall include the following information:
(a) Subdivision name or identifying title.
(b) North point, scale, date.
§ 235-21 CATASAUQUA CODE § 235-22
170:526
(c) Name of the record owner and subdivider.
(d) Name and seal of the registered professional engineer or
surveyor responsible for the plan.
(e) Boundaries of the tract.
(f) Street lines, lot lines, rights-of-way, easements, and areas
dedicated or proposed to be dedicated to public use.
(g) Sufficient data to determine readily the location, bearing and
length of every street, lot, and boundary line and to reproduce
such lines on the ground.
(h) The length of all straight lines, radii, lengths of curves, tangent
bearings, and deflection angles for each street.
(i) All dimensions and angles or bearings of the lines of each lot
and of each area proposed to be dedicated to public use.
(j) The proposed building setback line for each street, or the
proposed placement of each building.
(k) Location, size and invert elevation of all sanitary, storm and
combined sewers and location of all manholes, inlets and
culverts.
(l) All dimensions shall be shown in feet and hundredths of a foot.
(m) Lot number.
(n) Names of streets within and adjacent to the subdivision.
(o) Permanent reference monuments shall be shown, and shall be
as specified by the Commission Engineer.
(p) Wherever practicable, names of any adjoining subdivisions
shall be shown.
(q) Wherever practicable, names of the owners of any unplotted
land shall be shown.
(r) Certificate of dedication of streets and other public property.
(s) Certificate for approval by the Commission and Borough
Council with space for both the application of the review stamp
of the County Planning Commission and for acknowledgment
of receipt of the plan by the County Recorder of Deeds when it
is presented for recording.
(2) The final plan shall include thereon or be accompanied by:
(a) An affidavit that the applicant is the owner or equitable owner
of the land proposed to be subdivided.
§ 235-22 JUNKYARDS § 235-22
170:527
(b) A statement duly acknowledged before an officer authorized to
take acknowledgment of deeds and signed by the owner or
owners of the property, to the effect that the subdivision as
shown on the final plan is made with his or their free consent
and that it is desired to record the same.
(c) Certification by the State Department of Environmental
Protection when individual sewage disposal or water systems
are to be installed as required by Article III of this chapter.
(d) Certification by the Commission Engineer that the subdivider
has met the requirements of §§ 235-14 and 235-16 of this
chapter.
(e) Construction plans.
[1] Construction plans for all required improvements
including typical cross-sections, street profiles and
drainage details for all streets. Such profiles shall show at
least the following:
[a] Existing (natural) grade along the proposed street
center line.
[b] Existing (natural) grade along each side of the
proposed street right-of-way.
[c] Proposed finished center-line grade or proposed
finished grade at top of curbs.
[d] Sanitary sewer mains and manholes.
[e] Storm sewer mains, inlets, manholes and culverts.
[2] All such plans shall include a public improvements
tabulation and shall be in a form suitable to serve as a
basis for documenting all improvements to be installed.
(f) A contour grading plan including ground and basement floor
elevations of all buildings may be required if deemed necessary
by the Commission Engineer to properly establish grading and
drainage patterns.
(g) Protective covenants, if any, in form for recording.
(h) Any other special plans required by the Commission in
accordance with § 235-13M and N of this chapter.
(i) A development agreement and improvement bond as required
herein.
§ 235-22 CATASAUQUA CODE § 235-22
170:528
ARTICLE V
Floodplain Regulations
[Added 6-2-1980 by Ord. No. 803]
§ 235-23. Purpose.
The specific purpose of these special provisions is:
§ 235-24. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This article supersedes any ordinances currently in effect in flood-prone
areas. However, any underlying ordinance shall remain in full force and
effect to the extent that those provisions are more restrictive.
§ 235-25. Municipal liability.
The grant of a permit or approval of a subdivision and/or land development
plan in the identified flood-prone area(s) shall not constitute a
representation, guarantee or warranty of any kind by the Borough or by an
official or employee thereof of the practicability or safety of the proposed
use, and shall create no liability upon the Borough, its officials or
employees.
§ 235-26. Preapplication procedures.
A. To regulate the subdivision and/or development of flood-prone land
areas in order to promote the general health, welfare and safety of the
community.
B. To require that each subdivision lot in flood-prone areas be provided
with a safe building site with adequate access; and that public facilities
which serve such uses be designed and installed to preclude flood
damage at the time of initial construction.
C. To protect individuals from buying lands which are unsuitable for use
because of flooding by prohibiting the subdivision and/or development
of unprotected flood-prone lands.
A. Prior to the preparation of any plans, it is suggested that prospective
developers consult with the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection concerning soil suitability when on-site sewage disposal
facilities are proposed.
B. Prospective developers shall consult the Lehigh County Conservation
District representative concerning erosion and sediment control and
the soil limitations that might exist on the proposed development. At the
same time, a determination should be made as to whether any flood
hazards will be created as a result of the subdivision or development.
§ 235-23 JUNKYARDS § 235-27
170:529
§ 235-27. Preliminary and final plan requirements.
The following information shall be required as part of the preliminary plan
and shall be prepared by a registered engineer or surveyor:
§ 235-28. Design standards and improvements.
A. Name of engineer, surveyor or other qualified person responsible for
providing the information required in this section.
B. A map showing the location of the proposed subdivision and/or land
development with respect to the Borough's flood-prone areas including,
but not limited to, the regulatory flood elevations; boundaries of floodprone
areas, proposed lots and sites, fills, flood or erosion protective
facilities and areas subject to special deed restrictions.
C. Where the subdivision and/or land development lies partially or
completely in the flood-prone areas, or where the subdivision and/or
land development borders on the flood-prone areas, the preliminary
plan map shall include detailed information giving the location and
elevation of proposed roads, public utilities, and building sites. All such
maps shall also show contours at intervals of two or five feet depending
upon the slope of the land and identify accurately the boundaries of the
flood-prone areas.
D. Final plans shall contain all the aforesaid requirements.
A. Where not prohibited by this or any other laws or ordinances, land
located in flood-prone area(s) may be platted for development with the
provision that the developer construct all buildings and structures to
preclude flood damage in accordance with this and any other laws and
ordinances regulating such development.
B. No subdivision and/or land development, or part thereof, shall be
approved if the proposed development and/or improvements will,
individually or collectively, increase the regulatory flood elevation more
than one foot at any point.
C. Building sites for residences or any other type dwelling or
accommodation shall not be permitted in any floodway area. Sites for
these uses may be permitted outside the floodway area if the sites or
dwelling units are elevated to a height at least one foot above the
elevation of the regulatory flood. If fill is authorized and used to raise
the elevation of a site, the fill area shall extend out laterally for a
distance of at least 15 feet beyond the limits of the proposed structure.
D. Building sites for structures or buildings other than for residential uses
shall also not be permitted in any floodway area. Also such sites for
structures or buildings outside the floodway shall be protected as
provided for in Subsection B above. However, the Borough Council may
allow the subdivision and/or development of areas or sites for
commercial and industrial uses at an elevation less than one foot above
§ 235-27 CATASAUQUA CODE § 235-28
170:530
§ 235-29. Excavation and grading.
Where any earth-moving or grading is proposed, or where any existing
trees, shrubs or other vegetative cover will be removed, the developer shall
consult the Lehigh County Conservation District representative concerning
plans for erosion and sediment control and to also obtain a report on the
soil characteristics of the site so that a determination can be made as
to the type and degree of development the site can accommodate. The
above information shall be submitted to the Catasauqua Borough Planning
Commission and Council as part of the subdivider's application for
subdivision plan approval.
§ 235-30. Drainage facilities.
§ 235-31. Streets.
The finished elevation of proposed streets shall be no more than one foot
below the regulatory flood elevation. The Borough Engineer may require,
when necessary, profiles and elevations of streets to determine compliance
the regulatory flood if the developer otherwise protects the area to that
height or assures that the buildings or structures will be floodproofed
at least up to that height.
E. If the Catasauqua Borough Planning Commission or Council determines
that only a part of a proposed plat can be safely developed, it shall limit
development to that part and shall require that development proceed
consistent with this determination.
F. When a developer does not intend to develop the plat himself and the
Catasauqua Borough Council determines that additional controls are
required to insure safe development, it may require the developer to
impose appropriate deed restrictions on the land. Such deed
restrictions shall be inserted in every deed and noted on every recorded
plat.
A. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow of surface
waters without damage to persons or property. The system shall insure
drainage at all points along streets and provide positive drainage away
from buildings and on-site waste disposal sites.
B. Plans shall be subject to the approval of the Catasauqua Planning
Commission, Council and Borough Engineer.
C. The Borough Engineer may require a primarily underground system to
accommodate frequent floods and a secondary surface system to
accommodate larger, less frequent floods. Drainage plans shall be
consistent with local and regional drainage plans. The facilities shall be
designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent
properties.
§ 235-28 JUNKYARDS § 235-31
170:531
with this requirement. Drainage openings shall be sufficient to discharge
flood flows without unduly increasing flood heights.
§ 235-32. Sewer facilities.
All sanitary sewer systems located in flood-prone areas, whether public or
private, shall be floodproofed up to a point one foot above the regulatory
flood elevation.
§ 235-33. Water facilities.
All water systems located in flood-prone areas, whether public or private,
shall be floodproofed to a point one foot above the regulatory flood
elevation. If there is an existing public water supply system on or near
the subdivision, the Council shall require the developer to connect to this
system where practical and shall prescribe the procedures to be followed
by the developer in connecting to the system.
§ 235-34. Other public utilities and facilities.
All other public and/or private utilities and facilities shall be elevated or
floodproofed to a point one foot above the regulatory flood elevation.
A. The Catasauqua Planning Commission or Borough Council shall
prohibit installation of sewage disposal facilities requiring soil
absorption systems where such systems will not function due to high
ground water, flooding or unsuitable soil characteristics. The Council
may require that the developer note on the face of the plat and in any
deed of conveyance that soil absorption fields are prohibited in
designated areas.
B. The Planning Commission or Council shall prescribe adequate methods
for waste disposal. If a sanitary sewer system is located on or near the
proposed subdivision and/or land development, the Planning
Commission or Council shall require the developer to provide sewage
facilities to connect to this system where practical and shall prescribe
the procedures to be followed by the developer in connecting to the
system.
§ 235-31 CATASAUQUA CODE § 235-34
170:532
ARTICLE VI
Definitions and Word Usage
§ 235-35. Interpretation.
For the purpose of this chapter, words used in the present tense include the
future tense; the term "shall" is always mandatory; other terms or words
used herein shall be interpreted or defined as follows.
§ 235-36. Definitions. [Amended 6-7-1980 by Ord. No. 803; by Ord.
No. 929; 6-5-1995 by Ord. No. 1031]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary, tentative or final required to be filed and approved prior to
start of construction or development including, but not limited to, an
application for a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plat or
plan or for the approval of a development plan.
BLOCK — Property bounded on one side by a street, and other three sides
by a street, railroad right-of-way, waterway, unsubdivided area or other
definite barrier.
BOROUGH MANAGER — The person designated by the Council to perform
all administrative and/or supervisory duties required by this chapter.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all mobile homes and trailers used
for human habitation.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — The minimum distance from the front lot line
to any building or structure to be erected on the lot.
COMMISSION ENGINEER — The engineer designated by the Commission
to perform all supervisory duties required of a registered engineer by
the provisions of this chapter. The Commission Engineer may also be the
Borough Engineer retained by Council.
COMMISSION or PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission
of the Borough of Catasauqua.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water,
or a combination of land and water within a development site and designed
and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a development, not
including streets, off-street parking areas, and areas set aside for public
facilities.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN or MASTER PLAN — The complete plan, or any
part of the plan, for the development of the Borough of Catasauqua
prepared by the Commission.
COUNCIL — The Council of the Borough of Catasauqua.
COUNTY — Lehigh County, Pennsylvania.
§ 235-35 JUNKYARDS § 235-36
170:533
COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION — The County Planning Commission
shall be the Joint Planning Commission of Lehigh and Northampton
Counties, Pennsylvania.
CUL-DE-SAC — A minor street having one end open to traffic and being
permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with
the permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development including a
planned residential development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants
relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity
of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking facilities,
common open space and public facilities. The phrase "provisions of
development plan" when used in this chapter shall mean the written and
graphic materials referred to in this definition.
DWELLING — A building designed and constructed for residential purposes
in which people live.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms, including a kitchen (or
kitchenette) and sanitary facilities in a dwelling structure, designed as a
unit for occupancy by not more than one family for living and sleeping
purposes, or by a group of not more than five persons, who are not all
related by blood or marriage living together.
EASEMENT — A grant by the property owner of the use of a strip of land by
the public, a corporation, or persons for specified purposes.
FLOOD-PRONE AREA — A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a
stream, river or watercourse, which is subject to partial or complete
inundation; or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation or
runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas required to carry and discharge a flood of a given magnitude.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
A.
§ 235-36 CATASAUQUA CODE § 235-36
170:534
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one unit or in two or more units
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready
for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent
foundation.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved
with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary
for the erection thereon of a single mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has
been so designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile home
lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY — A body politic and corporate created pursuant
to the Act of May 2, 1945 (P.L. 382, No. 164), known as the "Municipalities
Authority Act of 1945."140
OFFICIAL MAP — The map adopted by ordinance of the Borough of
Catasauqua showing exact locations of existing and proposed lines for
public streets, watercourses and public grounds, including widenings,
narrowings, extensions, diminutions, opening or closing of same for the
entire Borough.
B. A subdivision of land.
"Land development" does not include development which involves:
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or
single-family semidetached dwelling into not more than three
residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium;
(1)
The addition of an accessory building, including farm building, on
a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal building; or
(2)
The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the confines
of an enterprise which would be considered an amusement park.
For the purposes of this subsection, an "amusement park" is
defined as a tract or area used principally as a location for
permanent amusement structures or rides. This exclusion shall not
apply to newly acquired acreage by an amusement park until initial
plans for the expanded area have been approved by the proper
authorities.
(3)
C.
140. Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 235-36 JUNKYARDS § 235-36
170:535
PLAN — A map or chart, also known as a plat, indicating the subdivision or
resubdivision of land which in its various stages of preparation can include
the following:
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Includes:
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the
Borough Council or Planning Commission, intended to inform and obtain
public comment, prior to taking action in accordance with this chapter.
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of July
3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84), known as the "Sunshine Act," 53 P.S. § 271 et
seq.141
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. Such notice
shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of
the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be
more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than seven
days from the date of the hearing.
REGULATORY FLOOD — A flood having an average frequency of
occurrence on the order of once in 100 years, although the flood may occur
in any year.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year flood elevation
based upon the information contained in the Official Flood Insurance Study.
SKETCH PLAN — An informal plan indicating salient existing features
of a tract and its surroundings and the general layout of the proposed
subdivision to be used as a basis for consideration by the Borough.
A.
PRELIMINARY PLAN — A tentative plan, in lesser detail than a final
plan, showing proposed streets and lot layout and such other
information as required by this chapter.
B.
FINAL PLAN — A complete and exact plan, prepared for official
recording as required by this chapter to define property rights and
proposed streets and other improvements.
C.
RECORD PLAN — The copy of the final plan which contains the original
endorsements or approvals of the Commission and Borough Council
and the County Planning Commission and which is intended to be
recorded with the County Recorder of Deeds.
D.
Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and other
public areas;
A.
Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly
owned or operated facilities; and
B.
C. Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
141. Editor's Note: See now 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq.
§ 235-36 CATASAUQUA CODE § 235-36
170:536
REVERSE FRONTAGE LOT — A lot extending between and having frontage
on a major traffic street and a minor street, and with vehicular access solely
from the latter.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land reserved for use as a street, alley, interior walk, or
for other public purpose.
SETBACK OR BUILDING LINE — The line within a property defining the
required minimum distance between any enclosed structure and the
adjacent right-of-way.
SIGHT DISTANCE — The maximum extent of unobstructed vision (in a
horizontal or vertical plane along a street) from a vehicle located at any
given point on the street.
STREET — Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway,
parkway, lane, alley, viaduct or any other ways used or intended to be used
by vehicular traffic or pedestrians, whether public or private.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
SUBDIVIDER — The owner, or authorized agent of the owner, including
but not limited to an individual, partnership, or corporation that undertakes
a subdivision or land development or any of the activities covered by this
chapter, particularly the preparation of a subdivision plan showing the
layout of the land and the public improvements involved therein. The term
"subdivider" is intended to include the term "developer" even thorough the
personnel involved in successive stages of the project may vary.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
MAJOR STREET — Those serving or anticipated to serve in excess of
4,000 vehicles per day and shall have a design speed of 55 miles per
hour.
A.
COLLECTOR STREET — Those which intercept local streets, provide
access to abutting properties and/or serve or are anticipated to serve
between 750 and 4,000 vehicles daily and shall have a design speed of
40 miles per hour.
B.
LOCAL STREET — Those used primarily to provide access to abutting
property and serve or are anticipated to serve up to 750 vehicles daily
and shall have a design speed of 30 miles per hour.
C.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET — Local streets, parallel and adjacent
to major traffic or collector streets, providing access to abutting
properties and control of intersections with major traffic streets.
D.
§ 235-36 JUNKYARDS § 235-36
170:537
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED — Where in the judgment of the Borough
Engineer, at least 90% (based on the cost of the required improvements for
which financial security was posted pursuant to the requirements of this
chapter) of those improvements required as a condition for final approval
have been completed in accordance with the approved plan, so that the
project will be able to be used, occupied or operated for its intended use.
TRAVEL TRAILER — A vehicle less than 29 feet in length, standing on
wheels, and containing not more than one dwelling unit which may be used
for temporary living or sleeping purposes.
WATER SURVEY — An inventory of the source, quantity, yield and use of
groundwater and surface-water resources within the Borough.
§ 235-36 CATASAUQUA CODE § 235-36
170:538
ARTICLE VII
Administration and Enforcement
§ 235-37. Administrative action.
A. Borough Manager. The Borough Manager, with the assistance of the
Commission Engineer and Commission Planner, shall act as the
administrative officer of the Commission and Council. The Borough
Manager shall receive and examine all subdivisions in the name of the
Commission and Council and shall refer copies of all such plans and
applications to appropriate agencies or officials involved. The Borough
Manager shall also receive information from such agencies or officials
and shall transmit these comments to the Commission and Council. The
Borough Manager shall keep records of all applications and plans and
of actions taken by the Commission and Council on such applications
and plans. The Commission Engineer at the request of the Borough
Manager or the Borough Council shall make all required inspections
called for in this chapter. The Borough Manager shall also inform the
subdivider and the Council of any violations of this chapter which shall
become known to him.
B. Planning Commission. The Commission, with the assistance of the
Borough Manager, Borough Engineer, Solicitor and other appropriate
consultants and officials shall review all plans to determine conformity
with this chapter, the Zoning Ordinance142 and other applicable
Borough ordinances and resolutions and make recommendations to the
Borough Council concerning action to be taken in connection therewith.
[Amended 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 1274]
C. Borough Council. As the governing body of the Borough of Catasauqua,
Borough Council shall have the sole authority to take official action on
all plans, applications and requests for waivers or modifications
submitted pursuant to this chapter or the Municipalities Planning Code,
as amended.143 [Amended 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 1274]
D. Subdivision records. The Borough Manager shall keep a record of the
findings, decisions and recommendations relative to all subdivision
plans and applications filed for approval. Such records shall be open to
the public for review.
E. No plan shall be recorded or construction of improvements commenced
unless and until the developer has fully complied with all conditions of
plan approval, including, but not limited to, where appropriate, the
execution of an improvements agreement to the satisfaction of the
Borough Solicitor and the posting of security for the completion of
improvements in accordance with the plan. [Added 12-19-2011 by
Ord. No. 1274]
142. Editor's Note: See Ch. 280, Zoning.
143. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 235-37 JUNKYARDS § 235-37
170:539
F. Submission constitutes public record (waiver of copyright). [Added
12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 1274]
(1) By making a submission under this chapter, the applicant and the
developer acknowledge and agree that all documents and other
materials or information submitted to the Borough or its
consultants constitute public records within the meaning of the
Pennsylvania Right-to-Know Law, Act 3 of 2008, as amended,144 and
are therefore subject to review and reproduction upon request in
accordance with that law and the ordinances and resolutions of the
Borough of Catasauqua.
(2) To the extent that any such documents and other materials or
information are not deemed public records and are subject to
protection pursuant to applicable copyright law, the applicant and
the developer and all of their agents, employees and consultants,
by submitting documents to the Borough pursuant to this chapter
or otherwise creating documents for review by the Borough
pursuant to this chapter, shall be deemed to have waived all
copyright protection as relates to the review, analysis, criticism or
approval of the plan by the Borough and all of its agents, servants,
employees, officials, consultants and the public at large.
(3) By making a submission under this chapter, the applicant and the
developer hereby agree to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the
Borough and all of its agents, servants, employees, officials,
consultants, boards, commissions and councils of and from any and
all claims arising out of or relating to allegations of copyright
violations.
G. Applicant's/developer's duty of good faith. [Added 12-19-2011 by
Ord. No. 1274]
(1) Upon the filing of an application for review under this chapter, the
applicant and developer shall exercise good faith and promptly
address or otherwise respond substantively to the review
comments and requirements of the Borough and its staff and
consultants.
(2) It is the duty of the applicant and the developer to move the plan to
completion in a prompt, timely and diligent manner so as to enable
final review by the Planning Commission and action by the Borough
Council, to comply with all conditions of plan approval imposed by
Council and accepted by the applicant and developer and to record
the plan.
(3) The Borough shall not be obligated to accept an applicant's or
developer's offer of a time extension for plan review or grant a
continuance of any hearing, meeting or review.
144. Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 67.101 et seq.
§ 235-37 CATASAUQUA CODE § 235-37
170:540
§ 235-38. Modifications, appeals and amendments. [Amended
6-5-1995 by Ord. No. 1031]
H. Unsworn falsification to authorities. All statements made to the
Borough, whether written or oral, in the course of the land development
or subdivision plan process, shall be true and correct to the best of the
knowledge, information and belief of the applicant, the developer and
their agents and consultants, and with the understanding that any false
statement is subject to the penalties of 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4904, relating to
unsworn falsification to authorities. [Added 12-19-2011 by Ord. No.
1274]
A. Modifications.
(1) The Borough Council may grant a modification of the requirements
of one or more provisions of this chapter if the literal enforcement
will exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining
to the land in question, provided that such modification will not be
contrary to the public interest and that the purpose and intent of
this chapter is observed.
(2) All requests for a modification shall be in writing and shall
accompany and be a part of the application for development. The
request shall state in full the grounds and facts of
unreasonableness or hardship on which the request is based, the
provision or provisions of this chapter involved and the minimum
modification necessary.
(3) The request for modification shall be referred to the Planning
Commission for advisory comments.
(4) The Borough Council shall keep a written record of all action on all
requests for modifications.
B. Reconsideration and appeals to Commission. Any subdivider aggrieved
by a finding, decision or recommendation of any official may request
and receive opportunity to appear before the Commission, present
additional relevant information, and request reconsideration and/or
appeal of the original finding, decision or recommendation.
C. Procedure for applying. Applications for modification, variances and
appeals to the Commission shall be submitted in writing. The
application shall state fully the grounds and all the facts relied upon by
the applicant. The Commission shall act upon such applications within a
period of 45 days.
D. Appeals to court. The decisions of the Commission and/or Council with
respect to the approval or disapproval of plans may be appealed
directly to court as provided for in Pennsylvania Act 247, as amended,
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.145
145. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 235-37 JUNKYARDS § 235-38
170:541
§ 235-39. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-5-1995 by Ord. No.
1031]
E. Amendments.
(1) Amendments to this chapter shall become effective only after a
public hearing held pursuant to public notice. A brief summary
setting forth the principal provisions of the proposed amendment
and a reference to the place within the Borough where copies of the
proposed amendment may be secured or examined shall be
incorporated in the public notice. Unless the proposed amendment
shall have been prepared by the Planning Commission, the
Borough Council shall submit the amendment to the Planning
Commission at least 30 days prior to the hearing on such
amendment to provide the Planning Commission an opportunity to
submit recommendations. In addition, at least 30 days prior to the
public hearing on the amendment, the Borough shall submit the
proposed amendment to the county planning agency for
recommendations.
(2) Within 30 days after adoption, the Borough Council shall forward a
certified copy of the amendment to the county planning agency.
(3) Proposed amendments shall not be enacted unless notice of
proposed enactment is given in the manner set forth in this section,
and shall include the time and place of the meeting at which
passage will be considered, a reference to a place within the
Borough where copies of the proposed amendment may be
examined without charge or obtained for a charge not greater than
the cost thereof. The Borough Council shall publish the proposed
amendment once in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Borough not more than 60 days nor less than seven days prior to
passage. Publication of the proposed amendment shall include
either the full text thereof or the title and a brief summary,
prepared by the Borough Solicitor and setting forth all the
provisions in reasonable detail. If the full text is not included:
(a) A copy thereof shall be supplied to a newspaper of general
circulation in the Borough at the time the public notice is
published.
(b) An attested copy of the proposed amendment shall be filed in
the county law library (or other county office designated by the
County Commissioners).
(4) In the event substantial amendments are made in the proposed
amendment, before voting upon enactment, the Borough Council
shall, at least 10 days prior to enactment, readvertise, in one
newspaper of general circulation in the Borough, a brief summary
setting forth all the provisions in reasonable detail together with a
summary of the amendments.
§ 235-38 CATASAUQUA CODE § 235-39
170:542
§ 235-40. Preventive remedies. [Added 6-5-1995 by Ord. No. 1031]
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a
civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Borough, pay a
judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs, including
reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Borough as a result thereof.
No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the
date of the determination of a violation by the District Justice. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Borough
may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil
Procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation, unless the District Justice determining that there
has been a violation further determines that there was a good faith
basis for the person, partnership, or corporation violating this chapter
to have believed that there was no such violation, in which event there
shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day
following the date of the determination of a violation by the District
Justice and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation.
B. The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem judgment pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the Borough the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
D. District Justices shall have initial jurisdiction in proceedings brought
under this section.
E. Any person found guilty of violating an ordinance shall be assessed
court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in
the enforcement proceedings. [Added 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1288]
A. In addition to other remedies, the Borough may institute and maintain
appropriate actions by law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate
violations, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages and to
prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises. The
description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other
documents used in the process of selling or transferring shall not
exempt the seller or transferor from such penalties or from the
remedies herein provided.
B. The Borough may refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval
necessary to further improve or develop any real property which has
been developed or which has resulted from a subdivision of real
property in violation of this chapter. This authority to deny such a
permit or approval shall apply to any of the following applicants:
§ 235-39 JUNKYARDS § 235-40
170:543
§ 235-41. Conflict with other ordinances. [Amended 6-5-1995 by
Ord. No. 1031]
Wherever there is a difference between minimum standards or dimensions
specified herein and those contained in the Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 280)
or other official regulations, the highest standard shall apply.
(1) The owner of record at the time of such violation.
(2) The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such
violation without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had
actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(3) The current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent
to the time of violation without regard as to whether such current
owner had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(4) The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who acquired
the property subsequent to the time of violation without regard as
to whether such vendee or lessee had actual or constructive
knowledge of the violation.
C. As an additional condition for issuance of a permit or the granting of an
approval to any such owner, current owner, vendee or lessee for the
development of any such real property, the Borough may require
compliance with the conditions that would have been applicable to the
property at the time the applicant acquired an interest in such real
property.
§ 235-40 CATASAUQUA CODE § 235-41
170:544
Chapter 237
TAPPING FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 210.
Water — See Ch. 265.
Fees — See Ch. A285.
§ 235-41 JUNKYARDS § 235-41
170:545

ARTICLE I
Calculation
[Adopted 7-17-2006 by Ord. No. 1197]
§ 237-1. Determination of usage.
Unless specifically provided otherwise, anticipated or presumed water and
sewer service usage shall be determined in accordance with the provisions
of this article.
§ 237-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this § 237-2, unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
AUTHORITY — The Catasauqua Sewer Authority, constituted and existing
pursuant to the Municipalities Authorities Act of 1945, as amended.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Catasauqua, a municipal corporation,
incorporated under the Borough Code.
DWELLING UNIT — Any structure, or part thereof, designed and intended
to be occupied as the living quarters of a single family or housekeeping unit,
and having separate kitchen and bathroom facilities.
GPD — Gallons per day of actual, presumed or anticipated flows.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property located within the utility service
area of the Borough upon which there is erected a structure intended for
continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy, or use by human beings or
animals.
SEWER SYSTEM — All facilities, as of any particular time, for collecting,
pumping, transporting, treating, or disposing of sewage and other wastes,
other than stormwater, which are owned, leased, or operated by the
Borough.
WATER SYSTEM — All facilities, as of any particular time, for pumping,
transporting, producing, treating, storing, or distributing potable water,
which are owned, leased, or operated by the Borough.
§ 237-3. Anticipated or presumed flow calculation criteria.
A. Residential. In accordance with the requirements of Act 2003-57, the
measure of the rate of flow of water to a single-family residential
dwelling unit (SFRD) is 65 times the average number of residents in an
SFRD in the Borough of Catasauqua, as determined by the last federal
census. The rate of flow of sewage from an SFRD is 90 times the same
average number of residents. As of the date of this article, the average
number of residents in an SFRD is 2.45.
B. Nonresidential. The measure of the rate of flow for water and sewer to a
nonresidential dwelling shall be the anticipated flow, as reasonably
§ 237-1 JUNKYARDS § 237-3
170:547
§ 237-4. Presumed flows by use category.
The presumed flow for any given improved property served or to be served
by the Borough shall be determined in accordance with the Calculation
of Presumed Water or Sanitary Sewerage System Flow by Use Category,
marked as Exhibit A,146 attached hereto and made a part hereof as follows:
determined by the Borough, based upon Department of Environmental
Protection data, public utility industry publications, or from user
estimates, so long as the latter has an empirical and readily verifiable
basis, provided that no estimate shall be made in a manner which
conflicts with Acts 2003-57 or 1990-203.
C. Presumptions.
(1) Variations: peak vs. average day. In all types of uses, the rate of
flow of water or sanitary sewage is not constant at all times. The
rate varies from hour to hour, day to day, and season to season
depending on the demands of the use. When one is concerned with
the ability to provide service at times of peak demand, one is only
interested in the rate of flow at times of peak demand; it is
irrelevant what the average rate of flow is when one needs to
design a system that can accommodate peak demands. In other
situations, it may be more appropriate to consider the average rate
of flow over an extended period of time.
(2) Anticipated flow calculations refer to peak demand. From time to
time, the rate of flow of a fluid must be determined for purposes of
insuring and providing capacity in the Borough sewer and water
systems which can accommodate peak demands on those systems.
Therefore, unless clearly indicated otherwise, all references to
anticipated flow for nonresidential properties shall be considered
references to the average flow from or to a given improved
property during the thirty-day period of any year for which the total
flow is the greatest.
D. Anticipated flow. Except as provided in § 237-5, the amount of
anticipated flow at any given time for any given nonresidential
improved property shall be determined in accordance with § 237-4
(rounded to four decimal places), based upon a rebuttable presumption
applicable as a matter of administrative convenience and necessity to
all calculations, that the average flow of water to, or sanitary sewage
from, a given nonresidential improved property may be calculated
utilizing the thirty-day period of any year for which the total flow is the
greatest.
A. Residential. Improved properties upon which residential uses (other
than hotels and motels) are maintained shall be charged in accordance
with § 237-3A hereof. Additional flows shall be presumed and charged
146. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 237-3 CATASAUQUA CODE § 237-4
170:548
for any retail, service, or business use which is attached to or part of a
dwelling unit, in accordance with the other subsections of this section.
However, no additional flows shall be presumed or charged for laundry
facilities provided on an improved property solely for the use of fulltime
residents. Mobile home parks shall be treated as having the flows
for one residential dwelling unit for each space available for the siting
of a mobile home.
B. Hotels and motels. Improved properties upon which hotels or motels
are maintained shall be charged in accordance with Exhibit A. If selfservice
laundry facilities or dining or food service areas are also
provided on the improved property, additional flow shall be presumed
and charged as provided in Subsections C and F. No additional flow
shall be presumed for institutional laundry facilities associated with
hotels or motels and which provide services solely for hotel or motel
guests.
C. Restaurants/food service. Improved properties upon which restaurants
and other food services uses are maintained shall be charged as
follows:
(1) Full-service restaurant. If the use is a full-service restaurant (one in
which the utensils will be washed and reused, and patrons will eat
on the premises), fees in accordance with Exhibit A shall be
presumed and charged on the basis of each square foot of gross
floor area in the dining areas of the restaurant (not counting any
cocktail lounge or bar areas). If cocktail lounge or bar areas are
also present, additional flow shall be presumed and charged as
provided in Subsection C(4) below.
(2) Single-service utensil restaurants. If the use is a single-service
utility restaurant (one in which the utensils will not be washed and
re-used, but in which the majority of patrons will eat on the
premises), fees in accordance with Exhibit A shall be presumed and
charged on the basis of each square foot of gross floor area in the
dining areas of the restaurant.
(3) Take-out restaurants and food catering facilities. If the use is a
take-out restaurant or other food services establishment in which
the majority of patrons will not eat on the premises, or a food
catering facility in which food is prepared for consumption at
another location, fees in accordance with Exhibit A shall be
presumed and charged on the basis of each square foot of gross
floor area occupied by the use (other than gross floor area in any
incidental dining area).
(4) Cocktail lounges and bar areas. If the use includes a cocktail
lounge and/or bar, fees in accordance with Exhibit A shall be
presumed and charged on the basis of each square foot of floor
area in the cocktail lounge and bar areas, including the floor area
behind the bar.
§ 237-4 JUNKYARDS § 237-4
170:549
D. Beauty shops/barbershops. Improved properties upon which beauty
shops or barbershops are maintained (except as described in
Subsection A) shall be charged with fees in accordance with Exhibit A
on the basis of each operator chair. Any change in the number of
operator chairs on an improved property shall constitute a change in
use or a modification of the use of the improved property.
E. Movie or live-performance theatres. Improved properties upon which
movie or live-performance theaters are maintained shall be charged
fees in accordance with Exhibit A on the basis of each square foot of
gross floor area in the performance-viewing areas of the improved
properties. If food service areas are also provided on the improved
property, additional flow shall be presumed as provided in Subsection
C.
F. Self-service laundries. Improved properties upon which self-service
laundries are maintained shall be charged fees in accordance with
Exhibit A on the basis of each square foot of gross floor area in the
areas open to the public.
G. Offices. Improved properties upon which offices are maintained shall be
charged fees in accordance with Exhibit A on the basis of each square
foot of gross floor area devoted to office and accessory uses (including,
e.g., storage, filing, and supply areas, waiting areas, conference areas,
meeting rooms, halls, elevators, washrooms, etc.).
H. Retail stores. Improved properties upon which retail sales uses are
maintained shall be charged fees in accordance with Exhibit A on the
basis of each square foot of gross floor area devoted to retail sales and
accessory uses (including, e.g., storage and supply areas, aisles, store
shelves, elevators, washrooms, etc.).
I. Industrial. Improved properties upon which industrial uses are
maintained shall be charged as follows:
(1) In general. Fees in accordance with Exhibit A on the basis of each
square foot of gross floor area devoted to industrial uses (including,
e.g., manufacturing, processing, fabrication, assembly, repair,
maintenance, garage, printing, binding, and freight terminal uses)
and uses accessory thereto, other than uses described in
Subsection I(2); and
(2) Warehouse and storage. Fees in accordance with Exhibit A on the
basis of each square foot of gross floor area devoted to warehouse
or storage uses (including aisles, etc.); and
(3) Industrial wastes. Fees in accordance with Exhibit A on the basis of
each reconstituted gallon of industrial waste estimated to be
discharged by the industrial use per day (as determined by the
Borough Engineer). For purposes of this Subsection I(3), the
number of reconstituted gallons is equal to the number of actual
gallons to be discharged if the strength of the discharge is equal to
§ 237-4 CATASAUQUA CODE § 237-4
170:550
or less than 300 mg/1 of biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), 360
mg/1 of suspended solids (SS), and 85 mg/1 of Total Kjeldahl
nitrogen (TKN); if the actual discharge exceeds a strength of 300
mg/1 BOD, 360 mg/1 SS, or 85 mg/1 TKN, the number of
reconstituted gallons is equal to the number of gallons which would
result if pure water were added to the discharge until the average
strength of the discharge-plus-added-water is equal to or less than
300 mg/1 BOD, 360 mg/1 SS, and 85 mg/1 TKN.
J. Schools.
(1) Day schools. Improved properties upon which schools are
maintained (other than boarding schools) shall be charged fees in
accordance with Exhibit A on the basis of each person if the school
includes showers, or fees in accordance with Exhibit A on the basis
of each person if the school does not include showers.
(2) Boarding schools. Improved properties upon which boarding
schools are maintained shall be charged fees in accordance with
Exhibit A on the basis of each square foot of gross floor area in any
residence hall (including bedrooms, washrooms, lounge areas,
halls, etc.), plus fees in accordance with Exhibit A on the basis of
each person for all other areas.
(3) Person. For purposes of this Subsection J only, the number of
persons in a school shall be equal to the maximum number of
students who may attend the school at any one time as established
by the Pennsylvania Department of Education, plus the number of
administrators, faculty, staff, and other employees reasonably
expected to be assigned to work at the school building in the event
the number of students at the school is equal to the maximum
permitted number of students.
K. Churches. Improved properties upon which churches are maintained
shall be charged with fees in accordance with Exhibit A on the basis of
each square foot of gross floor area in any worship-assembly area
(including, but not limited to, nave and sanctuary areas, but not
including any vestibule areas). In addition, if schools, classrooms,
offices, or food service uses are located on church property, such
additional uses shall be charged with additional flow as prescribed in
the other subsections of this § 237-4.
L. Hospitals. Improved properties upon which hospitals are maintained
shall be charged with:
(1) In-patients. Fees in accordance with Exhibit A on the basis of each
in-patient bed the hospital is authorized to maintain (Any change in
the number of authorized in-patient beds shall be deemed a change
in use or modification of use of the improved property.); plus
(2) Out-patients. Fees in accordance with Exhibit A on the basis of each
square foot of gross floor area in the hospital, except for in-patient
§ 237-4 JUNKYARDS § 237-4
170:551
rooms (rooms with beds primarily occupied by in-patients) and
rooms primarily devoted to the performance of medical procedures
on persons who are in-patients at the hospital. In addition, if food
service uses are located at the hospital, such uses shall be charged
with additional flow as prescribed in Subsection C, and the area
occupied by such uses shall not be included in the calculations
made under the first sentence of this Subsection L(2).
M. Institutions other than hospitals. Improved properties upon which
institutions (other than hospitals) are maintained (e.g., nursing homes)
shall be charged fees in accordance with Exhibit A on the basis of each
bed the institution is authorized to maintain. (Any change in the number
of authorized beds shall be deemed a change in use or modification of
use of the improved property for purposes of calculating additional
flow.)
N. Swimming pools and bathhouses.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection N(2), improved properties upon
which swimming pools or bathhouses are maintained shall be
charged fees in accordance with Exhibit A on the basis of each
square foot of gross area in the building areas and/or outdoor
enclosed areas devoted to the pool or bathhouse uses. In addition,
any food service uses shall be charged with additional presumed
flow as provided in Subsection C.
(2) Subsection N(1) shall not apply to pools or bathhouses which are
associated with residential properties and which may only be used
by residents or guests of residents who are not charged an
admission fee.
O. Other uses. Whenever any use exists on an improved property which is
not fairly described in the preceding subsections of this § 237-4, the
amount of additional flow with respect to such use shall be determined,
whenever practicable, by reference to that use (or those uses)
described in the preceding subsections of this § 237-4 which is most
similar to the use which exists on the improved property. Similar uses
for this purpose shall be based on similar patterns of water
consumption and sanitary sewage discharge. Whenever it is not
practicable to calculate additional or presumed flow by reference to one
or more of the preceding provisions of this § 237-4, the Borough
Engineer shall establish the presumed flow for such use in accordance
with the criteria in § 237-3.
P. Multiple uses. Whenever any improved property shall have more than
one use established thereon, the additional presumed flow for such
improved property shall be equal to the sum of the amount of additional
presumed flow for each individual use (as provided in the preceding
subsections of this § 237-4).
§ 237-4 CATASAUQUA CODE § 237-5
170:552
§ 237-5. Special exceptions to use of presumed flows by use
category.
A. In general. The Borough recognizes that the presumption set forth in
§ 237-4 may not properly reflect peak flow rates from a given improved
property for either water, sanitary sewage, or both. Therefore, the
procedures set forth in this section shall apply to any request to
establish a different presumed or anticipated flow for any given
improved property, applicable to either water, sanitary sewage, or both,
by special exception.
B. Request for special exception. Either the Borough or a person with an
interest in the improved property may request a special exception to
the presumptions of § 237-4. The Borough shall make such a request by
mailing (certified mail, return receipt requested to last known address)
or hand-delivering a notice of the request to the owner of the improved
property or his authorized agent. Any other interested person shall
make such a request by filing a written notice with the Borough, on
forms prescribed by the Borough.
C. Agreement of owner and Borough Council. If the owner of the improved
property and the Borough Council shall agree that the presumed or
anticipated flow which should be assigned to any improved property for
purposes of water, sanitary sewer, or both, should be higher or lower
than the amount calculated under § 237-4, and shall agree on the
appropriate anticipated or presumed flow, the number so agreed shall
be the amount of flow assigned to the improved property at that time.
Any agreement under this Subsection C with respect to any particular
situation giving rise to an obligation to make a payment to the Borough
shall be made at or prior to the time that the payment is due to the
Borough.
D. Hearing before Borough Council. If an agreement under Subsection C
cannot be obtained, Borough Council shall conduct a hearing to
determine the anticipated or presumed flow which should be assigned
to the improved property. The Borough Council shall find that the
amount of flow is equal to the presumed flow under § 237-4, unless
either the Borough staff or the owner of the improved property shall
persuade the Borough Council that it is likely that the actual thirty-day
peak flow rate from or to the improved property will be more than 10%
higher or considerably lower than that presumed under § 237-4. All
hearings under this Subsection D with respect to any particular
situation giving rise to an obligation to make a payment to the Borough
shall be made at or prior to the time that the payment is due to the
Borough. Hearings shall not be deferred for extended periods of time
after the time payment is due to the Borough, nor shall any payments
made be subject to reconsideration and partial reimbursement through
hearings under this Subsection D which take place months or years
after the time payment is due to Borough. Anticipated flows are to be
determined based on reasonable estimates made at the time payment is
due, and not the actual usage data obtained after the fact by any
§ 237-5 JUNKYARDS § 237-5
170:553
§ 237-6. Appeal process.
The Borough Council is hereby appointed as a board of appeals, duly
constituted (in addition to other lawful powers and duties granted to it) and
authorized to review and adjudicate challenges by property owners to any
and all anticipated flow calculations used or to be used to assess or levy a
fee against any property owner whose property is served by the Borough
water system; provided that:
§ 237-7. Word usage.
All references to be, him, his and himself shall be considered gender
neutral, and shall be deemed to represent masculine, feminine and neuter
subjects and objects.
particular customer for any particular period, since such actual data
may not be representative of the peak demands which may be made by
an improved property on the municipal water and sewer systems when
the improved property is fully utilized.
A. The written notice of appeal must state the basis for such challenge,
and must have appended to it (or delivered with it) data in support
thereof, to provide a reasonable opportunity for resolution of the
dispute without the necessity of a hearing.
B. A decision made by the Borough as to an anticipated flow calculation
shall be presumed valid, so long as it is based upon substantial
evidence, or upon the best evidence available to or provided by the
property owner to the decisionmaker at the time the connection or
tapping fee was assessed.
C. A hearing on the appeal, if requested by the appellant, must be held
within 60 days of the date the appeal is filed with the Borough Council,
and a written decision must be mailed to the appellant's last known
address within 45 days of the date that the final hearing was officially
concluded. The written decision shall set forth the basis upon which the
Borough Council's decision is made.
D. A decision made by the Borough Council shall be deemed a final
determination, appealable only to the Court of Common Pleas of Lehigh
County.
§ 237-5 CATASAUQUA CODE § 237-7
170:554
Chapter 240
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Earned Income Taxation Department — See
Ch. 90.
§ 237-7 JUNKYARDS § 237-7
170:555

ARTICLE I
Earned Income and Net Profits Tax
[Adopted 1-6-1959 by Ord. No. 397; amended in its entirety
10-3-2011 by Ord. No. 1271]
§ 240-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ARTICLE XIII TAX OFFICER — The tax officer authorized by the Borough to
collect income taxes levied prior to January 1, 2012.
BUSINESS — An enterprise, activity, profession or any other undertaking of
an unincorporated nature, conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for
profit, whether by a person, partnership, association or any other entity.
BUSINESS ENTITY — A sole proprietorship, corporation, joint-stock
association or company, partnership, limited partnership, limited-liability
company, association, business trust, syndicate or other commercial or
professional activity organized under the laws of this commonwealth or any
other jurisdiction.
CERTIFIED PUBLIC ACCOUNTANT or PUBLIC ACCOUNTANT — A
certified public accountant, public accountant or firm, as provided for in the
Act of May 26, 1947 (P.L. 318, No. 140), known as the "CPA Law."147
CLAIM — A written demand for payment made by a tax officer or tax
collection district for income taxes collected by another tax officer or tax
collection district.
CORPORATION — A corporation or joint-stock association organized under
the laws of the United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any
other state, territory, foreign country or dependency. The term shall include
an entity which is classified as a corporation for federal income tax
purposes.
CURRENT YEAR — The calendar year for which the tax is levied.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Community and Economic
Development of the Commonwealth.
DOMICILE — The place where a person lives and has a permanent home
and to which the person has the intention of returning whenever absent.
An actual residence is not necessarily a domicile, for a domicile is the fixed
place of abode which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent rather
than transitory. A domicile is the voluntarily fixed place of habitation of
a person, not for a mere special or limited purpose, but with the present
intention of making a permanent home, until some event occurs to induce
the person to adopt some other permanent home. In the case of a business,
a domicile is that place considered as the center of business affairs and the
place where its functions are discharged.
147. Editor’s Note: See 63 P.S. § 9.1 et seq.
§ 240-1 JUNKYARDS § 240-1
170:557
EARNED INCOME — The compensation as required to be reported to or
as determined by the Department of Revenue under Section 303 of the
act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax Reform Code
of 1971,"148 and rules and regulations promulgated under that section.
Employee business expenses as reported to or determined by the
Department of Revenue under Article III of the Tax Reform Code of 1971
shall constitute allowable deductions in determining earned income. The
term does not include offsets for business losses. The amount of any housing
allowance provided to a member of the clergy shall not be taxable as earned
income.
EARNED INCOME AND NET PROFITS TAX — The tax levied by the
Borough on earned income and net profits.
EMPLOYER — A person, business entity or other entity, employing one
or more persons for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation.
The term includes the commonwealth, a political subdivision and an
instrumentality or public authority of either. For purposes of penalties under
this article, the term includes a corporate officer.
INCOME TAX — Except as set forth in Section 511(b) of the Local Tax
Enabling Act, P.L. 1257, Act 511 of 1965, as amended (hereinafter the
"LTEA"), 53 P.S. § 6924.511(b), an earned income and net profits tax,
personal income tax or other tax that is assessed on the income of a
taxpayer levied by the Borough under the authority of this act or any other
act.
JOINT TAX COLLECTION COMMITTEE — An entity formed by two or more
tax collection committees for the purpose of income tax collection in more
than one tax collection district.
LTEA — The Pennsylvania Local Tax Enabling Act, P.L. 1257, Act 511 of
1965, as amended.149
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business, other
than a corporation, as required to be reported to or as determined by the
Department of Revenue under Section 303 of the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L.
6, No. 2), 72 P.S. § 7303, known as the "Tax Reform Code of 1971," and rules
and regulations promulgated under that section. The term does not include
income under any of the following subsections:
A. Income which:
(1) Is not paid for services provided; and
(2) Is in the nature of earnings from an investment.
B. Income which represents:
(1) Any gain on the sale of farm machinery;
148. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
149. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 240-1 CATASAUQUA CODE § 240-1
170:558
(2) Any gain on the sale of livestock held 12 months or more for draft,
breeding or dairy purposes; or
(3) Any gain on the sale of other capital assets of a farm.
NONRESIDENT — A person or business domiciled outside the
Borough levying the tax.
NONRESIDENT TAX — An income tax levied by the Borough on
nonresidents.
OFFICIAL REGISTER — The part of the tax register that includes
withholding tax rates as provided in Section 511(a)(3) of the LTEA,
53 P.S. § 6924.511(a)(3).
PERSON — A natural person.
PRECEDING YEAR — The calendar year before the current year.
PRIVATE AGENCY — A business entity or person appointed as a tax
officer by a tax collection committee.
PUBLIC AGENCY — Any and all public bodies, authorities,
agencies, instrumentalities, political subdivisions, intermediate
units, councils, boards, commissions or similar governmental
entities.
RESIDENT — A person or business domiciled in the Borough
levying the tax.
RESIDENT TAX — An income tax levied by the Borough.
RESIDENT TAX OFFICER — The tax officer administering and
collecting income taxes for the tax collection district in which a
taxpayer is domiciled.
SUCCEEDING YEAR — The calendar year following the current
year.
TAXABLE INCOME — Includes:
TAX BUREAU — A public nonprofit entity established for the
administration and collection of taxes.
TAX COLLECTION COMMITTEE — The committee established to
govern the Lehigh Tax Collection District for the purpose of income
tax collection. The term shall include a joint tax collection
committee.
In the case of an earned income and net profits tax, earned
income and net profits.
(a)
In the case of a personal income tax, income enumerated in
Section 303 of the act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known
as the "Tax Reform Code of 1971," 72 P.S. § 7303, as reported
to and determined by the Department of Revenue, subject to
correction for fraud, evasion or error, as finally determined by
the commonwealth.
(b)
§ 240-1 JUNKYARDS § 240-1
170:559
§ 240-2. Imposition of tax.
TAX COLLECTION DISTRICT — The Lehigh Tax Collection District
established under Section 504 of the LTEA.150
TAX OFFICER — A political subdivision, public employee, tax
bureau, county, except a county of the first class, or private agency
which administers and collects income taxes for one or more tax
collection districts. Unless otherwise specifically provided, for
purposes of the obligations of an employer, the term shall mean the
tax officer for the tax collection district within which the employer
is located, or, if an employer maintains workplaces in more than
one district, the tax officer for each such district with respect to
employees principally employed therein.
TAXPAYER — A person or business required under this article to
file a return of an income tax or to pay an income tax.
TAX RECORDS — Tax returns, supporting schedules,
correspondence with auditors or taxpayers, account books and
other documents, including electronic records, obtained or created
by the tax officer to administer or collect a tax under this article.
The term includes documents required by Section 509(e) of the
LTEA, 53 P.S. § 6924.509(e). The term "electronic records" includes
data and information inscribed on a tangible medium or stored
in an electronic or other medium and which is retrievable in
perceivable form.
TAX REGISTER — A database of all county, municipal and school
tax rates available on the Internet as provided in Section 511(a)(1)
of the LTEA, 53 P.S. § 6924.511(a)(1).
WITHHOLDING TAX — An income tax levied by a political
subdivision under the authority of this article or any other
ordinance, or any other tax levied by a municipality or school
district for which employer withholding may be required under this
article.
A. The tax levied under this article is a continuation of a tax previously
described in the above-referenced whereas clauses.151 The tax
previously imposed and continued under this article is a tax for general
revenue purposes of 1% and is hereby imposed on the following:
(1) Earned income, as defined by this article, received by residents of
the Borough on or after January 1, 2012;
(2) Earned income, as defined by this article, received by nonresidents
of the Borough for work done or services performed or rendered in
the Borough on or after January 1, 2012;
150. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.504.
151. Editor's Note: A copy of Ord. No. 1271, complete with said clauses, is on file in the
Borough offices.
§ 240-1 CATASAUQUA CODE § 240-2
170:560
§ 240-3. Declaration and payment of tax.
(3) Net profits, as defined by this article, earned on or after January 1,
2012, of businesses, professions and other activities conducted by
residents in the Borough; and
(4) Net profits, as defined by this article, earned on or after January 1,
2012, of businesses, professions and other activities conducted by
nonresidents in the Borough.
B. The tax levied under Subsection A(1) and (2) herein shall relate to and
be imposed upon salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation
paid by an employer or on its behalf to any person who is employed by
or renders services to him. The tax levied under Subsection A(3) and (4)
herein shall relate to and be imposed on the net profits of any business,
profession or enterprise carried on by any person as owner or as
proprietor, either individually or in association with some other person
or persons.
A. Application.
(1) Income taxes shall be applicable to taxable income earned or
received based on the method of accounting used by the taxpayer
in the period beginning January 1 of the current year and ending
December 31 of the current year, and the tax shall continue in force
on a calendar year or taxpayer fiscal year basis, without annual
reenactment, unless the rate of the tax is subsequently changed.
(2) For a taxpayer whose fiscal year is not a calendar year, the tax
officer shall establish deadlines for filing, reporting and payment of
taxes which provide time periods equivalent to those provided for a
calendar year taxpayer.
B. Partial domicile. The taxable income subject to tax of a taxpayer who is
domiciled in the Borough for only a portion of the tax year shall be an
amount equal to the taxpayer's taxable income multiplied by a fraction,
the numerator of which is the number of calendar months during the
tax year that the individual is domiciled in the Borough and the
denominator of which is 12. A taxpayer shall include in the numerator
any calendar month during which the taxpayer is domiciled for more
than half the calendar month. A day that a taxpayer's domicile changes
shall be included as a day the individual is in the new domicile and not
the old domicile. If the number of days in the calendar month in which
the individual lived in the old and new domiciles are equal, the calendar
month shall be included in calculating the number of months in the new
domicile.
C. Declaration and payment. Except as provided in Subsection A(2),
taxpayers shall declare and pay income taxes as follows:
(1) Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15 of the succeeding year,
make and file with the resident tax officer a final return showing
§ 240-2 JUNKYARDS § 240-3
170:561
the amount of taxable income received during the period beginning
January 1 of the current year and ending December 31 of the
current year, the total amount of tax due on the taxable income,
the amount of tax paid, the amount of tax that has been withheld
under Section 512 of the LTEA, 53 P.S. § 6924.512, and the balance
of tax due. All amounts reported shall be rounded to the nearest
whole dollar. At the time of filing the final return, the taxpayer shall
pay the resident tax officer the balance of the tax due or shall make
demand for refund or credit in the case of overpayment. Every
taxpayer is required to file a final return showing the amount of
earned income received even if no payment is due and owing.
(2) Every taxpayer making net profits shall, by April 15 of the current
year, make and file with the resident tax officer a declaration of the
taxpayer's estimated net profits during the period beginning
January 1 and ending December 31 of the current year and shall
pay to the resident tax officer in four equal quarterly installments
the tax due on the estimated net profits. The first installment shall
be paid at the time of filing the declaration, and the other
installments shall be paid on or before June 15 of the current year,
September 15 of the current year and January 15 of the succeeding
year, respectively.
(3) Any taxpayer who first anticipates any net profit after April 15 of
the current year shall make and file the declaration required on or
before June 15 of the current year, September 15 of the current
year or December 31 of the current year, whichever date next
follows the date on which the taxpayer first anticipates such net
profit, and shall pay to the resident tax officer in equal installments
the tax due on or before the quarterly payment dates that remain
after the filing of the declaration.
(4) Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15 of the succeeding year,
make and file with the resident tax officer a final return showing
the amount of net profits earned or received based on the method
of accounting used by the taxpayer during the period beginning
January 1 of the current year and ending December 31 of the
current year, the total amount of tax due on the net profits and the
total amount of tax paid. At the time of filing the final return, the
taxpayer shall pay to the resident tax officer the balance of tax due
or shall make demand for refund or credit in the case of
overpayment. Any taxpayer may, in lieu of paying the fourth
quarterly installment of the estimated tax, elect to make and file
with the resident tax officer, on or before January 31 of the
succeeding year, the final return. Every taxpayer is required to file
a return showing the amount of net profits earned or received even
if no payment is due and owing.
(5) The Department, in consultation with the Department of Revenue,
shall provide by regulation for the filing of adjusted declarations of
estimated net profits and for the payments of the estimated tax in
§ 240-3 CATASAUQUA CODE § 240-3
170:562
§ 240-4. Withholding, remittance and reporting of tax.
For taxable years commencing on and after January 1, 2012, income taxes
shall be withheld, remitted and reported as follows:
cases where a taxpayer who has filed the declaration required
under this subsection anticipates additional net profits not
previously declared or has overestimated anticipated net profits.
(6) Every taxpayer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of
the current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of
business, file a final return as required under this subsection and
pay the tax due.
(7) Every taxpayer who receives any other taxable income not subject
to withholding under Section 512(3) of the LTEA, 53 P.S.
§ 6924.512(3), shall make and file with the resident tax officer a
quarterly return on or before April 15 of the current year, June 15
of the current year, September 15 of the current year, and January
15 of the succeeding year, setting forth the aggregate amount of
taxable income not subject to withholding by the taxpayer during
the three-month periods ending March 31 of the current year, June
30 of the current year, September 30 of the current year and
December 31 of the current year, respectively, and subject to
income tax, together with such other information as the
Department may require. Every taxpayer filing a return shall, at the
time of filing the return, pay to the resident tax officer the amount
of income tax due. In accordance with criteria established by the
Department, the tax officer may waive the quarterly return and
payment of the income tax and permit a taxpayer to file the receipt
of taxable income on the taxpayer's annual return and pay the
income tax due on or before April 15 of the succeeding year.
A. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse
or other place of business within the tax collection district which
employs one or more persons, other than domestic servants, for a
salary, wage, commission or other compensation, who has not
previously registered, shall, within 15 days after becoming an employer,
register with the tax officer the name and address of the employer and
such other information as the tax officer may require.
B. An employer shall require each new employee to complete a certificate
of residency form, which shall be an addendum to the federal
employee's withholding allowance certificate (Form W-4). An employer
shall also require any employee who changes his or her address or
domicile to complete a certificate of residency form. The certificate of
residency form shall provide information to help identify the political
subdivision where an employee lives and works. Forms of certificate of
residency may be obtained by an employer from the Department upon
request by an employer.
§ 240-3 JUNKYARDS § 240-4
170:563
C. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse
or other place of business within a tax collection district that employs
one or more persons, other than domestic servants, for a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation, shall, at the time of payment,
deduct from the compensation due each employee employed at such
place of business the greater of the employee's resident tax or the
employee's nonresident tax as released in the official register under
Section 511 of the LTEA, 53 P.S. § 6924.511.
D. Except as set forth in Subsection E, within 30 days following the end of
each calendar quarter, every employer shall file a quarterly return and
pay the amount of income taxes deducted during the preceding
calendar quarter to the tax officer for the place of employment of each
employee. The form shall show the name, address and social security
number of each employee, the compensation of the employee during
the preceding three-month period, the income tax deducted from the
employee, the political subdivision imposing the income tax upon the
employee, the total compensation of all employees during the preceding
calendar quarter, the total income tax deducted from the employees
and paid with the return and any other information prescribed by the
Department.
E. Notwithstanding Subsection D, the provisions of this subsection shall
apply if an employer has more than one place of employment in more
than one tax collection district. Within 30 days following the last day of
each month, the employer may file the return required by Subsection D
and pay the total amount of income taxes deducted from employees in
all work locations during the preceding month to the tax officer for
either the tax collection district in which the employer's payroll
operations are located or as determined by the Department. The return
and income taxes deducted shall be filed and paid electronically. The
employer must file a notice of intention to file combined returns and
make combined payments with the tax officer for each place of
employment at least one month before filing its first combined return or
making its first combined payment. This subsection shall not be
construed to change the location of an employee's place of employment
for purposes of nonresident tax liability.
F. Any employer who, for two of the preceding four quarterly periods, has
failed to deduct the proper income tax, or any part of the income tax, or
has failed to pay over the proper amount of income tax as required by
Subsection C to the tax collection district, may be required by the tax
officer to file returns and pay the income tax monthly. In such cases,
payments of income tax shall be made to the tax officer on or before the
last day of the month succeeding the month for which the income tax
was withheld.
G. On or before February 28 of the succeeding year, every employer shall
file with the tax officer where income taxes have been deducted and
remitted pursuant to Subsection C:
§ 240-4 CATASAUQUA CODE § 240-4
170:564
§ 240-5. Powers and duties of tax officer.
(1) An annual return showing, for the period beginning January 1 of
the current year and ending December 31 of the current year, the
total amount of compensation paid, the total amount of income tax
deducted, the total amount of income tax paid to the tax officer and
any other information prescribed by the Department.
(2) An individual withholding statement, which may be integrated with
the federal wage and tax statement (Form W-2), for each employee
employed during all or any part of the period beginning January 1
of the current year and ending December 31 of the current year,
setting forth the address and social security number, the amount of
compensation paid to the employee during the period, the amount
of income tax deducted, the amount of income tax paid to the tax
officer, the numerical code prescribed by the Department
representing the tax collection district where the payments
required by Subsections D and E were remitted and any other
information required by the Department. Every employer shall
furnish one copy of the individual withholding statement to the
employee for whom it is filed.
H. Any employer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of the
current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of business,
file returns and withholding statements required under this section and
pay the income tax due.
I. Except as otherwise provided in Section 511 of the LTEA, 53 P.S.
§ 6924.511, an employer who willfully or negligently fails or omits to
make the deductions required by this section shall be liable for payment
of income taxes which the employer was required to withhold to the
extent that the income taxes have not been recovered from the
employee. The failure or omission of any employer to make the
deductions required by this section shall not relieve any employee from
the payment of the income tax or from complying with the requirements
for filing of declaration and returns.
A. Tax collection. In addition to any other power and duty conferred upon
a tax officer in this article or by law, it shall be the duty of the tax officer
to:
(1) Collect, reconcile, administer and enforce income taxes imposed on
residents and nonresidents in the Borough included in the tax
collection district.
(2) Receive and distribute income taxes and to enforce withholding by
employers located in the tax collection district.
(3) Receive income taxes distributed by tax officers for other tax
collection districts.
§ 240-4 JUNKYARDS § 240-5
170:565
(4) Distribute income taxes to the Borough as required by Section 513
of the LTEA, 53 P.S. § 6924.513.
(5) Comply with all regulations adopted by the Borough under this
article and all resolutions, policies and procedures adopted by the
tax collection committee.
(6) Invest all income taxes in the custody of the tax officer in
authorized investments, subject to the approval of the tax
collection committee. The tax officer shall observe the standard of
care that would be observed by a prudent person dealing with
property of another. For the purposes of this subsection, the term
"authorized investment" shall include all of the following:
(a) Short-term obligations of the United States government or its
agencies or instrumentalities which are backed by the full faith
and credit of the United States or are rated in the highest
category by a nationally recognized statistical rating
organization.
(b) Deposits in savings accounts, time deposits, share accounts or
certificates of deposit of institutions, insured by the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation or the National Credit Union
Share Insurance Fund, or their successor agencies, to the
extent that the accounts are insured and, for the amount above
the insured maximum, that collateral, free from other liens, for
the amount is pledged by the depository institution.
(c) Deposits in investment pools established by the State
Treasurer or established by local governments pursuant to 53
Pa.C.S.A. Ch. 23, Subchapter A (relating to intergovernmental
cooperation), and related statutes, provided that the
investment pools are rated in the highest category by a
nationally recognized statistical rating organization.
(d) Repurchase agreements which are fully collateralized by
obligations of the United States government or its agencies or
instrumentalities, which are free from other liens and backed
by the full faith and credit of the United States or are rated in
the highest category by a nationally recognized statistical
rating organization.
(7) To distribute income generated from investments authorized under
Subsection A(6) as determined by the tax collection committee.
B. Monthly reports. The tax officer shall, within 20 days after the end of
each month, provide a written report, on forms prescribed by the
Department, to the secretary of the tax collection committee and to the
secretary of the Borough for which taxes were collected during the
previous month. The report shall include a breakdown of all income
taxes, income generated from investments under Subsection A(6),
penalties, costs and other money received, collected, expended and
§ 240-5 CATASAUQUA CODE § 240-5
170:566
distributed for each political subdivision served by the tax officer and
of all money distributed to tax officers for other tax collection districts.
C. Overpayments. A tax officer shall refund, under 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8425
(relating to refunds of overpayments) and § 8426 (relating to interest on
overpayment), on petition of and proof by the taxpayer, income taxes
paid in excess of income taxes rightfully due.
D. Bonds. Prior to initiating any official duties, each tax officer shall give
and acknowledge a bond to the appointing tax collection committee as
follows:
(1) The tax collection committee shall fix the amount of the bond in an
amount equal to the maximum amount of taxes that may be in the
possession of the tax officer at any given time or an amount
sufficient, in combination with fiscal controls, insurance and other
risk management and loss prevention measures used by the tax
collection district, to secure the financial responsibility of the tax
officer in accordance with guidelines adopted by the Department.
The amount of the bond shall be revised annually by the tax
collection committee based upon the annual examination required
under Section 505(h) of the LTEA, 53 P.S. § 6924.515 (h).
(2) Each bond shall be joint and several, with one or more corporate
sureties, which shall be surety companies authorized to do business
in this commonwealth and licensed by the Insurance Department.
(3) Each bond shall be conditioned upon the completion of all of the
following by the tax officer's employees and appointees:
(a) The faithful execution of all duties required of the tax officer.
(b) The just and faithful accounting or payment over of all moneys
and balances paid to, received or held by the tax officer by
virtue of the office in accordance with law.
(c) The delivery of all tax records or other official items held in
right as the tax officer to the tax officer's successor in office.
(4) Each bond shall be taken in the name of the tax collection district
and shall be for the use of the tax collection district appointing the
tax officer, and for the use of any other political subdivision or tax
collection district for which income taxes shall be collected or
distributed in case of a breach of any conditions of the bond by the
acts or neglect of the principal on the bond.
(5) The tax collection committee or any political subdivision may sue
upon the bond for the payment or distribution of income taxes.
(6) Each bond shall contain the name of the surety company bound on
the bond.
§ 240-5 JUNKYARDS § 240-5
170:567
(7) The tax collection committee may, upon cause shown and due
notice to the tax officer and the tax officer's sureties, require or
allow the substitution or the addition of a surety company
acceptable to the tax collection committee for the purpose of
making the bond sufficient in amount, without releasing the
sureties first approved from any accrued liability or previous action
on the bond.
(8) The tax collection committee shall designate the custodian of the
bond.
(9) The tax officer shall file copies of all bonds in effect with the
Borough.
(10) A copy of all bonds in effect shall be made available upon request
and at no cost to the Department or to a tax collection district or
political subdivision seeking payment or distribution of income
taxes authorized by this article.
E. Records. It shall be the duty of the tax officer to keep a record showing
the amount of income taxes received from each taxpayer or other tax
officer, the date of receipt, the amount and date of all other moneys
received or distributed and any other information required by the
Department. All tax records shall be the property of the Borough and
the tax collection district in which the taxes were collected. The tax
collection district and tax officer shall retain all tax records as directed
by the tax collection committee and, when applicable, in accordance
with retention and disposition schedules established by the Local
Government Records Committee of the Pennsylvania Historical and
Museum Commission under 53 Pa.C.S.A. Ch. 13, Subchapter F (relating
to records). Tax records under this subsection may be retained
electronically as permitted by law.
F. Employer and taxpayer audits.
(1) In order to verify the accuracy of any income tax declaration or
return or, if no declaration or return was filed, to ascertain the
income tax due, the tax officer and the tax officer's designated
employees may examine or audit the records pertaining to income
taxes due of any of the following:
(a) An employer;
(b) A taxpayer; and/or
(c) A person whom the tax officer reasonably believes to be an
employer or taxpayer.
(2) The examination or audit conducted by the tax officer and the tax
officer's designated employees shall conform to the requirements
set forth in the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8421
et seq.
§ 240-5 CATASAUQUA CODE § 240-5
170:568
(3) Every employer and taxpayer or other person whom the tax officer
reasonably believes to be an employer or taxpayer shall provide to
the tax officer and the tax officer's designated employees the
means, facilities and opportunity for the examination and
investigation authorized under Subsection F(1).
(4) For purposes of this subsection, the term "records" shall include
any books, papers and relevant federal or state tax returns and
accompanying schedules, or supporting documentation for any
income taxable under this article.
G. Exchange of information.
(1) The tax officer shall ensure that the tax collection district enters
into an agreement with the Department of Revenue for the
exchange of information as necessary for the collection of income
taxes.
(2) The Department of Revenue may enter into agreements with each
tax collection district and shall establish procedures under which
tax collection, filing and other taxpayer and locality information in
its custody will be made available to tax officers for purposes of
collection, reconciliation and enforcement no later than one year
after the deadline for filing returns for the tax year in question.
H. Actions for collection of income taxes. The tax officer may file an action
in the name of the Borough for the recovery of income taxes due to the
Borough and unpaid. Nothing in this subsection shall affect the
authority of the Borough to file an action in its own name for collection
of income taxes under this article. This subsection shall not be
construed to limit a tax officer, a tax collection district or the Borough
from recovering delinquent income taxes by any other means provided
by this article or by law. Actions for collection of income taxes shall be
subject to the following:
(1) Except as set forth in Subsection H(2) or (4), an action brought to
recover income taxes must be commenced within three years of the
later of the date:
(a) The income taxes are due;
(b) The declaration or return has been filed; or
(c) Of a redetermination of compensation or net profits by the
Department of Revenue.
(2) If there is substantial understatement of income tax liability of 25%
or more and there is no fraud, an action must be commenced within
six years.
(3) Except as set forth in Subsection H(4)(b), (c) or (d), an action by a
tax officer for recovery of an erroneous refund must be commenced
as follows:
§ 240-5 JUNKYARDS § 240-5
170:569
(a) Except as set forth in Subsection H(3)(b), within two years
after making the refund.
(b) If it appears that any part of the refund was induced by fraud
or misrepresentation of material fact, within five years after
making the refund.
(4) There is no limitation of action if any of the following apply:
(a) A taxpayer fails to file a declaration or return required under
this article.
(b) An examination of a declaration or return or of other evidence
in the possession of the tax officer relating to the declaration or
return reveals a fraudulent evasion of income taxes.
(c) An employer has deducted income taxes under Section 512 of
the LTEA, 53 P.S. § 6924.512, and has failed to pay the amount
deducted by the tax officer.
(d) An employer has intentionally failed to make deductions
required by this article.
I. Interest and penalties.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection I(2), if the income tax is not paid
when due, interest at the rate the taxpayer is required to pay to the
commonwealth under Section 806 of the Act of April 9, 1929 (P.L.
343, No. 176), known as "The Fiscal Code," 72 P.S. § 806, on the
amount of the income tax, and an additional penalty of 1% of the
amount of the unpaid income tax for each month or fraction of a
month during which the income tax remains unpaid shall be added
and collected, but the amount shall not exceed 15% in the
aggregate. Where an action is brought for the recovery of the
income tax, the taxpayer liable for the income tax shall, in addition,
be liable for the costs of collection, interest and penalties.
(2) The Department may establish conditions under which a tax officer,
with the concurrence of the tax collection committee, may abate
interest or penalties that would otherwise be imposed for the
nonreporting or underreporting of income tax liabilities or for the
nonpayment of income taxes previously imposed and due if the
taxpayer voluntarily files delinquent returns and pays the income
taxes in full.
(3) The provisions of Subsection I(2) shall not affect or terminate any
petitions, investigations, prosecutions or other proceedings
pending under this article, or prevent the commencement or
further prosecution of any proceedings by the proper authorities
for violations of this article. No proceedings shall, however, be
commenced on the basis of delinquent returns filed pursuant to
Subsection H if the returns are determined to be substantially true
§ 240-5 CATASAUQUA CODE § 240-5
170:570
and correct and the income taxes are paid in full within the
prescribed time.
J. Fines and penalties for violations.
(1) Any taxpayer who fails, neglects or refuses to make any declaration
or return required by this article, any employer who fails, neglects
or refuses to register, keep or supply records or returns required by
Section 512 of the LTEA, 53 P.S. § 6924.512, or to pay the income
tax deducted from employees, or fails, neglects or refuses to deduct
or withhold the income tax from employees, any taxpayer or
employer who refuses to permit the tax officer appointed by a tax
collection committee or an employee or agent of the tax officer to
examine books, records and papers, and any taxpayer or employer
who knowingly makes any incomplete, false or fraudulent return,
or attempts to do anything whatsoever to avoid the full disclosure
of the amount of income in order to avoid the payment of income
taxes shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of
not more than $2,500 for each offense and reasonable costs and in
default of payment of said fine and costs, to imprisonment for not
more than six months.
(2) Any employer required under this article to collect, account for and
distribute income taxes who willfully fails to collect or truthfully
account for and distribute income taxes, commits a misdemeanor
and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding
$25,000 or to imprisonment not exceeding two years, or both.
(3) The penalties imposed under this subsection shall be in addition to
any other costs and penalties imposed by this article.
(4) The failure of any person to obtain forms required for making the
declaration or returns required by this article shall not excuse the
person from making the declaration or return.
K. Costs. The tax officer shall be entitled to impose and collect the
reasonable costs incurred to provide notices of delinquency or to
implement similar procedures utilized to collect delinquent taxes from a
taxpayer as approved by the tax collection committee. Reasonable costs
collected may be retained by the tax officer. An itemized accounting of
all costs collected shall be remitted to the tax collection committee on
an annual basis.
L. Appeals and tax officer actions. A determination of the tax officer
relating to the assessment, collection, refund, withholding, remittance
or distribution of income taxes may be appealed to the appeals board
established by the tax collection committee by a taxpayer, employer,
political subdivision or another tax collection district pursuant to the
provisions of Section 505(j) of Act 32, 53 P.S. § 6924.505(j). Pursuant to
Section 505(k) of Act 32, 53 P.S. § 6924.505(k), any dispute among the
affected parties involving a deviation of 10% or greater from taxes
received in the previous tax year shall be subject to mandatory
§ 240-5 JUNKYARDS § 240-5
170:571
§ 240-6. Compensation of tax officer.
The tax officer shall receive such compensation for his services and
expenses as determined by the tax collection committee. At the discretion
of the tax collection committee, the tax officer may be permitted to withhold
the amount of the tax officer's compensation from income taxes collected if
the monthly reports required by Section 509(b) of the LTEA,152 submitted
by the tax officer include an accounting for all compensation withheld.
§ 240-7. Exemption.
mediation in accordance with regulations and guidelines adopted by
the Department. A dispute involving threshold of less than 10% may be
the subject of voluntary mediation in accordance with regulations and
guidelines adopted by the Department.
M. Confidentiality.
(1) General rule. Any information gained by a tax officer or any
employee or agent of a tax officer or of the tax collection committee
as a result of any declarations, returns, investigations, hearings or
verifications shall be confidential tax information.
(2) Prohibited conduct. It shall be unlawful, except for official purposes
or as provided by law, for the commonwealth, the Borough, tax
collection committee member, tax officer or employee or agent of a
tax officer or tax collection committee to do any of the following:
(a) Divulge or make known confidential tax information.
(b) Permit confidential tax information or a book containing an
abstract or particulars of the abstract to be seen or examined
by any person.
(c) Print, publish or otherwise make known any confidential tax
information.
(3) Penalties. A person who violates Subsection M(2) commits a
misdemeanor of the third degree and shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $2,500 or to imprisonment
for not more than one year, or both. If the offender is a member of
the tax collection committee, the member shall be removed from
the tax collection committee. If the offender is an employee of a tax
collection committee or the Borough, the employee shall be
discharged from employment. The offender shall pay the costs of
prosecution.
A. The tax imposed by this article shall not apply to:
152. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.509(b).
§ 240-5 CATASAUQUA CODE § 240-7
170:572
§ 240-8. Severability.
The provisions of this article are severable. If any sentence, clause or
section of this article is for any reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal
or invalid, such unconstitutionally, illegality or invalidity shall not affect or
impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses or sections of
this article. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Borough that this
article would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid
sentence, clause or section not been included herein.
§ 240-9. Effective date; repealer; effect on prior provisions;
legislative authority.
(1) Any person as to whom it is beyond the legal power of the Borough
to impose the tax herein provided under the Constitution of the
United States and the Constitution and laws of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
(2) Institutions or organizations operated for public, religious,
educational or charitable purposes, to institutions or organizations
not organized or operated for private profit, or to trusts and
foundations established for any of said purposes.
B. This section shall not be construed to exempt any person who is an
employer from the duty of collecting the tax from his employees and
paying the amount collected to the tax officer under the provisions of
§ 240-4 of this article.
A. The provisions of this article shall take effect on January 1, 2012, and
shall apply to earned income and net profits received or earned income
and net profits earned or made by a taxpayer during calendar year 2012
and each year thereafter without annual reenactment unless the rate of
tax is subsequently changed. Changes in the rate of tax shall become
effective on the date specified in the ordinance.
B. Nothing contained herein shall be considered to repeal by implication
or otherwise the provisions of any earned income and net profits tax
ordinance(s) previously enacted as it may apply to earned income and
net profits of taxpayers prior to the effective date of this article, which
shall remain in full force and effect with respect to such earned income
and net profits.
C. Subject to valid enactment of this article without appeal, all provisions
of any prior ordinance or parts thereof inconsistent herewith are hereby
modified, amended and repealed by the provisions of this article, which
shall thereafter govern the taxation of such earned income and net
profits.
D. This article is enacted under authority of the LTEA, and all provisions
thereof that relate to a tax on earned income and net profits are
incorporated into this article. Any future amendments to the LTEA that
§ 240-7 JUNKYARDS § 240-9
170:573
§ 240-10. (Reserved)
are required to be applied to a tax on earned income or net profits will
automatically become part of this article upon the effective date of such
amendment, without the need for formal amendment of this article, to
the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
§ 240-9 CATASAUQUA CODE § 240-10
170:574
ARTICLE II
Transmission of Earned Income Tax on Nonresidents
[Adopted 5-7-1962 by Ord. No. 455 (Ch. XVII, Sec. 12, of the 1962
Code)]
§ 240-11. Transmission of tax of nonresidents to political
subdivision of residence.
If a nonresident of Borough of Catasauqua is subject to an earned income
or wage tax in the political subdivision where such nonresident resides,
Borough of Catasauqua will transmit to the political subdivision of residence
any tax received by its Income Tax Officer by withholdings, or otherwise,
from said nonresident; provided that Borough of Catasauqua assumes no
duty or liability to ascertain the accuracy of the address of any such
nonresident, and shall in no event be held accountable for tax in any amount
in excess of that shall apply to political subdivisions which reciprocate in
the transmission of earned income or wage taxes received by withholdings,
or otherwise from resident of Borough of Catasauqua.
§ 240-11 JUNKYARDS § 240-11
170:575

ARTICLE III
Per Capita Tax
[Adopted 3-1-1965 by Ord. No. 535 (Ch. XVII, Secs. 41 to 45, 47 and
48, of the 1962 Code)]
§ 240-12. Imposition of tax. [Amended 12-20-2004 by Ord. No.
1176]
A per capita tax of $10 for general Borough purposes is hereby levied
and assessed under the authority of the Act of the General Assembly of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of June 25, 1947 (P.L. 1145), and its
amendments, and the Act of December 31, 1965 (P.L. 1257, No. 511),
and its amendments, upon each resident or inhabitant of the Borough of
Catasauqua over the age of 21 years, which tax shall be in addition to all
other taxes levied and assessed by the Borough of Catasauqua pursuant to
any other laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 240-13. Borough Manager to collect tax.
Such tax shall be collected by the Borough Manager who is hereby
appointed Tax Collector ex officio for the administration of the provisions
hereof and the collection of said tax in the same manner and at the same
time as other Borough taxes are collected, as provided by the Local Tax
Collection Law of 1945, as amended and supplemented.
§ 240-14. Notice to taxpayers; discounts and penalties.
The Tax Collector shall give notice to the taxpayer of the amount of per
capita tax due under this article at the same time and in the same manner
as provided by the Local Tax Collection Law of 1945, as amended and
supplemented. All taxpayers subject to the payment of per capita tax under
this article shall be entitled to a discount of 2%, from the amount of such
tax upon making payment of the whole amount thereof within two months
alter the date of the tax notice. All taxpayers who shall fail to make payment
of such tax charged against them for four months after the date of the tax
notice, shall be charted a penalty of 5%, which penalty shall be added to the
tax by the Tax Collector and be collected by him.
§ 240-15. Property owners to provide list of names. [Added
12-26-1984 by Ord. No. 880]
Within 30 days of receipt of notice, each property owner or his agent
shall furnish the names of all residents and/or tenants of his property. This
information shall be on a form supplied by the Borough or may be requested
by the Tax Collector.
§ 240-16. List of persons subject to tax; addition of names.
The Borough Council shall keep and maintain a list of residents and
inhabitants subject to such tax and the issuance of such list to the Tax
§ 240-12 JUNKYARDS § 240-16
170:577
Collector shall constitute his warrant for the collection of the per capita tax
hereby levied and assessed. In case the Tax Collector shall at any time find
within the Borough of Catasauqua any resident or inhabitant above the age
of 21 years whose name does not appear upon said list, he shall report the
name of such person forthwith to the Borough Council who shall add the
same to such list whereupon the Tax Collector shall assess this per capita
tax against such person and proceed to collect the same.
§ 240-17. Authority of Tax Collector; applicability of statute.
The Tax Collector shall have power to collect said tax by distress, shall have
power and authority to demand and receive said tax from the employer of
any person owing per capita tax, or whose wife owes any per capita tax,
shall remit such tax to the Borough Treasurer by separate statement at the
same time as other taxes are remitted to the Borough, shall allow discounts
and add penalties, and generally have all rights and authority conferred
upon tax collectors by the Local Tax Collection Law of 1945, as amended
and supplemented.
§ 240-18. Violations and penalties. [Added 12-26-1984 by Ord. No.
880; amended 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1288]
Anyone violating any provision of this article, as amended, shall be guilty of
a summary offense with a penalty of a fine of up to $300 ($50 minimum) and/
or imprisonment up to 90 days in jail. Any person found guilty of violating
an ordinance shall be assessed court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees
incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings.
§ 240-16 CATASAUQUA CODE § 240-18
170:578
ARTICLE IV
Per Capita Tax Exemption
[Adopted 4-2-1984 by Res. No. 24-84 (Ch. XVII, Sec. 46, of the 1962
Code)]
§ 240-19. Persons exempted from paying tax.
A. All persons meeting the qualification set forth below, upon making
proper and timely application therefor, shall be entitled to be
exonerated and exempted from paying the per capita tax of the Borough
of Catasauqua.
B. The qualification for eligibility to be exonerated follows:
(1) Total income:
(a) Single persons not to exceed $5,000 per year.
(b) Married couples not to exceed $8,000 per year.
(2) NOTE: Total income includes income from all sources including
social security, pensions, disability, interest from savings, stocks,
bonds, and all securities, as well as any income from employment.
C. The form to be used for applying for exoneration shall follow the format
of that which is attached hereto and marked as "Exhibit A."153
D. On or prior to March 31 of the year following the year in which
exoneration is applied for, the Tax Collector shall submit to Borough
Council a listing of those persons eligible for exoneration. Council shall
approve the exonerations by resolution.
E. Applications for exoneration must be filed yearly for exoneration from
the then-current year's per capita tax.
153. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 240-19 JUNKYARDS § 240-19
170:579

ARTICLE V
Real Estate Tax Penalty
[Adopted 7-10-1978 by Ord. No. 765 (Ch. XVII, Part 5, of the 1962
Code)]
§ 240-20. Penalty for delinquent payment.
The Tax Collector of real estate taxes for the Borough of Catasauqua,
County of Lehigh, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, shall, commencing with
the taxable year beginning January 1, 1979, for real property taxes, charge
a penalty of 10% on all taxpayers who shall fail to make payment of any
such taxes aforesaid charged against them for four months after the date of
the tax notice; said penalty shall be added to the taxes by the Tax Collector
aforesaid and shall be collected by such Tax Collector.
§ 240-21. When effective.
The penalty hereby imposed directed to be collected shall become effective
upon all such real property taxes, aforesaid, commencing with the taxable
year beginning January 1, 1979.
§ 240-22. Continuation.
This article shall become effective 30 days after enactment and shall remain
effective for all taxable years beginning with the 1979 tax year.
§ 240-20 JUNKYARDS § 240-22
170:581

ARTICLE VI
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 4-4-1988 by Ord. No. 928 (Ch. XVII, Part 2, of the 1962
Code)]
§ 240-23. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of
Borough of Catasauqua."
§ 240-24. Authority.
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or interest in real estate situated within the
Borough of Catasauqua, regardless of where the documents making the
transfer are made, executed or delivered, or where the actual settlements
on such transfer took place, as authorized by Article XI-D, "Local Real
Estate Transfer Tax," 72 P.S. § 8101 et seq.
§ 240-25. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Catasauqua, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of this
commonwealth, the United States or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title of
real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not
pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has
been paid or any cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding 30 years, or instruments which solely grant,
vest or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also include
a declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording under
§ 240-24.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of its
assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each
class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business or agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
§ 240-23 JUNKYARDS § 240-25
170:583
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendents of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing, and the estate of any of the
foregoing. Individuals related by the half-blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they were related by the whole-blood.
PERSON — Every natural person, association, or corporation. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or
both. The term "person" as applied to associations, shall include the
responsible members or general partners thereof, and as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or
more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and
which:
Recreational activities such as, but not limited to, hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing;
A.
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities;
B.
C. Fur farming;
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations; or
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
All lands, tenements or hereditaments within this Borough, including
without limitation, buildings, structures, fixtures, mines, minerals, oil,
gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower boundaries, trees
and other improvements, immovables or interests which by custom,
usage or law pass with a conveyance of land, but excluding permanently
attached machinery and equipment in an industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or
disposition of real estate; or
A.
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets
which are freely transferable and actively traded on an established
market.
B.
§ 240-25 CATASAUQUA CODE § 240-25
170:584
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
years, including without limitation an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold; or
A.
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including without limitation a leasehold interest or
possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term of
30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity.
B.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents, or a
commensurate part thereof where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against real estate;
provided that where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the "value" thereof shall be determined from the price
set forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale;
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, any exchange of properties, or the real estate
of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local
real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio factor developed
by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue for Pennsylvania realty
transfer tax base calculations;
B.
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate, the value of
which is not determinable under Subsection A or B, the actual monetary
worth of such interest; or
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor of a related
D.
§ 240-25 JUNKYARDS § 240-25
170:585
§ 240-26. Imposition of tax; interest.
§ 240-27. Exempt parties.
The United States, the commonwealth or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax
imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
§ 240-28. Excluded transactions.
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.
A. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording, shall be
subject to pay for and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof, a
tax at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate represented by such
document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the
document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of
such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
B. The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the recorder of deeds whereon
the date of the payment of the tax, amount of the tax and the signature
of the collecting agent shall be set forth.
C. It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of the tax imposed
herein on a person or transfer shall not exceed the limitations
prescribed in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965,
P.L. 1257, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq., so that if any other political subdivision
shall impose or hereafter shall impose such tax on the same person or
transfer then the tax levied by the Council of the Borough of
Catasauqua under the authority of that Act shall during the time such
duplication of the tax exists, except as hereinafter otherwise provided,
be 1/2 rate of the rate and such 1/2 shall become effective without any
action on the part of the Council of the Borough of Catasauqua
provided, however, that the Borough of Catasauqua and any other
political subdivision which impose such tax on the same person or
transfer may agree that, instead of limiting their respective rates to 1/2
of the rate herein provided, they will impose respectively different
rates, the total of which shall not exceed the maximum rate permitted
under "The Local Tax Enabling Act."
D. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate in
effect at the time the tax is due shall be added and collected.
A. The tax imposed by § 240-26 shall not be imposed upon:
§ 240-25 CATASAUQUA CODE § 240-28
170:586
(1) A transfer to the commonwealth, or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions, by gift, dedication or deed in lieu
of condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings, or a reconveyance by the condemning
body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the time
of condemnation which reconveyance may include property line
adjustments provided said reconveyance is made within one year
from the date of condemnation.
(2) A document which the Borough of Catasauqua is prohibited from
taxing under the Constitution or statutes of the United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, township, school
district or county of a tax delinquent property at sheriff sale or tax
claim bureau sale.
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend
or limit existing record legal title or interest.
(5) A transfer or division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in
value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
(6) A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided the property or interest therein subject to such transfer
was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife prior to
the granting of the final decree in divorce, between parent and
child or the spouse of such child, between brother or sister or
spouse of a brother or sister, and between a grandparent and
grandchild or the spouse of such grandchild, except that a
subsequent transfer by the grantee within one year shall be subject
to tax as if the grantor were making such transfer.
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are
contingent or specifically named. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the recorder of deeds is presented with a copy of
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries.
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
§ 240-28 JUNKYARDS § 240-28
170:587
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
(11) A transfer (i) for no or nominal actual consideration between
principal and agent or straw party; or (ii) from or to an agent or
straw party where, if the agent or straw party were his principal, no
tax would be imposed under this article. Where the document by
which title is acquired by a grantee or statement of value fails to set
forth that the property was acquired by the grantee from, or for the
benefit of, his principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the
property is the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if
the grantee claims an exemption from taxation under this clause.
(12) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the department reasonably determines that the
primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is
avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.
(13) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of
the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more than two years.
(14) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt of the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
(15) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if: (i) the
grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary purpose
of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding, processing,
publishing, research and development, transportation, energy
conversion, energy production, pollution control, warehousing or
agriculture; and (ii) the agency or authority has the full ownership
interest in the real estate transferred.
(16) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
(17) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
is not being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial
purposes.
§ 240-28 CATASAUQUA CODE § 240-28
170:588
§ 240-29. Documents relating to associations or corporations.
Except as otherwise provided in § 240-28, documents which make, confirm
or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between
associations or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or
stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this section,
corporations and associations are entities separate from their members,
partners, stockholders and shareholders.
§ 240-30. Acquired company.
(18) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax-exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954
[68A Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)], and which has as its primary
purpose preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic,
agricultural or open space opportunities.
(19) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
(20) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
(21) A transaction wherein the tax is $1 or less.
(22) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the Statement of
Value. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of
Value may be submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural
gas or minerals, the Statement of Value may be limited to an
explanation of the reason such document is not subject to tax under this
article.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change
does not affect the continuity of the company; and of itself or together
with prior changes has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly,
90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a
period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this article.
§ 240-28 JUNKYARDS § 240-30
170:589
§ 240-31. Credits against tax.
§ 240-32. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
§ 240-33. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid, and have priority out of the
proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made except the state realty transfer tax, and the sheriff, or other
C. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the recorder of each county in
which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and
recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Declaration of Acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as a consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given
the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of the tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount of tax due, no refund or carryover credit shall be
allowed.
§ 240-30 CATASAUQUA CODE § 240-33
170:590
officer, conducting said sale, shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the
first moneys paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale
are insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be
liable for the remaining tax.
§ 240-34. Duties of recorder of deeds.
§ 240-35. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the recorder of deeds for
recording, shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof, or shall be accompanied by a statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value
thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under
this article. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of
Value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt
from taxation based on family relationship. Other documents presented
for the affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy of
the document and statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 240-36. Unlawful acts; violations and penalties.
A. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by Act of July 7, 1983, (P.L.
40, No. 21), the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for the
local realty transfer tax, including any amount payable to the Borough
of Catasauqua based on a redetermination of the amount of tax due by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of the Pennsylvania realty transfer
tax, without compensation from the Borough of Catasauqua.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of the taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the Recorder shall not
accept for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
C. On or before the 10th of each month, the Recorder shall pay over to the
Borough of Catasauqua all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2%
for use of the county, together with a report containing the information
as is required by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting
collections of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The 2% commission
shall be paid to the county.
D. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Recorder shall rerecord the deed
or record the additional realty transfer tax form only when both the
state and local amounts and a rerecording or recording fee has been
tendered.
§ 240-33 JUNKYARDS § 240-36
170:591
§ 240-37. Lien.
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements or hereditaments, or any interest therein, lying, being situated,
wholly or in part within the boundaries of the Borough of Catasauqua,
which lands, tenements, hereditaments or interest therein, are described
in or conveyed by or transferred by the deed which is the subject of the
tax imposed, assessed and levied by this article, said lien to begin at the
time when the tax under this article is due and payable, and continue until
discharged by payment, or in accordance with the law, and the solicitor
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Make, execute, deliver, accept or present for recording or cause to
be made, executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording
any document, without the full amount of tax thereon being duly
paid.
(2) Make use of any documentary stamp to denote payment of any tax
imposed by this article without cancelling such stamp as required
by this article or as prescribed by the Borough.
(3) Fail, neglect or refuse to comply with or violate the rules and
regulations prescribed, adopted and promulgated by the Borough
under the provisions of this article.
(4) Fraudulently cut, tear or remove from a document any
documentary stamp.
(5) Fraudulently affix to any document upon which tax is imposed by
this article any documentary stamp which has been cut, torn or
removed from any other document upon which tax is imposed by
this article or any other documentary stamp of insufficient value, or
any forged or counterfeited stamp, or any impression of any forged
or counterfeited stamp, dye, plate or other article.
(6) Knowingly have in his possession any altered or restored
documentary stamp which has been removed from any document
upon which tax is imposed by this article.
(7) Knowingly or willfully prepare, keep, sell, offer for sale, or have in
his possession any forged or counterfeited documentary stamps.
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be liable
to a penalty not exceeding $100 for each offense, and further, shall be
required to pay the amount of the tax together with interest thereon as
provided in this article, and upon default in the payment of the same for
a period of 10 days, shall be subject to 30 days' imprisonment.
C. Any person found guilty of violating an ordinance shall be assessed
court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in
the enforcement proceedings. [Added 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1288]
§ 240-36 CATASAUQUA CODE § 240-37
170:592
is authorized to file a municipal or tax claim in the Court of Common
Pleas of Lehigh County, in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal
Claims and Liens Act of 1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., its supplements and
amendments.
§ 240-38. Enforcement.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character are
recovered.
§ 240-39. Regulations.
The Recorder of Deeds of Lehigh County is charged with enforcement and
collection of tax and is empowered to promulgate and enforce reasonable
regulations for enforcement and collection of the tax. The regulations which
have been promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue under
72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq. are incorporated into and made a part of this article.
§ 240-37 JUNKYARDS § 240-39
170:593

ARTICLE VII
Real Estate Tax Certifications
[Adopted 1-6-1992 by Ord. No. 977 (Ch. XVII, Part 6, of the 1962
Code)]
§ 240-40. Requests for certification.
All requests for tax certification shall be made in writing. The request shall
include the name of the current property owner, the property designation
as per the Lehigh County Tax Map, the required fee and a self-addressed,
stamped envelope for the return of the certification.
§ 240-41. Designated municipal official.
The municipal official empowered to provide certifications and collect the
required fee shall be the locally elected Tax Collector.
§ 240-42. Form of certification.
The requested tax certification shall be provided on a form approved by
the Borough Council. Tax certifications shall be provided for the current
calendar year only. Previous years' taxes may be verified only by the Tax
Claim Bureau of Lehigh County.
§ 240-43. Fee.154
The fee charged for a tax certification shall be as set from time to time
by resolution of Borough Council.155 The fee officially established shall
be collected by the designated municipal official and retained by that
individual as compensation for providing the additional service tax
certification.
154. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
155. Editor's Note: See Ch. A285, Fees.
§ 240-40 JUNKYARDS § 240-43
170:595

ARTICLE VIII
Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights
[Adopted 1-4-1999 by Res. No. 3-99 (Ch. XVII, Part 7, of the 1962
Code)]
§ 240-44. Rules and regulations.
The rules and regulations attached hereto as Attachment 1 and
incorporated herein are hereby approved and adopted.156
§ 240-45. Disclosure statement.
The disclosure statement, substantially in the form set forth in Attachment
2 attached hereto and incorporated herein, is hereby approved and
adopted.157
§ 240-46. Petition for appeal and refund.
The form of petition for appeal and refund, substantially in the form set
forth in Attachment 3 attached hereto and incorporated herein, is hereby
approved and adopted.158
§ 240-47. Duties of Local Tax Office Appeals Board.
The Borough of Catasauqua hereby determines that administrative appeal
procedures relating to petitions for appeal and refund submitted by
taxpayers in connection with the assessment, determination or refund of
an eligible tax under the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights (LTBR) shall be
undertaken by the Local Tax Office Appeals Board.
§ 240-48. Appeals Board.
The Borough of Catasauqua hereby appoints the Borough Treasurer and the
General Government Committee Chairman to the Appeals Board. A third
member of the Appeals Board shall be appointed by Borough Council and
shall serve a term of three years, the initial term expiring December 31,
2001.
§ 240-49. Administrative appeal procedures.
The administrative appeal procedures set forth in the rules and regulations
and substantially in the form set forth in Schedule 4, attached hereto and
incorporated herein, are hereby approved and adopted.159
156. Editor's Note: Attachment 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
157. Editor's Note: Attachment 2 is included at the end of this chapter.
158. Editor's Note: Attachment 3 is included at the end of this chapter.
159. Editor's Note: Schedule 4 is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 240-44 JUNKYARDS § 240-49
170:597

ARTICLE IX
Real Estate Tax Rate
[Adopted 12-10-2018 by Ord. No. 1377160]
§ 240-50. Tax rate established.
A tax be and the same is hereby levied on all real estate within said Borough
subject to taxation for Borough purposes for fiscal year 2019 as follows:
A. Tax rate for general Borough purposes: the sum of 6.10 mills on each
dollar of assessed valuation;
B. Making a total tax rate for all Borough purposes of 6.10 mills.
160. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. IX, Real Estate Tax Rate,
adopted 12-20-2017 by Ord. No. 1362.
§ 240-50 JUNKYARDS § 240-50
170:599

ARTICLE X
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 1219161]
§ 240-51. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
COLLECTOR — The person, public employee or private agency designated
by the political subdivision to collect and administer the tax herein imposed.
DCED — The Department of Community and Economic Development of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EARNED INCOME — Compensation as this term is defined in § 13 (relating
to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of December
31, 1965, P.L. 1257, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as amended.
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, limited-liability
corporation, limited-liability partnership, corporation, governmental body,
agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation basis, including a self-employed person.
HE, HIS or HIM — Indicates the singular and plural number, as well as
male, female and neuter genders.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation,
trade or profession within the corporate limits of the political subdivision.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession, or other activity, as this term is defined in § 13 (relating to
earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of December
31, 1965, P.L. 1257, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as amended.
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, carried on or
performed within the corporate limits of the political subdivision for which
compensation is charged or received; whether by means of salary, wages,
commission or fees for services rendered.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION — The area within the corporate limits of the
Borough of Catasauqua.
TAX — The local services tax at the rate fixed in § 240-52 of this article.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 until December 31 in any year; a
calendar year.
161. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. X, Emergency and Municipal
Services Tax, adopted 1-13-2005 by Ord. No. 1180.
§ 240-51 JUNKYARDS § 240-52
170:601
§ 240-52. Levy of tax.
For specific revenue purposes, an annual tax is hereby levied and assessed,
commencing January 1, 2008, upon the privilege of engaging in an
occupation with a primary place of employment within the Borough of
Catasauqua during the tax year. Each natural person who exercises such
privilege for any length of time during any tax year shall pay the tax for that
year in the amount of $52, assessed on a pro rata basis, in accordance with
the provisions of this article. This tax may be used solely for the following
purposes as the same may be allocated by the Borough of Catasauqua
from time to time: emergency services, which shall include emergency
medical services, police services and/or fire services; road construction and/
or maintenance; reduction of property taxes; or property tax relief through
implementation of a homestead and farmstead exclusion in accordance with
53 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 85, Subchapter F (relating to homestead property
exclusion). The political subdivision shall use no less than 25% of the funds
derived from the tax for emergency services. This tax is in addition to
all other taxes of any kind or nature heretofore levied by the political
subdivision. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each
calendar year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within
which a person may be employed.
§ 240-52.1. Exemption and refunds.
A. Exemption. Any person whose total earned income and net profits from
all sources within the political subdivision is less than $12,000 for any
calendar year in which the tax is levied is exempt from the payment of
the tax for that calendar year. In addition, the following persons are
exempt from payment of the tax:
(1) Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which
the United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or its
successor to be a total one-hundred-percent disability.
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. For the purposes of this Subsection A(2), "reserve
component of the armed forces" shall mean the United States Army
Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air
Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
B. Procedure to claim exemption.
(1) A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax
may annually file an exemption certificate with the political
§ 240-52 CATASAUQUA CODE § 240-52.1
170:602
subdivision and with the person's employer affirming that the
person reasonably expects to receive earned income and net profits
from all sources within the political subdivision of less than
$12,000 in the calendar year for which the exemption certificate is
filed. In the event the political subdivision utilizes a tax collection
officer, it shall provide a copy of the exemption certificate to that
officer. The exemption certificate shall have attached to it a copy
of all the employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms from employment
within the political subdivision for the year prior to the fiscal year
for which the employee is requesting to be exempted from the
tax. Upon receipt of the exemption certificate and until otherwise
instructed by the political subdivision or except as required by
Subsection B(2), the employer shall not withhold the tax from the
person during the calendar year or the remainder of the calendar
year for which the exemption certificate applies. Employers shall
ensure that the exemption certificate forms are readily available to
employees at all times and shall furnish each new employee with a
form at the time of hiring. The exemption certificate form shall be
the uniform form provided by the political subdivision.
(2) With respect to a person who claimed an exemption for a given
calendar year from the tax, upon notification to an employer by the
person or by the political subdivision that the person has received
earned income and net profits from all sources within the political
subdivision equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or
that the person is otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for that
calendar year, or upon an employer's payment to the person of
earned income within the municipality in an amount equal to or in
excess of $12,000 in that calendar year, an employer shall withhold
the local services tax from the person under Subsection B(3).
(3) If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year
from the tax becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year under
Subsection B(2), the employer shall withhold the tax for the
remainder of that calendar year. The employer shall withhold from
the person, for the first payroll period after receipt of the
notification under Subsection B(2), a lump sum equal to the amount
of tax that was not withheld from the person due to the exemption
claimed by the person under this subsection, plus the per-payroll
amount due for that first payroll period. The amount of tax withheld
per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in that
calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for other
employees. In the event the employment of a person subject to
withholding of the tax under this Subsection B(3) is subsequently
severed in that calendar year, the person shall be liable for any
outstanding balance of tax due, and the political subdivision may
pursue collection under this article.
(4) Except as provided in Subsection B(2), it is the intent of this
subsection that employers shall not be responsible for investigating
§ 240-52.1 JUNKYARDS § 240-52.1
170:603
§ 240-53. Duty of employers to collect.
exemption certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or
exempting any employee from the local services tax.
C. Refunds. The Borough Manager, in consultation with the Collector and
DCED, shall establish procedures for the processing of refund claims
for any tax paid by any person who is eligible for exemption, which
procedures shall be in accord with provisions of the General Municipal
Law relating to refunds of overpayments and interest on overpayments.
Refunds made within 75 days of a refund request or 75 days after the
last day the employer is required to remit the tax for the last quarter of
the calendar year, whichever is later, shall not be subject to interest. No
refunds shall be made for amounts overpaid in a calendar year that do
not exceed $1. The Borough Manager or the Collector shall determine
eligibility for exemption and provide refunds to exempt persons.
A. Each employer within the political subdivision, as well as those
employers situated outside the political subdivision but who engage in
business within the political subdivision, is hereby charged with the
duty of collecting the tax from each of his employees engaged by him or
performing for him within the political subdivision and making a return
and payment thereof to the Collector. Further, each employer is hereby
authorized to deduct this tax for each employee in his or her employ,
whether said employee is paid by salary, wage or commission and
whether or not all such services are performed within the political
subdivision.
B. A person subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro rata
share of the tax for each payroll period in which the person is engaging
in an occupation. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person
for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the rate of the tax
levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods
established by the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of
determining the pro rata share, an employer shall round down the
amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest onehundredth
of a dollar. Collection of the tax shall be made on a payrollperiod
basis for each payroll period in which the person is engaging in
an occupation, except as provided in Subsection D of this section. For
purposes of this Subsection B, "combined rate" shall mean the
aggregate annual rate of the tax levied by the school district and the
municipality.
C. No person shall be subject to the payment of the local services tax by
more than one political subdivision during each payroll period.
D. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the tax if the employee provides a recent pay statement
from a principal employer that includes the name of the employer, the
length of the payroll period and the amount of the tax withheld and a
statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
§ 240-52.1 CATASAUQUA CODE § 240-53
170:604
§ 240-54. Returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the
tax on forms to be supplied to the employer by the Collector. If an employer
fails to file the return and pay the tax, whether or not the employer makes
collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him or her
to an employee, except as provided hereafter in this article, the employer
shall be responsible for the payment of the tax in full as though the tax had
been originally levied against the employer.
§ 240-55. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
In each tax year, each employer shall use his or her employment records to
determine the number of employees from whom such tax shall be deducted
and paid over to the Collector on or before the 13th day following the end
of each calendar quarter of each such tax year.
§ 240-56. Self-employed individuals.
Each self-employed individual who performs services of any type or kind
or engages in any occupation or profession within a primary place of
employment within the political subdivision shall be required to comply with
this article and pay the pro rata portion of the tax due to the Collector on or
before the 13th day following the end of each quarter.
§ 240-57. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation or
employed in more than one political subdivision.
employee's principal employer and the employee will notify other
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two
weeks of its occurrence. The employee's statement shall be provided on
the form approved by DCED.
E. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person may be employed. The political subdivision shall provide a
taxpayer a receipt of payment upon request by the taxpayer.
F. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for the
payment of the withheld tax money to the political subdivision if the
failure to withhold taxes arises from incorrect information submitted by
the employee as to the employee's place or places of employment, the
employee's principal office or where the employee is principally
employed. Further, an employer shall not be liable for payment of the
local services tax in an amount exceeding the amount withheld by the
employer if the employer complies with the provisions of Subsection B
of § 240-52.1 of this article and this section and remits the amount so
withheld in accordance with this article.
G. Employers shall be required to remit the local services taxes 30 days
after the end of each quarter of a calendar year.
§ 240-53 JUNKYARDS § 240-57
170:605
§ 240-58. Nonresidents subject to tax.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places
of business outside of the political subdivision but who perform services
of any type or kind or engage in any occupation or profession within the
political subdivision do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject
themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under
this article with the same force and effect as though they were residents of
the political subdivision. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation
within the political subdivision and an employee of a nonresidential
employer may, for the purpose of this article, be considered a self-employed
person, and in the event his or her tax is not paid, the political subdivision
shall have the option of proceeding against either the employer or employee
for the collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 240-59. Administration of tax.
A. The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the
person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. In the
event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is,
concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires the person
working in more than one political subdivision during a payroll period,
the priority of claim to collect the local services tax shall be in the
following order:
(1) First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his or
her principal office or is principally employed;
(2) Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and
works if the tax is levied by that political subdivision;
(3) Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and
which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home.
B. In case of dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that calendar
year declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment constitutes
prima facie certification of payment to all other political subdivisions.
A. The Collector shall be appointed by resolution of the political
subdivision. It shall be the duty of the Collector to accept and receive
payments of this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the amount
received by him from each employer or self-employed person, together
with the date the tax was received.
B. The Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby charged and empowered,
subject to municipal approval, to prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules
and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration
and enforcement of this article, including provisions for the
examination of payroll records of any employer subject to this article,
the examination and correction of any return made in compliance with
§ 240-57 CATASAUQUA CODE § 240-59
170:606
§ 240-60. Suits for collection.
§ 240-61. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord. No.
1288]
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article, or whoever refuses inspection of the books, records or accounts
in his or her custody and control setting forth the number of employees
subject to this tax who are in his or her employment, or whoever fails
or refuses to file any return required by this article shall be guilty of a
violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of
not more than $600 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days. The
action to enforce the penalty herein prescribed may be instituted against
any person in charge of the business of any employer who shall have failed
or who refuses to file a return required by this article. Any person found
guilty of violating an ordinance shall be assessed court costs and reasonable
attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings.
§ 240-62. Interpretation.
this article and any payment alleged or found to be incorrect or as to
which overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any person
aggrieved by any decision of the Collector shall have the right to appeal
consistent with the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights under Act 50 of 1998
(municipalities may detail their appeal processes).
C. The Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax
due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the
Collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due dates above set forth, the Collector may sue for the
recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article, together with
interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
on the amount of such tax shall be calculated beginning with the due
date of the tax and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat rate of such
tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery of
this tax or other appropriate remedy undertaken, the individual liable
therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of
collection.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
political subdivision to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any
occupation not within the taxing power of the political subdivision
under the Constitution of the United States and the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 240-59 JUNKYARDS § 240-62
170:607
B. If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of
the tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
§ 240-62 CATASAUQUA CODE § 240-62
170:608
ARTICLE XI
Delinquent Taxes
[Adopted 2-7-2005 by Res. No. 8-05]
§ 240-63. Approval and adoption of schedule.
The Borough of Catasauqua, Lehigh County, approves and adopts the Cost
of Collection Schedule attached hereto and made apart of this article to
be imposed by Berkheimer upon any taxpayer whose taxes are or become
delinquent and/or remain due and unpaid.162
§ 240-64. Retention by collector.
Berkheimer is authorized to retain said costs of collection set forth in the
attached schedule incurred in recovering delinquent taxes and assessed to
the delinquent taxpayer as allowed by law.
162. Editor's Note: Said cost of Collection Schedule is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 240-63 JUNKYARDS § 240-64
170:609
Chapter 245
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 115.
Uniform codes — See Ch. 130.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 195.
Public property — See Ch. 205.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 230.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
235.
§ 245-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Catasauqua.
COMMISSION — The Shade Tree Commission of the Borough of
Catasauqua.
NOTICE — A written notification to any person from the Commission to
plant, prune, remove or otherwise take action with respect to a shade tree.
PARK TREES — Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in
public parks having individual names and all areas owned by the Borough
or to which the public has free access as a park.
PERMIT — Written permission to any person from the Commission to
perform some act with respect to a shade tree.
PERSON — Refers to any natural person, firm, unincorporated association,
partnership or corporation.
PUBLIC HIGHWAY — Includes the vehicular cartway and the right-of-way
attendant thereto.
STREET AND/OR SHADE TREE — Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other
woody vegetation on land lying in the Borough right-of-way lines on either
side of all streets, avenues, alleys or ways within the Borough of
Catasauqua.
§ 245-2. Shade Tree Commission established.
There is hereby created and established a Shade Tree Commission for
the Borough of Catasauqua, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, which shall
consist of three members, citizens and residents of the Borough, who shall
be appointed by the Borough Council.
A. As of passage of this subsection, the Shade Tree Commission is
increased to consist of five members, citizens and residents of the
§ 240-64 CATASAUQUA CODE § 245-2
170:610
§ 245-3. Term of office of Commission members. [Amended
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 1301]
The term of the three persons appointed to the Commission shall be for
five years. With the increase in the membership of the Commission from
three members to five members, in 2014, the term of the first new appointee
(fourth member) shall be for a term expiring June 1, 2019. The term of
the second appointee (fifth member) shall be for a term expiring June
1, 2016. Since the Commission is already in existence and under prior
ordinances, the terms of the members were for a period of three years, the
next member's term to expire shall be reappointed for a term of three years,
the succeeding member shall be appointed for a term of four years, and
thereafter, the Commissioner shall be appointed for a term of five years.
On the expiration of the term of any Commissioner, a successor shall be
appointed by Council to serve for a term of five years. Any vacancies in
office of the Commissioner shall be filled by Council for the unexpired term.
§ 245-4. Compensation of Commission.
Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.
§ 245-5. Duties and responsibilities of Commission.
§ 245-6. Organization and operation of Commission.
The Commission shall choose its own officers, make its own administrative
rules and regulations and keep "minutes" of its proceedings. A majority of
the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business
Borough, who shall be appointed by Borough Council. [Added
6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 1301]
A. The Commission shall have the exclusive custody and control of the
shade trees in the Borough, and is hereby authorized to plant, remove,
maintain and protect shade trees on the streets and highways in the
Borough. The Commission shall also have authority as hereinafter set
forth concerning park trees.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the Commission to study, investigate,
counsel and develop and/or update annually, and administer a written
plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal
or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other
public areas. Such plan will be presented annually to the Borough
Council and upon their acceptance and approval shall constitute the
official comprehensive Borough tree plan for the Borough of
Catasauqua, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
C. The Commission, when requested by Borough Council, shall consider,
investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any special
matter of question coming within the scope of its work.
§ 245-2 JUNKYARDS § 245-7
170:611
§ 245-7. General regulations for street/park trees.
A. No person shall plant, prune or remove a street/park tree without first
obtaining a permit from the Shade Tree Commission. The permit shall
state the species of the tree to be pruned, removed or planted and its
location.
B. No person shall destroy, break, cut, scrape, paint, whitewash or in any
way deface, injure or interfere with the roots, trunk, bark, branches,
leaves, flowers or fruit of any street/park tree without written
permission of the Shade Tree Commission.
C. No person shall spray or otherwise treat any street/park tree which is
infected or infested with any parasite, disease or insect pest with a view
to the preservation of the tree from such disease or insects without the
permission of the Commission for the work to be done.
D. All street trees shall be kept trimmed on or over the street, sidewalk
and public alley of which they are located in accordance with §§ 245-13,
245-14 and 245-15. Street trees shall be trimmed so that no portion of
any growing shrub or other woody plants (i.e., hedges) shall encroach
to within 12 inches of any curbline of any property whereat there is no
sidewalk or encroach over the sidewalk area where sidewalk has been
installed. Any encroachment of over six inches over the sidewalk, or
within 12 inches of the curbline where there is no sidewalk, shall
constitute a violation of these regulations.
E. No person shall attach any wire insulator, or other device for holding
such wire, or any other item, document, flier or material to any street/
park tree. Exception: Newly planted trees may be guyed to provide
stability during the first growing season.
F. All other wires shall be securely fastened so as not to come in contact
with said trees or any part thereof, nor shall any person direct or allow
their employees to climb said trees without the written permission of
the Commission. The use of implements with sharp, penetrating points,
i.e., nails, staples, bolts, etc., is positively prohibited.
G. No person shall cause, authorize or permit any oil, liquid dye or any
other substance deleterious to tree life to lie, leak, pour, flow or drop on
or into the soil about the base of any street/park tree.
H. No person shall permit any escape of gas so as to injure any street/park
tree. Any gas leak must immediately be repaired in such a manner as to
minimize any chance of recurrence.
I. No tight guards or any other device shall be attached to any street/park
tree without the permission of the Commission. No guard or device
approved by the Commission and intended for the protection of a street/
park tree shall be removed or damaged.
§ 245-7 CATASAUQUA CODE § 245-7
170:612
§ 245-8. Street tree species to be planted.
The following list constitutes the official street tree species for the Borough
of Catasauqua, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. No species other than
those included in this list may be planted as street trees without the written
permission of the Commission. A permit must be secured before planting
in accordance with § 245-18B of these regulations. The Commission may
refuse to issue a permit to plant any species of tree which in its opinion is
not suited to the location. This list of trees may be modified by resolution of
the Commission.
Small Trees
(under 30 feet)
Acer campestre - Hedge maple (Queen Elizabeth is a good cultivar)
Acer tataricum - Tatarian maple
Amelanchier laevis -"Cumulus" or "Majestic" - Apple serviceberry
Amelanchier x grandiflora - Serviceberry (many cultivars)
Crataegus crus-galli "Inermis" - Thornless cockspur hawthorn
Crataegus lavallei - Lavalle hawthorn
Crataegus phaenopyrum "Princeton Sentry"- Washington hawthorn
Maackia amurensis - Amur maackia
Malus cultivars - Crabapples (disease resistance emphasized) "Adams,"
"Centurion," "Donald Wyman," "Harvest Gold," "Prairifire," "Professor
Spenger," "Red Jewel," "Robinson," "Sentinel," "Spring Snow," "Sugar
Tyme," "Strawberry Parfait"
Malus floribunda - Japanese flowering crabapple
Malus sieboldii x zumi "Calocarpa" - Zumi crabapple
Prunus "Accolade" - flowering cherry
Prunus sariaentii "Columnar" - Sargent cherry
Prunus serrulata "Amanogawa," "Kwanzan" - Japanese flowering cherry
J. In the erection, alteration, repair or removal of any building or
structure, the owner thereof shall be responsible for the placing of such
guards around all street/park trees as shall effectually prevent injury to
them. No stories, brick, cement or any other building materials shall be
placed in any manner which may impede the free passage of air and
water to the roots of a street/park tree.
K. No person shall attach any rope, wire, sign, or other object to any
street/park tree guard without the written permission of the
Commission.
L. Any of the regulations outlined above may be waived by the
Commission when it is necessary to perform the regulated actions to
protect or preserve life or property.
§ 245-7 JUNKYARDS § 245-8
170:613
Small Trees
(under 30 feet)
Prunus virginiana "Shubert" - Shubert Chokecherry
Syringa reticulata "Summer Snow" or "Regent," "Ivory Silk" - Japanese
tree lilac
Medium Trees
(30 feet to 45 feet)
Carpinus betulus - European hornbeam
Carpinus betulus "Fastigiata" - Upright european hornbeam
Carpinus caroliniana - American hornbeam
Koelreuteria paniculata - Golden rain tree
Phelodendron amurense "Macho" - Amur cork tree (male trees are
seedless)
Prunus x yedoensis - Yoshino cherry
Pyrus calleryana cultivars - Callery pear (stay away from "Bradford"!)
"Aristocrat," "Capital," "Chanticleer" or "Cleveland Select," "Red Spire,"
and "Whitehouse" have better branching structure
Quercus acutissima - Sawtooth oak
Sorbus alnifolia - Korean mountain ash
Sorbus Aucuparia - European mountain ash
Large Trees
(over 45 feet)
Acer rubrum - Red maple (own rooted plants best - many cultivars)
Celtis laevigata "All Seasons" - Sugar hackberry
Celtis occidentalis "Prairie Pride" or "Magnifica" - Hackberry
Corylus colurna - Turkish Filbert
Eucommia ulmoides - Hardy rubber tree
Fraxinus americana - White ash (many cultivars)
Fraxinus oennsylvanica - Green ash cultivars (many are seedless)
Gingko biloba - Gingko (male selections only)
Gleditsia triacanthos "Shademaster" or other cultivars - Honeylocust
Gymnocladus dioicus - Kentucky coffee tree (male selections only)
Liquidambar styraciflua - Sweet gum ("Rotundifolia" is seedless)
Metasequoia glyptostroboides - Dawn redwood
Nyssa sylvatica - Black gum
Platanus x acerifolia - London plane tree
§ 245-8 CATASAUQUA CODE § 245-8
170:614
Large Trees
(over 45 feet)
Quercus alba - White oak
Quercus bicolor - Swamp white oak
Quercus imbricaria - Shingle oak
Quercus palustris - Pin oak
Quercus phellos - Willow oak
Quercus robur "Pyramich" - Skymaster english oak
Quercus rubra - Red oak
Quercus shumardii - Shumard oak
Sophora japonica - Japanese scholar tree (cultivars "Halka" or "Regent")
Taxodium distichum - Bald cypress
Tilia americana "Wandell" - Legend american linden
Tilia americana "Redmond Linden" - Redmond linden
Tilia cordata - Little leaf linden cultivars
Tilia x euchlora - Crimean linden (ungrafted specimens)
Tilia tomentosa - Silver linden
Ulmus parvifolia - Lacebark elm ("Ohio," "Dynasty" or "Pathfinder")
Zelkova serrata "Village Green" or "Halka" - Zelkova
§ 245-9. Location and spacing.
§ 245-10. Distance from curb and sidewalk.
The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curblines and sidewalks
will be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in § 245-8
of this chapter, and no trees may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk
than the following: small trees, two feet; medium trees, three feet; and large
trees, four feet.
§ 245-11. Distance from street corners, stop signs and fireplugs.
No street tree shall be planted closer than 35 feet of any street corner,
measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curblines except
A. The Commission shall determine the species size class for each
location.
B. The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the three species
size classes listed in § 245-8 of this chapter and no trees may be planted
closer together than the following: small trees, 30 feet; medium trees,
40 feet; large trees, 50 feet; except in special plantings designed or
approved by a landscape architect.
§ 245-8 JUNKYARDS § 245-11
170:615
where a stop sign is placed, then no street tree shall be planted closer than
35 feet of any stop sign. No street tree shall be planted closer than 15 feet
of any fireplug.
§ 245-12. Utilities.
No street trees other than those species listed as small trees per ordinance
or resolution may be planted under or within 10 lateral feet of any overhead
utility wire, or over or within 10 lateral feet of any underground water line,
sewer line, transmission line or other utility.
§ 245-13. Public tree care.
§ 245-14. Tree topping.
It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm or Borough
department to top any street tree, park tree, or any other tree on public
property. "Topping" is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs
larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a
degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees
severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility
wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical,
may be exempted from this section at the determination of the Borough
Shade Tree Commission.
§ 245-15. Pruning and maintenance.
The clearance of space between the street and the overhanging branches
of the tree shall be 14 feet above the surface of the street continuing
completely around the circumference of the tree. Branches shall not
obstruct the proper spread of light from any street light or obstruct the
view of any sign, traffic control device or street intersection. Dead, broken
A. The Borough shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove
trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues,
lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to insure public
safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such
public grounds.
B. The Shade Tree Commission may remove, or cause or order to be
removed, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or
which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines,
gas lines, water lines or other public improvements, or is affected with
any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. This section does not prohibit
the planting of street trees by adjacent property owners providing that
the selection and location of said trees is in accordance with this
chapter.
C. The Shade Tree Commission may order removal of any tree which has
become overgrown and when the base of the trunk reaches the
curbline.
§ 245-11 CATASAUQUA CODE § 245-15
170:616
or decayed limbs must be removed so as not to constitute a menace to
the safety of the public. (Newly planted trees will be exempt from height
requirements in this section until the tree reaches maturity. Annual pruning
may be required at the request and recommendation of the Commission.)
The cost and expense of caring for such trees after having been planted
(except for removal) shall be borne by the Borough.
§ 245-16. Dead or diseased tree removal on private property.
§ 245-17. Removal of stumps.
All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of
the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface
of the ground.
§ 245-18. Notices and permits.
A. The Borough shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or
diseased trees on private property within the Borough, when such trees
constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or disease
which constitute a potential threat to other trees within the Borough.
B. The Shade Tree Commission will notify in writing the owners of such
trees. Removal shall be done by said owners at their expense within 60
days after the date of service of notice, unless exigent circumstances
require removal in a shorter period as determined by the Commission.
The above time frames may be extended by the Commission upon
request in writing by the owner, setting forth the reasons for the same.
In the event of failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the
Borough shall have the authority to remove such trees and charge the
cost of removal to the property owner in the form of a lien upon the
premises, and a claim therefor shall be filed and collected by the
Borough Solicitor in the same manner as municipal claims are filed and
collected.
A. Any person receiving a written notice from the Commission to perform
any of the actions requested in this chapter must conform to the notice
within the time specified on the notice. Failure to comply with the
notice will result in the work being done by the Commission at the
expense of the person receiving the notice. The entire cost of the work
performed shall be a lien upon the premises, and a claim therefor shall
be filed and collected by the Borough Solicitor in the same manner as
municipal claims are filed and collected.
B. Applications to the Commission for permission to plant a street tree
must state the species and the location of the tree to be planted. The
Commission may refuse to issue a permit which in its opinion violates
this chapter or is not suited for its location. Issued permits will state the
approved species and the approved location of the planting. The
Borough will mark the exact location where the tree(s) may be planted
§ 245-15 JUNKYARDS § 245-18
170:617
§ 245-19. Interference with Shade Tree Commission.
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the
Catasauqua Shade Tree Commission, or any of its agents, while engaging
in and about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or
removing of any street trees, park trees or trees on private grounds, as
authorized in this chapter.
§ 245-20. Arborists' license and bond. [Amended 11-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 1190]
It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business or
occupation of pruning, treating, or removing street or park trees within
the Borough without first applying for and procuring a license. The license
fee shall be as set from time to time by resolution of Borough Council;163
provided, however, that no license shall be required of any public service
company or Borough employee doing such work in pursuit of their public
service endeavors. Before any license shall be issued, each applicant shall
first file evidence of possession of liability insurance in the minimum
amounts of $50,000 for bodily injury and $100,000 property damage
indemnifying the Borough or any person injured or damages resulting from
the pursuit of such endeavors as herein described.
§ 245-21. Review by Borough Council.
The Borough Council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and
decisions of the Shade Tree Commission. Any person may appeal from any
ruling or order of the Shade Tree Commission to the Borough Council who
may hear the matter and make a final decision.
according to code. Any violation of any such conditions or limitations
shall be a violation of these regulations.
C. Upon completion of work, the applicant shall fill out the bottom section
of the permit and return the stub to the Shade Tree Commission.
D. There shall be no charge or fee for any of the permits required under
these regulations.
E. Whenever the Shade Tree Commission proposes to plant, transplant or
remove shade trees on any street, notice of the time and place of the
meeting at which such work is to be considered shall be given in one
newspaper of general circulation in the Borough once a week for two
weeks immediately preceding the time of the meeting. The notice shall
specify in detail the streets or portions upon which the trees are
proposed to be planted, replanted or removed.
163. Editor's Note: See Ch. A285, Fees.
§ 245-18 CATASAUQUA CODE § 245-22
170:618
§ 245-22. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord. No.
1288]
Any person who shall violate any of the forgoing regulations may, upon
conviction therefor before the appropriate authority, be sentenced to pay
a fine of $50 but not more than $300 for each and every violation and for
each tree concerned, and all costs of prosecution, and in addition thereto,
or in the alternative, where authorized by the forgoing regulations, charges
may be assessed against the owners of property and liens placed against
real estate of the offender and collected in the same manner as municipal
claims are collected. Any person found guilty of violating an ordinance shall
be assessed court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the
Borough in the enforcement proceedings.
§ 245-23. Payment of damages.
In the event of a shade tree being damaged, the Shade Tree Commission
may make a charge for treatment to the tree, plus, should the tree be
destroyed, all costs for removal and replacement of the tree, against the
person causing the damage to the said tree(s). The payment of damages as
set forth herein is in addition to the penalties set forth in § 245-22.
§ 245-24. Payment by owners; assessments and liens.
§ 245-25. Enforcement.
These regulations shall be enforced by the following parties: the Shade Tree
Commission in conjunction with the Code Enforcement Officer, the Mayor,
the Police Department, the Borough Manager and Borough Council.
Chapter 255
A. The cost of planting, transplanting or removing any shade trees in and
along the streets and highways in the Borough, of the necessary and
suitable guards, curbing or grading for the protection thereof, and of
the replacing of any pavement or sidewalk necessarily disturbed in the
execution of such work, shall be paid by the owner of the real estate
abutting that on which the work is done, unless the work is done under
grant. The amount each owner is to pay shall be ascertained and
certified by the Commission to Council and to the Borough Treasurer.
B. Upon the filing of the certificate with the Council, the Borough
Secretary shall cause 30 days' written notice to be given to every
person against whose property an assessment has been made. The
notice shall state the amount of the assessment, and the time and place
of payment, and shall be accompanied with a copy of the certificate. The
amount assessed against the real estate shall be a lien from the time of
the filing of the certificate with the Council, and if not paid within the
time designated in tile notice, a claim may be filed and collected by the
Borough Solicitor in the same manner as municipal claims are filed and
collected.
§ 245-22 JUNKYARDS § 245-25
170:619
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junkyards — See Ch. 170.
Solid waste — See Ch. 220.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 260.
Zoning — See Ch. 280.
§ 255-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the
meaning ascribed in this section as follows:
ABANDONED OR JUNKED VEHICLE — Any vehicle found on public or
private property not within a completely enclosed structure or building such
as a garage or accessory building which is secured against potential health
and safety hazards and is found to be either:
ANTIQUE MOTOR VEHICLE — A motor vehicle, but not a reproduction
thereof, manufactured more than 25 years prior to the current year, which
has been maintained in or restored to a condition which is substantially in
conformance with manufacturer's specification.
CLASSIC MOTOR VEHICLE — A motor vehicle, but not a reproduction
thereof, manufactured more than 10 years prior to the current year and
because of discontinued production and limited availability it is determined
by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation to be a model or make of
significant value to collectors or exhibitors, and which has been maintained
or restored to a condition which is substantially in conformance with
manufacturer's specifications and appearance.
JUNKYARD — A lot, land or structure or part thereof used primarily for the
collection, storage and sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal or discarded
materials, or for the collection, dismantling, storage, and salvaging of
A vehicle for which a certificate of junk has been issued by the
Pennsylvania Secretary of Revenue or the official designated by any
other state to issue such certificate.
A.
Any vehicle provided that such vehicle is not registered with and
certified by the Borough Manager as a repairable vehicle in or on which
it is found that any of the following conditions exist:
If for more than 30 days its engine or motor or any other essential
part is inoperable or has been removed.
(1)
If for more than 30 days its tires or any tire has been deflated or its
wheel or wheels have been removed.
(2)
If it bears no official inspection sticker or any such sticker has not
been current for 30 days or more.
(3)
B.
§ 245-25 CATASAUQUA CODE § 255-1
170:620
machinery or vehicles not in running condition and for the sale of parts
thereof.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, limited partnership, association or
corporation; the use of the masculine shall include the feminine and the
neuter.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Any real property owned or controlled by the
Borough of Catasauqua.
REPAIRABLE VEHICLE — Any vehicle in or on which are found any of
the conditions specified under the definitions of an "abandoned or junked
vehicle," and which has been registered with the Borough Manager as a
vehicle that will be repaired, properly licensed and inspected within 120
days time from the date of registration.
STORAGE YARD — A lot, land or plot, or part thereof, used primarily for the
collection, storage, or deposit of automobiles, trucks, or other vehicles, or
parts thereof, which are defined as abandoned or junked.
STREET or HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of
any public right-of-way which the general public has the right to use.
VEHICLE — Shall have the same meaning as defined and prescribed in the
Motor Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.164
§ 255-2. Abandoned or junked vehicles prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to store or deposit an abandoned or junked vehicle,
or parts thereof, on any public or private property, vacant or occupied,
within the Borough of Catasauqua five days after such abandoned or junked
vehicle is declared by the Borough Manager to be a nuisance which is
detrimental to or a menace to the public health and safety of the citizens
and residents of the Borough of Catasauqua. The Borough Manager shall
immediately give reasonable notice of his determination and shall post the
same on the Borough Hall bulletin board.
§ 255-3. Repairable vehicles.165
A. For any abandoned or junked vehicle on private property to be
considered a repairable vehicle, an application must be made by the
owner of the vehicle to the Borough Manager, accompanied with the
registration fee as set from time to time by resolution of Borough
Council,166 certifying that the owner intends to repair said vehicle
within 120 days from the date of registration and to have the vehicle
properly inspected, licensed, and in operating condition within this
allotted time. Upon application, the Borough Manager shall certify that
the vehicle is registered as a repairable vehicle.
164. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
165. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
166. Editor's Note: See Ch. A285, Fees.
§ 255-1 JUNKYARDS § 255-3
170:621
§ 255-4. Junkyards.
B. Any person that has registered a repairable vehicle with the Borough
Manager may, with a fee as set from time to time by resolution of
Borough Council and a written proof of a requisition for necessary parts
yet to be delivered, renew his application for an additional 120 days if,
and only if, the vehicle in question is classified as an antique or classic
motor vehicle as herein defined.
A. Any person lawfully carrying on the business of, or maintaining, a
junkyard or storage yard or deposit for one or more abandoned or
junked automobiles, trucks or other vehicles or part thereof within the
Borough of Catasauqua shall secure a license and pay a license fee as
set from time to time by resolution of Borough Council,167 payable on or
before January 1 of every year. The provisions of this section are subject
to the regulations governing the use of land as set forth in the Zoning
Ordinance168 of the Borough of Catasauqua.169
B. Such license shall not be issued until the following conditions have been
complied with:
(1) The storage area is enclosed with a six-foot-high opaque fence,
provided that one gate of a maximum width of 10 feet shall be
permitted if the gate is locked during hours when the business or
storage area is not being used.
(2) The storage area is set back 25 feet from the curbline of any and all
streets abutting the property and, if there is no curbline, from the
point where the limit of the cartway closest to the storage area to
be licensed is located.
(3) Such other conditions and specifications which the Borough by
ordinance may prescribe to protect the health and safety and
general welfare of the Borough of Catasauqua.
C. The above license shall be deemed revoked should any of the above
conditions set forth in Subsection B above, including the conditions and
specifications authorized by Subsection B(3), be violated, and said
violation shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
D. Any person that shall fail or refuse to obtain such a license shall be
subject to the fines and penalties set forth in this chapter.
E. Any person carrying on an activity for which a license is required under
this chapter shall have six months from the effective date of this chapter
to comply with its terms.
167. Editor's Note: See Ch. A285, Fees.
168. Editor's Note: See Ch. 280, Zoning.
169. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 255-3 CATASAUQUA CODE § 255-5
170:622
§ 255-5. Notice of violation; abatement.
After taking into consideration the facts of each particular case, if it is found
that any person maintains a nuisance pursuant to § 255-2 above within
the Borough of Catasauqua, the Borough Manager shall serve notice to
that effect upon the person maintaining such nuisance. Such notice shall
describe the condition complained of and shall require the same to be made
safe, to be corrected or to be removed. Upon receipt of a notice from
the Borough Manager that such a condition exists on property owned or
occupied within the Borough, it shall be the duty of the person owning
or occupying such property to abate the nuisance within five days to the
satisfaction of the Borough Manager.
§ 255-6. Power to impound abandoned or junked vehicles.
Should any person neglect or refuse to abate a nuisance pursuant to § 255-5
above, the Borough of Catasauqua shall have the authority to abate or cause
to be abated such nuisance after five days following notice to the owner or
occupier of the premises, and the Police Department is hereby directed as
follows:
§ 255-7. Storage or impoundment garages.
With the exception of the use of the facilities of the Borough of Catasauqua,
said storage garage or pounds shall be bonded in an amount not less than
$5,000 against the loss, injury or damage to any vehicles while in the
custody of such poundkeeper.
§ 255-8. Payment for costs of impoundment.170
The owner of such impounded vehicle shall pay a towing charge and storage
charges as set from time to time by resolution of Borough Council.171 The
Borough of Catasauqua shall collect these costs plus 10% penalty in the
same manner as other municipal claims or by an action of assumpsit.
A. To secure and impound and immediately tow away and remove all
abandoned vehicles in violation hereof and to store the same at such
storage garages or pounds as may from time to time be designated by
the Borough of Catasauqua for such purposes.
B. To notify the owner of record, if such owner can be found, of such
vehicle within 12 hours of the impounding of the vehicle, designating
the place from which said vehicle was removed, the reasons for its
removal and impoundment, and the pound in which it has been
impounded.
170. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
171. Editor's Note: See Ch. A285, Fees.
§ 255-5 JUNKYARDS § 255-9
170:623
§ 255-9. Period of storage.
Poundkeepers or depositories as designated in this chapter shall store any
abandoned vehicle for not less than 15 days, nor more than 60 days, after
the owner has been notified of the impounding of said vehicle; thereafter,
said abandoned vehicle shall be disposed of in accordance with the Motor
Vehicle Code172 or in any other reasonable manner.
§ 255-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord. No.
1288]
In addition to any towing and storage charges as provided herein, any
person charged with a violation or violations of any provisions of this
chapter shall upon due conviction by a District Justice pay a fine to the
Borough of Catasauqua up to $300, plus costs of prosecution, and/or
undergo imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days. A new and
separate offense shall be deemed to be committed for each day such
violation exists. Any person found guilty of violating an ordinance shall
be assessed court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the
Borough in the enforcement proceedings.
Chapter 260
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 110.
Parades — See Ch. 190.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 195.
Public property — See Ch. 205.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 230.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 255.
172. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 255-9 CATASAUQUA CODE § 255-10
170:624
ARTICLE I
General Traffic Regulations
[Adopted 5-7-1962 by Ord. No. 480 (Ch. XII, Part 1A, of the 1962
Code)]
§ 260-1. Definitions and interpretation.
Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania,173 as now in force,
or as hereafter amended, enacted or reenacted, except in those instances
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. The singular shall
include the plural and the masculine shall include the feminine. Whenever
any time shall be set forth in this chapter, such time shall be in accordance
with Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Saving Time, depending
upon which standard of time shall be in general use in the Borough.
§ 260-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances or as parts of ordinances or as amendments to ordinances of
the Borough of Catasauqua.
§ 260-3. Special powers of Mayor.
A. The Mayor, or the police officers of the Borough, under the direction of
the Mayor, shall have the following powers to regulate traffic and
parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and parking regulations.
(2) In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works or in the
conduct of parades and public events, to restrict or prohibit
parking or traffic in limited areas for periods of not more than 72
hours.
B. Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Mayor and the police of the Borough in the same manner as permanent
regulations. Any person who shall operate or park a vehicle in violation
of any such regulations shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a
fine of $25 and costs. It shall be the duty of all police officers and
parking enforcement personnel of the Borough to report to the Mayor
all violations of any provision of § 260-3, indicating in each the license
number of the vehicle involved in the violation, the location where the
violation took place, and any other fact that might be necessary in order
to secure a clear understanding of the circumstances attending the
violation. The police officer or other person making the report shall also
attach to or place upon every vehicle a notice stating that the vehicle
173. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 260-1 JUNKYARDS § 260-3
170:625
§ 260-4. Experimental regulations.
The Borough Council may from time to time temporarily designate places
upon the streets and alleys in the Borough in which, for a period of not more
than three months, specified traffic or parking regulations. prohibitions or
restrictions shall be in force and effect, and shall designate such locations
by proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions and
restrictions shall be effective just as if they had been specified in this
chapter. No person shall violate any such regulation, prohibition or
restriction or shall remove, injure, destroy or deface any sign or marking
erected by authority of this section. Any person who shall violate any of the
provisions of this section or who shall remove, injure, destroy or deface any
sign or marking erected by authority of this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, be liable to the penalty set forth in the law or elsewhere in this
chapter for a violation of such nature, and, in case of a violation for which no
specific penalty is set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine
of not more than $10 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
of such fine and costs, to imprisonment in the County Jail for not more than
five days. Provided: the purpose of this section is to allow for the test and
experimental determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent
changes in the ordinances of the Borough regulating traffic and parking.
§ 260-5. Authority of police officers.
The police officers of the Borough are hereby given authority to direct
traffic on the highways of the Borough, and at intersections thereof.
§ 260-6. Motor vehicles not to be driven on sidewalks.
No person shall operate any motor vehicle longitudinally upon any sidewalk
in the Borough, nor shall any person operate any motor vehicle upon or
across any sidewalk except in order to gain access to or egress from a
driveway or alley at such locations where the curb, if such sidewalk is
curbed, shall have been properly cut down for the purpose. Any person
was parked in violation of this section. The notice shall contain
instructions to the owner or driver of the vehicle that if he or she
will report to the office of the Police Department and pay the sum of
$30 within 72 hours after the time of the notice, that act will save
the violator from prosecution and from payment of the fine and costs
prescribed in the first sentence of this section. [Amended 10-1-2007
by Ord. No. 1217; 8-3-2009 by Ord. No. 1242]
C. The Mayor and the police officers of the Borough shall further have the
authority to regulate traffic on the highways of the Borough by signs or
other devices; and, by painted markings on the highways, they may
show crosswalks and the places and manner in which vehicles may be
parked; and, by painting the curb, they may show that alongside it no
vehicle may be parked, all subject to such modifications as the Council
may make from time to time.
§ 260-3 CATASAUQUA CODE § 260-6
170:626
who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $50 and costs of
prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to
imprisonment in the County Jail for not more than 10 days.
§ 260-7. Speed limits established. [Last amended 11-6-2000 by Ord.
No. 1114]
The following speed limits are hereby established:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
2nd Street 25 For its entire extent within the Borough
10th Street 20 For its entire extent within the Borough
14th Street 25 From Race Street to Walnut Street
Bridge Street 25 From Front Street to American Street
Bridge Street 25 From Saint John Street to 14th Street
Church Street 25 From Front Street to Fairview Street
Front Street 25 From Race Street to the north Borough
line
Howertown
Road
25 For its entire extent within the Borough
Pine Street 25 From Front Street to American Street
Poplar Street 25 For its entire extent within the Borough
Race Street 35 For its entire extent within the Borough
Saint John
Street
25 For its entire extent within the Borough
South 14th
Street
25 From Race Street to Circle Drive
Union Street 25 From Front Street to 2nd Street
Walnut Street 25 East of Howertown Road to the Borough
line
Walnut Street 25 From Howertown Road to Front Street
Wood Street 25 From Front Street to Saint John Street
§ 260-8. One-way streets established. [Last amended 10-5-2009 by
Ord. No. 1244]
A. The following are hereby established as one-way streets:
§ 260-6 JUNKYARDS § 260-8
170:627
Street From To
Direction
of Travel
2nd Street Northern limits
of Borough
Race Street South
Cambridge
Place [Added
5-3-2010 by
Ord. No.
1252]
Eastern
connection with
Walnut Street
Western connection
with Walnut Street
South and west
Church Street 2nd Street Howertown Road East
Covington
Place [Added
5-3-2010 by
Ord. No.
1252]
Western
connection with
Walnut Street
Eastern connection
with Walnut Street
North and east
Crane Street Bridge Street Church Street North
Edward Lane 14th Street Faith Drive West
Front Street
[Amended
11-7-2016 by
Ord. No.
1340174]
Pine Street Northern limits of
Borough
North
Front Street
[Amended
11-7-2016 by
Ord. No.
1340]
Race Street Union Street North
High Street Faith Drive 14th Street East
Limestone
Street
Church Street Bridge Street South
Linden Street Front Street 2nd Street East
Linden Street
[Added
8-5-2019 by
Ord. No.
1385]
Second Street Pineapple Street East
174. Effective 8-17-2017, pursuant to Ord. No. 1340, adopted 11-7-2016, Ord. No. 1346,
adopted 3-6-2017, and Ord. No. 1348, adopted 5-1-2017, the portion of Front Street from
Union Street to Pine Street returned to two-way traffic.
§ 260-8 CATASAUQUA CODE § 260-8
170:628
Street From To
Direction
of Travel
Milton Street
[Added
12-10-2018 by
Ord. No.
1379]
Tunnel Alley Peach Street North
Mulberry
Street
2nd Street Front Street West
Peach Street Howertown Road End West; between
the hours of
7:30 a.m. and
8:00 a.m. and
2:30 p.m. and
3:00 p.m.,
Monday through
Friday
Pineapple
Street [Added
8-5-2019 by
Ord. No.
1384]
School Street Race Street South
Prospect Street Tioga Street Poplar Street North
Railroad Street Bridge Street Pine Street North
School Street
[Added
9-3-2013 by
Ord. No.
1293]
Howertown Road Pineapple Street East
Stonewood
Place [Added
5-3-2010 by
Ord. No.
1252]
Western
connection with
Walnut Street
Eastern connection
with Walnut Street
North and east
Strawberry
Street
2nd Street Front Street West
Tunnel Alley
[Added
12-10-2018 by
Ord. No.
1379]
American Street Milton Street West
Tunnel Alley Howertown Road 2nd Street West
Walnut Street Howertown Road 2nd Street West
§ 260-8 JUNKYARDS § 260-8
170:629
§ 260-9. Through highways established. [Amended 5-10-1963 by
Ord. No. 504]
The following highways in the Borough of Catasauqua are hereby
established as through highways, and the operator of every vehicle, upon
approaching any such highway at any intersection thereof, shall come to a
full stop, within a reasonable distance, before entering such intersection:
Name of Street Location
Pine Street From the west side of Front Street to the east
side of Howertown Road
Race Street From the Lehigh River Bridge on the west to
the east Borough line
Walnut Street From the west side of 2nd Street to the east
side of Howertown Road
§ 260-10. Stop intersections established. [Last amended 11-6-2006
by Ord. No. 1204]
The following intersections located in the Borough are hereby declared
to be stop intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected (or are
hereby confirmed if heretofore erected) in such a position as to face traffic
approaching the second-named street upon the first-named street in the
direction or directions hereby indicated. All four-way stop intersections
and all three-way stop intersections in the Borough of Catasauqua shall
be identified as such by appropriate markers. All vehicles approaching any
such intersection upon the first-named street in the direction or directions
hereby indicated in each case shall come to a full stop, within a reasonable
distance, before entering said intersection:
Stop Street Through Street Direction of Travel
2nd Street South
2nd Street Bridge Street Northeast and Southwest
Street From To
Direction
of Travel
Willow Street Front Street 2nd Street East
Wood Street Front Street 2nd Street West
Wood Street Howertown Road 2nd Street West
B. Any person who shall operate a vehicle upon any street or portion
thereof hereby established as a one-way street other than in the
direction established hereby for vehicular traffic thereon shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $10 and
costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs,
to imprisonment in the County Jail for not more than five days.
§ 260-8 CATASAUQUA CODE § 260-10
170:630
Stop Street Through Street Direction of Travel
2nd Street Chapel Street Northwest
2nd Street Church Street South
2nd Street Union Street Northwest and Southeast
2nd Street Walnut Street Northwest and Southeast
2nd Street Wood Street South
3rd Street Bridge Street Southeast
4th Street Bridge Street Southeast
6th Street Walnut Street Southeast
10th Street Bath Avenue North
10th Street Faith Drive South
11th Street Bath Avenue Southeast
11th Street Faith Drive North
11th Street Poplar Street South
12th Street Bath Avenue North and South
12th Street Bethlehem Road North
13th Street Bath Avenue North and South
13th Street Pearl Street West
14th Street Bethlehem Road Southwest and North
14th Street Bridge Court South
14th Street Exit From
Scheckler
Elementary
North
14th Street Walnut Street North
American Street Bridge Street Northwest and Southeast
American Street Church Street Northwest and Southeast
American Street Peach Street North and South
American Street Walnut Street Northwest and Southeast
American Street Wood Street Northwest and Southeast
Bath Avenue 10th Street West
Bath Avenue 11th Street East
Bath Avenue 11th Street West
Bath Avenue Bethlehem Road Southeast
Bethlehem Road Bath Avenue West
Blackberry Street Unnamed alley
between Chestnut
Street and Walnut
Street
North and South
§ 260-10 JUNKYARDS § 260-10
170:631
Stop Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Bridge Court 14th Street East
Bridge Street 2nd Street East and West
Bridge Street 14th Street East
Bridge Street Fairview Street Northeast and Southwest
Bridge Street
[Amended 6-5-2017
by Ord. No. 1350]
Front Street Northeast and Southwest
Bridge Street Howertown Road Northeast and Southwest
Bridge Street St. John Street Southwest
Cambridge Place (both
locations where it
intersects with Walnut)
Walnut Street North
Canal Street School Street South
Chapel Street Front Street Northeast
Chestnut Street 2nd Street East and West
Chestnut Street 3rd Street East and West
Chestnut Street 4th Street East and West
Chestnut Street Blackberry Street East and West
Chestnut Street Crane Street East and West
Chestnut Street Front Street West
Chestnut Street Limestone Street East and West
Church Street 2nd Street Northeast and Southwest
Church Street Fairview Street Northeast
Church Street Front Street Southwest
Church Street Howertown Road Northeast and Southwest
Circle Drive 14th Street Northwest and Southeast
Circle Drive Poplar Street North and South
Covington Place (both
locations where it
intersections with
Walnut)
Walnut Street South
Delaware Avenue Tioga Street West
Edward Lane 14th Street South
Edward Lane Faith Drive West
Erie Street Pennsylvania
Avenue
North and South
Fairview Street Bridge Street Southwest and Northeast
Faith Drive 14th Street East and West
§ 260-10 CATASAUQUA CODE § 260-10
170:632
Stop Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Faith Drive (east end) Circle Drive East
Faith Drive Circle Drive South
Faith Drive Poplar Street North and South
Front Street [Added
6-5-2017 by Ord. No.
1350]
Bridge Street Northeast and Southwest
Front Street Front Street
northwest and
northeast
Southeast and Southwest
Front Street [Added
6-5-2017 by Ord. No.
1350]
Union Street Northeast and Southwest
Front Street, S. Poplar Street North and South
Green Street 14th Street East and West
Hickory Street Limestone Street Northwest and Southeast
High Street 14th Street East
High Street Circle Drive East and West
High Street Faith Drive West
High Street Prospect Street West
High Street South Front Street West
Howertown Road 2nd Street Southwest
Howertown Road Bridge Street Northeast and Southwest
Howertown Road Church Street Northeast and Southwest
Howertown Road Pine Street Northeast and Southwest
Howertown Road Walnut Street Southeast and North
Howertown Road Wood Street Northeast and Southwest
Kurtz Street American Street East and West
Kurtz Street Howertown Road Southwest
Lenape Circle 14th Street West
Liberty Street 2nd Street East and West
Liberty Street Front Street West
Liberty Street [Added
3-3-2014 by Ord. No.
1297]
Limestone Street East and West
Limestone Street Bridge Street South
Limestone Street Church Street North
Limestone Street Hickory Street Northwest and Southeast
Limestone Street Howertown Road South
§ 260-10 JUNKYARDS § 260-10
170:633
Stop Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Limestone Street
[Added 3-3-2014 by
Ord. No. 1297]
Liberty Street North and South
Limestone Street Middle Alley Southeast
Limestone Street Peach Street Northwest and Southeast
Limestone Street Pine Street North and South
Limestone Street Strawberry Street North
Limestone Street Walnut Street North and South
Limestone Street Wood Street North and South
Linden Street 2nd Street East and West
Linden Street Front Street West
Main Street Lehigh Street Southwest
Middle Street 2nd Street East and West
Milton Street Bridge Street North and South
Milton Street Church Street North and South
Milton Street Pine Street North and South
Milton School [Added
5-3-2010 by Ord. No.
1251]
School Street South
Milton Street Walnut Street North and South
Mulberry Street 2nd Street East and West
Mulberry Street Front Street East and West
Mulberry Street Howertown Road Northeast and Southwest
Mulberry Street Limestone Street East and West
Mulberry Street Railroad Street West
Peach Street 2nd Street Southwest
Peach Street Howertown Road Southwest
Peach Street St. John Street Southwest
Pearl Street 12th Street East and West
Pearl Street 14th Street East and West
Pennsylvania Avenue Tioga Street West
Pineapple Street Race Street South
Pineapple Street Union Street North and South
Pine Street 3rd Street Southwest and Northeast
Pine Street American Street East and West
Pine Street Howertown Road Southwest and Northeast
Pine Street St. John Street Southwest
§ 260-10 CATASAUQUA CODE § 260-10
170:634
Stop Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Poplar Street 11th Street Northeast and Southwest
Poplar Street 14th Street East and West
Poplar Street Circle Drive East, West, and South
Poplar Street Faith Drive East and West
Prospect Street Poplar Street North
Railroad Street Bridge Street North and South
Railroad Street Chapel Street North
Railroad Street Chestnut Street North and South
Railroad Street Church Street North and South
Railroad Street Liberty Street North and South
Railroad Street Linden Street North and South
Railroad Street School Street North and South
Railroad Street Union Street North and South
Railroad Street Walnut Street North and South
Railroad Street Willow Street North and South
Railroad Street Wood Street North
St. John Street 10th Street Southwest
St. John Street Bridge Street Northeast and Southwest
St. John Street Church Street Northeast and Southwest
St. John Street Walnut Street Northwest
School Street 2nd Street East and West
School Street Canal Street West
School Street Front Street East and West
School Street [Added
5-3-2010 by Ord. No.
1251]
Milton Street East and West
Stonewood (both
locations where it
intersects with Walnut)
Walnut South
Strawberry Street 2nd Street West
Strawberry Street 3rd Street East and West
Strawberry Street 4th Street East and West
Strawberry Street 5th Street East and West
Strawberry Street American Street East
Strawberry Street Crane Street East and West
Strawberry Street Front Street West
Strawberry Street Howertown Road East
§ 260-10 JUNKYARDS § 260-10
170:635
Stop Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Strawberry Street Railroad Street Northwest
Tioga Street Circle Drive North
Tioga Street Delaware Avenue South
Tioga Street Main Street North and South
Tunnel Alley Limestone Street West
Union Street 2nd Street Northeast
Union Street Front Street Northeast and Southwest
Union Street Howertown Road Southwest
Union Street Pineapple Street East
Walnut Street 2nd Street Northeast and Southwest
Walnut Street 14th Street East and West
Walnut Street Front Street Southwest
Walnut Street Howertown Road Northeast and Southwest
Walnut Street St. John Street Northeast and Southwest
Willow Street 2nd Street West
Willow Street Limestone Street East and West
Wood Street 2nd Street Northeast and Southwest
Wood Street Front Street Southwest
Wood Street Howertown Road Northeast and Southwest
York Street 14th Street East
York Street Tioga Street West
§ 260-11. Play highways authorized.
The Mayor is hereby authorized to designate as "play highways," whenever
he shall deem such action advisable and for whatever period of time
directed by him, any portion of any street or alley in the Borough whereon
sledding and coasting shall be permitted. No person shall operate a motor
vehicle upon any play highway at any time when such highway shall be so
designated, except in cases of emergency, with special permission of the
Mayor or of the police officer in charge, who shall first clear such highway
of all persons using such highway for the purpose for which it was set apart.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $10
and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs,
imprisonment in the County Jail for not more than five days.
§ 260-12. Unlawful to operate self-propelled pleasure vehicles on
public lands or sidewalks; violations and penalties. [Added
12-6-1971 by Ord. No. 670]
§ 260-10 CATASAUQUA CODE § 260-12
170:636
§ 260-13. Truck and other commercial vehicle traffic restricted on
certain streets; weight limits established; violations and penalties.
[Added 3-3-1975 by Ord. No. 718; amended 4-7-1975 by Ord. No.
721; 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1288; 5-5-2014 by Ord. No. 1299]
A. No person shall operate, nor shall the owner of a vehicle permit the
operation of, any self-propelled vehicle for pleasure purposes upon the
public lands or sidewalks of the Borough of Catasauqua.
B. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$300 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine
and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 10 days.
C. Any person found guilty of violating an ordinance shall be assessed
court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in
the enforcement proceedings. [Added 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1288]
A. Maximum weight limit of five tons established.
(1) The following portions of streets are set aside only for use by
passenger motor vehicles and commercial vehicles not exceeding
five tons gross vehicular weight and it shall be unlawful for any
person to operate any truck or other commercial vehicle in excess
of five tons, except as necessary in order to pick up or to deliver
goods, wares or merchandise from or to any property located upon
any such portion of street:
(a) 14th Street from Race Street to Walnut Street.
(b) Walnut Street from Fourteenth Street to Howertown Road.
(2) Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $25 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
of such fine and costs, to imprisonment in the County Jail for not
more than 10 days.
(3) Any person found guilty of violating an ordinance shall be assessed
court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough
in the enforcement proceedings.
B. Weight limit established for Church Street Bridge over Catasauqua
Creek.
(1) No vehicle shall be permitted on or shall pass through or upon the
Church Street Bridge over the Catasauqua Creek in the Borough of
Catasauqua in excess of 34 tons, except combination loads of up to
40 tons.
(2) The appropriate weight limitation signage shall be erected and
maintained designating the weight limitation in accordance with
the PennDot specifications for signage.
§ 260-12 JUNKYARDS § 260-13
170:637
§ 260-14. Turn lanes established in certain locations; violations and
penalties. [Added 11-10-1975 by Ord. No. 726]
(3) Any person operating a vehicle or combination of vehicles upon the
Church Street Bridge in violation of this subsection shall be guilty
of a summary offense and, upon conviction, will be sentenced to
pay a fine of $150, plus $150 for each 500 pounds, or part thereof,
in excess of 3,000 pounds over the maximum allowable limit.
(4) This subsection shall become effective immediately upon
installation of the signs.
C. Local delivery restriction. [Added 8-5-2019 by Ord. No. 1386]
(1) Trucks are hereby restricted to local deliveries only on the
following streets or parts of streets:
(a) Walnut Street, between Howertown Road to the west and the
terminus of Walnut Street to the east.
(b) North 14th Street, between Walnut Street to the north and
Race Street to the South.
(c) Poplar Street, between Circle Drive and Lehigh Street. [Added
9-3-2019 by Ord. No. 1387]
(d) Faith Drive, beginning and ending at points on Circle Drive.
[Added 9-3-2019 by Ord. No. 1387]
(e) South Tenth Street, between Race Street and Faith Drive.
[Added 9-3-2019 by Ord. No. 1387]
(2) Penalties for violation of this subsection shall, upon conviction
thereof, be in accordance with the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle
Code, as the same may be amended from time to time.
(3) Any person found guilty of violating an ordinance shall, in addition
to fines and costs of prosecution, be assessed reasonable attorneys'
fees incurred by the Borough in said prosecution or any other
enforcement action.
A. Straight, and left and right turn lanes be hereby established in
accordance with a plan dated July 14, 1975, as prepared by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. This plan provides that all
traffic in the left lane must turn left and all traffic in the right lane must
either go straight or turn right.
B. Penalties for violation of this section shall be in accordance with the
prevailing state statutes of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
C. Any person found guilty of violating an ordinance shall be assessed
court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in
the enforcement proceedings. [Added 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1288]
§ 260-13 CATASAUQUA CODE § 260-15
170:638
§ 260-15. Intersections with no turns on red. [Added 10-2-1978 by
Ord. No. 772; amended 3-5-1979 by Ord. No. 779; 9-10-1979 by Ord.
No. 784]
§ 260-16. Prohibiting turning at certain intersections. [Added
10-1-1990 by Ord. No. 957; last amended 10-5-2009 by Ord. No.
1244]
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle traveling upon the first
named street of any of the following intersections, in the direction or
directions indicated in each case, to make a left turn and/or a right turn
into the second named street as indicated, at any time when such a turn is
prohibited by this section:
Vehicles
Traveling
On
Direction
of Travel
Not To
Make Into When
Type of
Vehicles
Applicable
To
Howertown
Road
Northbound Left turn Hickory
Street
7:30-8:00
and
2:30-3:00
Mon.-Fri.
when school
is in session
All types of
vehicles
Howertown
Road
Southbound Right
turn
Hickory
Street
7:30-8:30
and
2:30-3:00
Mon.-Fri.
when school
is in session
All types of
vehicles
A. Signs reading "No Turns on Red" are to be placed at the intersection of
Front and Pine Streets for northbound vehicles making a right turn onto
Pine Street from Front Street.
B. Signs reading "No Turns on Red" are to be placed at the intersection of
14th Street and Race Street for eastbound and westbound vehicles
making a right turn onto 14th Street from Race Street and for northbound
and southbound vehicles making a right turn onto Race Street
from 14th Street. [Amended 2-4-2013 by Ord. No. 1285]
C. Penalties for violations of this section shall be in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code. [Added 2-4-2013 by Ord. No.
1285]
§ 260-15 JUNKYARDS § 260-16
170:639
Vehicles
Traveling
On
Direction
of Travel
Not To
Make Into When
Type of
Vehicles
Applicable
To
Pine
Street
[Added
10-6-2014
by Ord.
No. 1306]
Eastbound Right
turn
Howertown
Road
At all times All types of
vehicles
Pine
Street
Eastbound
or
Westbound
Left turn Railroad
Street
At all times All types of
vehicles
Railroad
Street
Northbound
or
Southbound
Left turn Pine Street At all times All types of
vehicles
Walker
Street
Southbound Left turn Race Street At all times All types of
vehicles
§ 260-16 CATASAUQUA CODE § 260-16
170:640
ARTICLE II
Parking Regulations
[Adopted 5-7-1962 by Ord. No. 480 (Ch. XII, Part 1B, of the 1962
Code)]
§ 260-17. Parking without lights authorized.
The boundary limits of the Borough of Catasauqua are hereby established
as a zone in which motor vehicles may remain standing without lights, and
all streets and alleys within such boundary limits are hereby designated as
streets where motor vehicles may remain standing without lights.
§ 260-18. Parking restricted between 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.
[Amended 1-4-1999 by Ord. No. 1090]
It shall be unlawful to allow any vehicle, except for operable motor vehicles,
to remain parked on any street or alley in the Borough of Catasauqua for
longer than two hours.
§ 260-19. Parking prohibited in certain locations. [Last amended
3-5-2018 by Ord. No. 1366]
Parking shall be prohibited at any and all times in the following locations:
Name of Street Side Location
2nd Street East Between Bridge Street and Church
Street
2nd Street East From Church Street south to Hickory
Street
3rd Street Both 48 feet north of Strawberry Street to a
point 56 feet north of Strawberry Street
3rd Street West From a point 110 feet south of the
intersection with Pine Street to a point
124 feet south of the south side of Pine
Street
10th Street Both Between American Street and Race
Street
10th Street Between Race Street and St. John Street
10th Street East Between Bath Avenue and Faith Drive
14th Street East Between Pearl Street and a point 54 feet
south of Pearl Street
14th Street East Between Pearl Street and a point 66 feet
north of Pearl Street
14th Street East Between Race Street and a point
approximately 90 feet north
14th Street East Between Race Street and Beth Road
§ 260-17 JUNKYARDS § 260-19
170:641
Name of Street Side Location
14th Street West Between Pearl Street and a point 66 feet
north
14th Street West Between Race Street and Pearl Street
15th Street East From Pearl Street to a point 36 feet
south of Pearl Street
15th Street East From Race Street to Bath Avenue
15th Street West From Pearl Street to Race Street
Bridge Street North and
south
Between 2nd Street and a point 40 feet
east thereof, which is hereby reserved
for bus stop parking only
Bridge Street South Between Front Street and a point 40
feet east thereof, which is hereby
reserved for bus stop parking only
Chapel Street South From 98 feet east of Front Street
eastward, a distance of 50 feet; two
hour parking, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.,
weekdays
Chestnut Street Both Between Front Street and Blackberry
Street
Church Street North Between American Street and St. John
Street
Church Street North Between Front Street and a point 45
feet east thereof
Church Street
[Amended
4-2-2018 by Ord.
No. 1368]
North From Howertown Road to American
Street
Crane Street Both Between Bridge Street and Pine Street
Crane Street West Between Church Street and Bridge
Street
Crane Street East From the intersection of Chestnut
Street to a point 170 feet north of
Chestnut Street
Crane Street West Between Church Street and Bridge
Street and between Pine Street and
Chestnut Street
Faith Drive West From 10th Street to Poplar Street
Front Street East Between Bridge Street and Strawberry
Street, no parking from 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday
§ 260-19 CATASAUQUA CODE § 260-19
170:642
Name of Street Side Location
Front Street East From 48 feet south of Chapel Street
southward, a distance of 25 feet, no
parking 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. weekdays
Front Street East Between Race Street and a point 75 feet
north thereof
Front Street East Between a point 132 feet north of the
north side of School Street and a point
six feet north thereof
Front Street East From a point 35 feet south of Willow
Street to a point 35 feet north of Willow
Street
Front Street East From Wood Street to a point 40 feet
north of Wood Street
Front Street West From the north side of Church Street to
a point 120 feet north thereof
Front Street West From Chestnut Street to Spring Street,
two hour parking 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.,
weekdays
Hickory Street North and
South
Between 2nd Street and Howertown
Road
Howertown Road West From the northern Borough line to
Union Street, being the entire length of
Howertown Road in the Borough of
Catasauqua
Lehigh Street East Between Race Street and Poplar Street,
and opposite the boiler house of the
Catasauqua Weaving Company
Liberty Street Both Between 3rd Street and 4th Street
Limestone Street Both Between Howertown Road and Wood
Street
Limestone Street Both Between Peach Street and the Northern
Borough Line
Limestone Street East Between Wood Street and Peach Street
Linden Street North and
South
From Front Street to Pineapple Street
Middle Street Both Between 2nd Street and Crane Street
Milton Street Both Between Mulberry Street and School
Street
Mulberry Street Both Between Howertown Road and Lehigh
Coal and Navigation Canal
Pearl Street Both Between 10th Street and Walker Street
§ 260-19 JUNKYARDS § 260-19
170:643
Name of Street Side Location
Pearl Street Both From 12th Street to a point
approximately 100 feet west
Pearl Street South From 12th Street to 14th Street
Pearl Street Both From 14th Street to 15th Street
Pine Street North Between 2nd Street and Limestone
Street
Pine Street North Between 2nd Street and a point 75 feet
east thereof
Pine Street North From a point 25 feet west of 2nd Street
to a point 81 feet west of 2nd Street
Pine Street North Between 2nd Street and a point 132 feet
west thereof
Pine Street North and
South
From 3rd Street to a point 25 feet east
of the intersection
Pine Street South From 3rd Street to a point 74 feet east
thereof
Poplar Street North From Lehigh Street to Prospect Street
Poplar Street South From Lehigh Street to Circle Drive
Poplar Street South Between Lehigh Street and Faith Drive
Race Street North From 2nd Street to a point 54 feet west
thereof
Race Street North Between 10th Street and points 70 feet
east and west from the intersection
thereof
Race Street North From 10th Street westward 115 feet
Race Street North From 14th Street westward 60 feet
Race Street North From 14th Street eastward 95 feet
Race Street North Between the west side of Front Street
and a point 40 feet west thereof which
is hereby reserved for bus stop parking
only
Race Street North Between Pineapple Street and 2nd
Street
Race Street North From a point 40 feet west of the west
side of Front Street to the western
Borough boundary at the Lehigh River
Race Street South Between Lehigh Street and eastern limit
of the Borough of Catasauqua boundary
line
§ 260-19 CATASAUQUA CODE § 260-19
170:644
Name of Street Side Location
Railroad Street Both From a point 100 feet north of Bridge
Street to the north Borough line
Railroad Street Both From Race Street to Bridge Street
Railroad Street East From Bridge Street to a point 100 feet
north of Bridge Street
School Street Both Between 2nd Street and Howertown
Road
School Street Both Between Lehigh Coal and Navigation
Canal at Canal Street and Howertown
Road
School Street Both Between Howertown Road and
Pineapple Street
South Front Street East From Poplar Street to its terminus at
Lehigh Street
Spring Street Both From Front Street to west Borough line
Strawberry Street Both Between Front Street and American
Street
Tunnel Alley Both Between American Street and Milton
Street
Union Street Both From 10th Street to a point 50 feet west
of 10th Street
Union Street South Between Front Street and Second Street
Walker Street Both Between Race Street and Pearl Street
Walnut Street North From a point 527 feet west of the
intersection with the west side of
Covington Place to a point 66 feet west
thereof
Walnut Street North From Howertown Road to St. John
Street
Walnut Street South Between American Street and a point 50
feet east thereof
Walnut Street South Between Howertown Road and a point
90 feet east thereof
Walnut Street South Between St. John Street and 14th Street
Willow Street Both Between Front Street and Limestone
Street
Willow Street Both Between Howertown Road and
American Street
Willow Street South From Front Street to a point 200 feet
west of Front Street
§ 260-19 JUNKYARDS § 260-19
170:645
Name of Street Side Location
Wood Street North From 91 feet east of Front Street to a
point 131 feet east of the intersection
Wood Street North From 131 feet east of Front Street to a
point 146 east of the intersection
Wood Street North From St. John Street to Howertown
Road
Wood Street South Between Front Street and Howertown
Road
§ 260-20. Parking of certain vehicles prohibited [Added 11-1-2010
by Ord. No. 1257175]
The parking of any vehicle for which the inspection and/or registration is
expired by 30 days or more is prohibited on all public streets, roads and
alleys in the Borough of Catasauqua.
§ 260-21. Restricted parking zones. [Last amended 10-2-2017 by
Ord. No. 1356]
A. No person shall park a vehicle, or allow it to remain parked for longer
than the time indicated in any of the following locations at any time on
the days and between the hours indicated:
Street Side From To
Maximum
Parking
Time
Days and
Hours
2nd Street A point 30
feet north
of
intersection
with
Church
Street
A point
120 feet
north
15 minutes 9:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.,
Mon.
through
Sat.
2nd Street East 55 feet
north of
Pine Street
85 feet
north of
Pine Street
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
1:00 p.m.,
Sundays
only
2nd Street East Race Street North
Borough
line
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
first
Tuesday of
each month
175. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also retitled and replaced former § 260-20, Parking
prohibited in certain locations weekdays between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., as last
amended 10-5-1992 by Ord. No. 991, and further provided that in addition to remedies set
forth in the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code, Title 75, the specific penalty for violating
this section shall be as set forth in § 260-23.
§ 260-19 CATASAUQUA CODE § 260-21
170:646
Street Side From To
Maximum
Parking
Time
Days and
Hours
2nd Street Strawberry
Street
Bridge
Street
1 hour 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
Mon.
through
Sat.
2nd Street West 118 feet
south of
Bridge
Street
A distance
of 52 feet
southward
Loading
zone
2nd Street West Middle
Street
Church
Street
2 hours 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
weekdays
2nd Street West Race Street North
Borough
line
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
first
Wednesday
of each
month
2nd Street West Strawberry
Street
Middle
Street
2 hours 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
Mon.
through
Sat.
3rd Street East 65 feet
north of
north side
of Bridge
Street
110 feet
north of
north side
of Bridge
Street
15 minutes 12:00 noon
to 8:00
p.m., Mon.
through
Fri.; and
9:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
on Sat.
Bridge
Street
Both Front
Street
Limestone
Street
2 hours 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
Mon.
through
Sat.
Bridge
Street
Both 28 feet
west of
Railroad
Street
48 feet
west of
Railroad
Street
15 minutes 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
Mon.
through
Sat.
§ 260-21 JUNKYARDS § 260-21
170:647
Street Side From To
Maximum
Parking
Time
Days and
Hours
Bridge
Street
North 60 feet
west of the
curbline
with Front
Street
120 feet
west
thereof
15 minutes 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
Monday
through
Friday
Bridge
Street
South 60 feet
west of the
western
curbline at
Front
Street
60 feet
west
thereof
15 minutes 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
Monday
through
Friday
Bridge
Street
South 72 feet east
of 2nd
Street
92 feet
east of 2nd
Street
15 minutes 9:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.,
Mon.
through
Sat.; 8:00
a.m. to
12:00 noon
Saturdays
Chapel
Street
South 98 feet east
of Front
Street
Eastward
59 feet
2 hours 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
weekdays
Fairview
Street
East High
School
Parking Lot
Bridge
Street
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
Front
Street
Both Church
Street
Pine Street 2 hours 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
Mon.
through
Sat.
Front
Street
30 feet
south of
Bridge
Street
For a
distance of
60 feet
15 minutes Between
signs, 9:00
a.m. to
10:00 p.m.,
Mon.
through
Sat.
Front
Street
East 90 feet
north of
Bridge
Street
97 feet
south of
Pine Street
2 hours 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
Monday
through
Saturday
§ 260-21 CATASAUQUA CODE § 260-21
170:648
Street Side From To
Maximum
Parking
Time
Days and
Hours
Front
Street
East Race Street North
Borough
line
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
first
Wednesday
of each
month
Front
Street
East Chestnut
Street
Approx. 38
feet north
of
Chestnut
Street
15 hours 9:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.,
Mon.
through
Sat.
Front
Street
East 25 feet
south of
Strawberry
Street
65 feet
south of
Strawberry
Street
15 minutes 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Mon.
through
Sat.
Front
Street
105 feet
south of
Pine Street
137 feet
south of
Pine Street
15 minutes 9:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.,
Mon.
through
Sat.
Front
Street
West Intersection
of vacated
former Coal
Street
85 feet
south
2 hours 11:00 a.m.
to 7:?00
p.m., Mon.
through
Sat.
Front
Street
West 96 feet
south of
Coal Street
116 feet
south of
Coal Street
1 hour 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
Mon.
through
Fri.
Front
Street
West Race Street North
Borough
line
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
first
Tuesday of
each month
Peach
Street
North 2nd Street
eastward
94 feet No parking 7:00 a.m. to
3:30 p.m.,
Mon.
through
Fri.
Peach
Street
South Limestone
Street
85 feet
eastward
No parking Anytime
§ 260-21 JUNKYARDS § 260-21
170:649
Street Side From To
Maximum
Parking
Time
Days and
Hours
Pine
Street
Both Front
Street
Railroad
Street
1 hour 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
Mon.
through
Sat.
Pine
Street
North 100 feet
east of 2nd
Street
130 feet
east of 2nd
Street
No parking Except
Sundays
8:00 a.m. to
1:00 p.m.
Pine
Street
North 25 feet
west of
Limestone
Street
67 feet
west of
Limestone
Street
15 minutes 9:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.,
Sun.
through
Sat. Fri.
Railroad
Street
Both Mulberry
Street
Willow
Street
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.
Railroad
Street
West Bridge
Street
90 feet
north of
Bridge
Street
No parking Anytime
St. John
Street
West Walnut
Street
Church
Street
No parking 11:00 p.m.
to 7:00
a.m., every
day
B. Loading zones. The following portions of streets are hereby designated
as loading zones and there shall be no parking in said zones except for
the purpose of loading and unloading between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 6:00 p.m., from Mondays to Saturdays, inclusive [except as herein
otherwise provided], effective immediately upon erection of
appropriate signs, namely:
(1) (Reserved)
(2) The north side of Pine Street, from a point 47 feet west of the west
side of Railroad Street to a point 111 feet 10 inches west of the
west side of Railroad Street.
(3) (Reserved)
(4) Bridge Street, north side, from a point 100 feet west of the west
side of Second Street to a point 120 feet west thereof. Said loading
zone shall be in effect 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
§ 260-21 CATASAUQUA CODE § 260-21
170:650
§ 260-22. Restrictions on parking of truck trailers, tractors or
tractor-trailers. [Amended 9-8-1965 by Ord. No. 547; 1-3-1983 by
Ord. No. 848]
§ 260-23. Penalty for violation of parking regulations. [Last
amended 8-3-2009 by Ord. No. 1242]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs. Provided: it shall be the duty of
the police officers and of parking enforcement personnel of the Borough to
report to the Mayor all violations of any provision of this article, indicating
in each case the license number of the vehicle involved in the violation, the
location where the violation took place, and any other facts which might
be necessary in order to secure clear understanding of the circumstances
attending the violation. The police officer or other person making the report
shall also attach to or place upon every vehicle a notice stating that the
vehicle was parked in violation of this article. The notice shall contain
instructions to the owner or driver of the vehicle that if he or she will
(5) Front Street, west side, from a point 25 feet north of Race Street to
a point 75 feet north of Race Street, to be in effect 24 hours a day,
seven days a week.
(6) Bridge Street, north side, from 120 feet east of Front Street to a
point 160 feet east of Front Street. The loading zone is in effect
seven days a week, 24 hours a day.
(7) (Reserved)
(8) (Reserved)
(9) Willow Street, north side, from Front Street to a point 80 feet west
of Front Street, to be effective Thursday mornings between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m.
(10) 10th Street, east side, from Race Street to Bath Avenue, Monday
through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.
A. It shall be unlawful to park on any portion of any street or alley, located
within an R-1, R-2 or R-3 Residential District as shown on the official
Zoning Map of the Borough of Catasauqua, any truck-tractor, tractor or
tractor-trailer, except for the purpose of loading and unloading, and
then not in any event for a period of longer than one hour.
B. It shall be unlawful to park on any street or alley in the Borough of
Catasauqua between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. any selfpropelled
vehicle licensed as a truck tractor and/or trailer having either
a registered gross weight or combination weight of 11,000 pounds or
greater.
C. Excluded vehicles may be parked in these time periods set forth above
for the purpose of loading and unloading only.
§ 260-21 JUNKYARDS § 260-23
170:651
report to the office of the Police Department and pay the sum of $30 within
72 hours after the time of the notice, that act will save the violator from
prosecution and from payment of the fine and costs prescribed in the first
sentence of this section.
§ 260-24. Handicapped parking. [Added 10-1-1979 by Ord. No. 785;
last amended 8-5-2019 by Ord. No. 1383]
A. Signs reading "Handicapped Parking Only" are to be placed at the
following locations:
Location
118 2nd Street
120 2nd Street
138 2nd Street
740 2nd Street
752 2nd Street
763 2nd Street
613 3rd Street
725 3rd Street
732 3rd Street
748 3rd Street, Apt. 2
401 Bath Avenue
Chapel Street, south side, 25 feet west of Railroad Street
227 Church Street
228 Church Street
315 Church Street
342 Church Street
33 Front Street
40 Front Street
106 Front Street
123 Front Street
19 Front Street
227 Front Street
241 Front Street
617 Front Street
765 Front Street
137 Howertown Road
401 Howertown Road
§ 260-23 CATASAUQUA CODE § 260-24
170:652
§ 260-25. Seventy-two-hour parking. [Added 10-7-1991 by Ord. No.
972]
§ 260-26. Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces. [Added
10-5-1992 by Ord. No. 991]
Whenever a space is marked off on any street for the parking of an
individual vehicle, every vehicle parked there shall be parked wholly within
the lines bounding that space, and it shall be a violation of this section for
any person to park a vehicle or allow it to remain parked otherwise.
Location
603 Howertown Road
Howertown Road at Mulberry Street, east side, just after intersection
buffer
339 Mulberry Street, sign to be placed in the 100 Block of American
Street
108 Race Street
9 Union Street
233 Walnut Street (for resident at 621 Limestone Street)
407 Walnut Street
533 Walnut Street
118 Wood Street
208 Wood Street
B. It shall be the duty of the Borough of Catasauqua to place appropriate
signage at each handicap parking location giving notice of the
regulations. Signs shall be posted in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Motor Vehicle Code. Any other unauthorized person parking within that
area shall be in violation of this section and guilty of a summary offense
and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than
$50 and no more than $200. Vehicles parked in violation of this section
may be towed at the owner’s expense. [Amended 12-1-2014 by Ord.
No. 1307]
A. No motor vehicle shall be parked, stored, or left in any one parking
space upon any street in the Borough of Catasauqua for a period in
excess of 72 hours.176
176. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B, regarding exceptions to the seventy-two-hour parking
limit, which immediately followed, was repealed 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 1368.
§ 260-24 JUNKYARDS § 260-27
170:653
§ 260-27. Stopping, standing or parking. [Added 4-4-1994 by Ord.
No. 1010; amended 12-6-1999 by Ord. No. 1106]
Except when necessary to avoid conflict with traffic or to protect the safety
of any person or vehicle, or in compliance with law or the directions of a
police officer or official traffic control device, no person shall stop, stand or
park a vehicle at any place where official signs prohibit stopping, standing
or parking as defined in Section 102 of the Vehicle Code.177
Street Side Between
Howertown Road West Church Street to Wood Street
Peach Street South Howertown Road and a point 61 feet east of
Howertown Road
177. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 102.
§ 260-27 CATASAUQUA CODE § 260-27
170:654
ARTICLE III
Interpretation
[Adopted 5-7-1962 by Ord. No. 480 (Ch. XII, Part 1C, of the 1962
Code)]
§ 260-28. Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations.
The provisions of this chapter, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances and regulations in force immediately prior to the enactment
of this chapter, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and
regulations and not as new enactments. The provisions of this chapter shall
not affect any act done or liability incurred, nor shall they affect any suit or
prosecution pending or to be instituted to enforce any right or penalty or to
punish any offense under the authority of any of these repealed ordinances
and regulations.
§ 260-28 JUNKYARDS § 260-28
170:655

ARTICLE IV
Parking Meters
[Adopted 1-4-1954 by Ord. No. 366 (Ch. XII, Part 2, of the 1962
Code)]
§ 260-29. Leasing and installation of parking meters authorized.
A resolution authorizing and directing the proper officers of the Borough
of Catasauqua to enter into a contract for the leasing and installation of
parking meters was duly adopted by Council at a meeting held on the
eighth day of September 1953. Said contract to be made subject to the
conditions, and in the manner provided by law, the payment of such meters,
and the installation thereof, to be provided for solely from the operation
of said parking meters, without in any manner obligating the Borough of
Catasauqua to pay for the same from any other source.
§ 260-30. Parking meter zones; days and hours parking meters in
operation. [Amended 4-6-1964 by Ord. No. 520; 12-1-1969 by Ord.
No. 630; 11-7-1977 by Ord. No. 750; 12-1-1980 by Ord. No. 813]
§ 260-31. Marking of individual parking spaces; installation of
parking meters.
On streets so designated, the proper officers shall cause parking spaces to
be marked on the pavements or curbs, or by other appropriate measure,
and in such space so marked, shall erect, or cause to be erected, a parking
meter, which, upon the deposit of a coin, or combination of coins of the
United States indicated on the meters, will entitle the party parking his or
A. After the installation of said parking meters, it shall be unlawful for the
owner or operator of any motor or other vehicle to park between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day, except Saturdays, Sundays
and the following holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial Day,
Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas, for
more than the maximum time indicated on the dial of the parking
meters. The following are designated as parking meter zones:
(1) East and west sides of Front Street, between Church and Pine
Streets.
(2) North and south sides of Bridge Street, between Front and
Limestone Streets.
(3) East and west sides of Second Street, between Bridge and
Strawberry Streets.
B. Until meters are actually installed in the parking meter zones herein
before described the parking of cars in said zones, or that part of the
zone in which parking meters are not installed, shall be limited to such
parking time, or parking limitations, as has been fixed by other
ordinances of the Borough of Catasauqua.
§ 260-29 JUNKYARDS § 260-31
170:657
her car to a limited time as indicated on the parking meter, and the time
when such period has elapsed.
§ 260-32. Coin deposit in meter. [Amended 9-7-1971 by Ord. No.
667]
In order that the police officers may properly compute the time during
which a vehicle is parked, the owner or operator of said vehicle shall,
upon entering such parking space, during the time of limited parking,
immediately deposit a coin, or combination of coins of the United States, in
the parking meter situated at the side of said parking space; and operate
same according to instructions thereon. Upon deposit of such five-cent or
ten-cent coins, and placing the meter in operation, the parking space may
be lawfully occupied by such vehicle during the period of parking time,
which has been prescribed for the particular amount deposited. The parking
meters shall be so adjusted that five-cent coins and ten-cent coins may be
deposited at any time throughout the maximum range of the meters; a fivecent
coin permitting the vehicle to be parked for a period of 60 minutes and
each ten-cent coin permitting the vehicle to be parked for a period of 120
minutes. If such a vehicle shall remain parked in any such parking space
for such length of time that the meter shall indicate by proper signal that
the lawful parking period has expired, such vehicle shall be considered as
parking overtime, and the parking of a vehicle overtime shall constitute a
violation of this article.
§ 260-33. Vehicles to be parked wholly within marked spaces.
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle across any line or marking
designating a parking space, or to park said vehicle in any way that the
same shall not be wholly within a parking space as designated by said lines
or markings.
§ 260-34. Unlawful to deface or tamper with parking meters.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, tamper with, damage, open
or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter
installed under the terms of this article.
§ 260-35. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-7-1962 by Ord. No.
466; 7-7-1980 by Ord. No. 806; 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1288]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article,
or aiding, abetting or assisting in the violation of any of its provisions,
shall, upon conviction thereof before the Mayor or any District Justice of the
Borough, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $2 or more than $50 for
each offense, and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such
fine and costs, to imprisonment in the County Jail for not more than five
days. Any person found guilty of violating an ordinance shall be assessed
court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in the
enforcement proceedings.
§ 260-31 CATASAUQUA CODE § 260-35
170:658
ARTICLE V
Removal and Impounding of Illegally Parked Vehicles
[Adopted 4-6-1970 by Ord. No. 637 (Ch. XII, Part 3, of the 1962
Code)]
§ 260-36. Authority to remove and impound illegally parked
vehicles. [Amended 5-4-1970 by Ord. No. 638]
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to remove and impound, or to
order the removal and impounding of any vehicle parked on any of the
streets, highways or public property of the Borough in violation of any of
the provisions of the law or of any ordinance of the Borough, if the same
interferes with the normal flow of traffic to and from said street, or may
cause a threat to the passage of, or performance of emergency vehicles, or
otherwise in any way, impair work, repairs, cleanup, or snow removal, or in
any way cause a nuisance to pedestrians or users of the highways. Provided:
no vehicle shall be removed or impounded except in strict adherence to the
provisions of this article.
§ 260-37. Approved storage garage. [Amended 6-6-1988 by Ord. No.
930]
Borough Council shall designate approved storage garages, as pounds for
the storage of impounded vehicles, from time to time, by resolution of
Council.
§ 260-38. Garage to post bond.
Every such approved storage garage shall post a bond, in the amount of
$5,000, to be filed with the Borough Secretary, for the indemnifying of the
owner of any such impounding vehicle against the loss thereof, or injury or
damage thereto, while in the custody of the said poundkeeper.
§ 260-39. Towing and storage charges fixed. [Amended 5-7-1984 by
Ord. No. 870]
The following are hereby fixed and established as the charges that shall be
made for the towing and storage of any vehicle removed and impounded
under the authority of this article. The owner of such impounded vehicle
shall pay a towing charge as set forth in a schedule of fees and charges
adopted by resolution of Borough Council.
§ 260-40. Chief of Police to notify owners of impounded vehicles.
Within 12 hours from the time of removal of any vehicle under authority
granted by this article, notice of the fact that such vehicle has been
impounded shall be sent by the Chief of Police of the Borough to the owner
of record of such vehicle. Such notice shall designate the place from which
said vehicle was removed, the reason for its removal and impounding, and
the pound in which it shall have been impounded.
§ 260-36 JUNKYARDS § 260-41
170:659
§ 260-41. Effect of payment of towing and impounding charges
without protest.
The payment of any towing and impounding charges, authorized by this
article, shall, unless such payment shall have been made "under protest,"
be final and conclusive and shall constitute a waiver of any right to recover
the money so paid.
§ 260-42. Effect of payment of charges under protest.
In the event that any towing and impounding charges, so imposed, shall
be paid "under protest," the offender shall be entitled to a hearing before
a magistrate or court of record having jurisdiction, in which case such
defendant shall be proceeded against and shall receive such notice as is
provided by the Vehicle Code in other cases of summary offenses, and shall
have the same rights as to appeal and waiver of hearing.
§ 260-43. Records of vehicles removed and impounded.
The Chief of Police shall keep a record of all vehicles impounded and shall
be able at all reasonable times to furnish the owners or agents of the owners
thereof with information as to the place of storage of such vehicles.
§ 260-44. Owner or operator of vehicle remains liable for fine or
penalty.
The payment of towing and storage charges shall not operate to relieve the
owner or operator of any vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the
violation of any law or ordinance on account of which the said vehicle was
removed and impounded.
§ 260-45. Restrictions upon removal of vehicles.
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this article if, at the time
of the intended removal thereof, the owner or person for the time being in
charge of such vehicle is present and expresses a willingness and intention
to remove such vehicle immediately.
§ 260-46. Motor vehicle repairs on public property. [Added 6-3-1996
by Ord. No. 1052]
A. No person shall make repairs to a vehicle in the Borough of Catasauqua
on public property, including the streets of the Borough, rendering the
vehicle immobile for over 24 hours, as such a vehicle shall constitute a
safety hazard and shall be subject to removal as described in
Subsection B, below.
B. If it is found and determined by the Police Department of the Borough
of Catasauqua that a vehicle constitutes a safety hazard as discussed
above, the Police Department may have the vehicle removed
immediately and within 12 hours submit written notice to the
§ 260-41 CATASAUQUA CODE § 260-46
170:660
registered owner of the vehicle stating the cause of removal and the
procedure to follow in reclaiming the vehicle.
§ 260-46 JUNKYARDS § 260-46
170:661

ARTICLE VI
Snow Emergencies
[Adopted 11-2-1970 by Ord. No. 658 (Ch. XII, Part 4, of the 1962
Code)]
§ 260-47. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this article, shall, unless the context
clearly indicates otherwise, mean or include as follows:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Catasauqua.
PERSON — Any natural person, firm, copartnership, association or
corporation.
STREET — Every way or place of whatever nature within the Borough of
Catasauqua, open to the use of the public as a matter of right, for purpose
of vehicular travel.
VEHICLE — Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a public street.
§ 260-48. Parking on snow emergency routes during snow
emergencies unlawful.
In the event a snow emergency is declared by the Mayor of the Borough or
his duly designated representative, six to 10 hours thereafter, as specified
by the Mayor or his representative, it shall be unlawful for any person or
persons to park or leave parked any vehicle at any place along any new
street where official signs have been erected prohibiting parking during
snow emergencies, as passed by Borough Council by resolution hereafter.178
§ 260-49. Unlawful to park a vehicle on or to fail to remove vehicle
from street scheduled for snow removal.
In the event any street is scheduled by the Mayor, or his duly designated
representative, for snow removal, by the posting of said street with notice
of snow removal, 12 hours following said posting, it shall be unlawful for
any person or persons to park a vehicle at or fail to remove a vehicle from
any place along said street. This restriction shall remain in force until the
snow removal has been completed, or the posting has been removed by
authorized persons.
§ 260-50. Removal and impounding of illegally parked vehicles.
Any vehicle parked in violation of §§ 260-48 and 260-49 of this article
may be removed by any member of the Catasauqua Police Department or
his designee. Any vehicle removed may be towed to and placed at any
area designated by the Mayor or his duly designated representative, for
impounding of vehicles. All costs for removal, towing, storage or parking
178. Editor's Note: Said resolution is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 260-47 JUNKYARDS § 260-50
170:663
of any vehicle removed under the provisions of this § 260-50 of this article
shall be paid by the owner of said vehicle and the vehicle shall remain
impounded until all costs are paid.
§ 260-51. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-17-1994 by Ord.
No. 1019]
A. Any person violating § 260-48 of this article, as amended, relating to
parking on snow emergency routes during snow emergencies, shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $50 and costs or
imprisonment of not more than five days. It shall be the duty of the
police officers and of parking enforcement personnel of the Borough to
report to the Mayor all violations of these regulations indicating in each
case the license number of the vehicle involved in the violation, the
location where the violation took place and any other facts which might
be necessary to secure clear understanding of the circumstances
attending the violation. The police officer or other person making the
report shall also attach to or place upon every vehicle a notice stating
that the vehicle was parked in violation of this article. The notice shall
contain instructions to the owner or driver of the vehicle that if he or
she will report to the office of the Police Department and pay the sum of
$35 within 72 hours after the time of the notice, that act will save the
violator from prosecution and from payment of the fine and cost
prescribed in the first sentence of this subsection.
B. Any person violating § 260-49 of this article, relating to parking of
vehicle on or failure to remove vehicle from a street scheduled for snow
removal, shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a fine or penalty of $25 and
costs, and in default of payment of fine and costs, suffer imprisonment
for not more than three days. It shall be the duty of the police officers
and of parking enforcement personnel of the Borough to report to the
Mayor all violations of these regulations indicating in each case the
license number of the vehicle involved in the violation, the location
where the violation took place and any other facts which might be
necessary to secure clear understanding of the circumstances
attending the violation. The police officer or other person making the
report shall also attach to or place upon every vehicle a notice stating
that the vehicle was parked in violation of this article. The notice shall
contain instructions to the owner or driver of the vehicle that if he or
she will report to the office of the Police Department and pay the sum of
$10 within 72 hours after the time of the notice, that act will save the
violator from prosecution and from payment of the fine and costs
prescribed in the first sentence of this subsection.
C. Any person found guilty of violating an ordinance shall be assessed
court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in
the enforcement proceedings. [Added 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1288]
§ 260-50 CATASAUQUA CODE § 260-51
170:664
ARTICLE VII
Business Parking Permits
[Adopted 12-3-1984 by Ord. No. 875 (Ch. XII, Part 5, of the 1962
Code)]
§ 260-52. Issuance of business parking permits.
The Borough Manager shall have the power to issue parking permits to any
business operating within the limits of the Borough of Catasauqua.
§ 260-53. Conditions required for issuance.
The Borough Manager shall issue the parking permit only if he determines
that all of the following problems exist:
§ 260-54. Permit information required. [Amended 5-2-1994 by Ord.
No. 1012]
A parking permit shall be issued on a form designed by the Borough
Manager and shall contain the following information:
§ 260-55. Two-hour parking in restricted areas. [Amended 5-2-1994
by Ord. No. 1012]
Anyone having or displaying a business parking permit will be able to park
in the designated one hour parking zone area of the Borough of Catasauqua
for a period of time up to two hours. The business parking permit will not
entitle any user to exceed the time limits in any other restricted parking
zone such as "no parking," "fifteen minute" or "loading zone;" or to park in
any "one hour zone location" except the one designated on the permit.
A. The business is a valid use in that zoning district. (This shall include
preexisting nonconforming uses.)
B. The business has made a good faith effort to obtain off-street parking.
C. Permit parking is necessary to allow the business to function effectively
at that location.
A. The name of the business (or sole proprietor).
B. The term of the permit.
C. That the permit can only be used by the permit holder or its clients
while parking to patronize permit holder's business.
D. That the permit is good for two hours maximum parking time per patron
per day.
E. The location (street area) where the permit is valid.
§ 260-52 JUNKYARDS § 260-56
170:665
§ 260-56. Display of permit.
While parking in a time restricted zone the permit must be displayed face
up on the top of the dashboard on the left side of the vehicle so as to be
visible to any official of the Borough by looking in the front window of the
vehicle.
§ 260-57. Violation on exceeding time limit.
If the permit holder exceeds a period of two hours they shall be deemed to
have violated the appropriate parking offense for the zone in which they are
parked.
§ 260-58. Illegal acts.
The following acts are hereby declared illegal:
§ 260-59. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord. No.
1288]
Anyone violating any section of this article except § 260-57 shall be guilty
of a summary offense punishable by a fine of up to $300 and/or 90 days
in jail. Any person found guilty of violating an ordinance shall be assessed
court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in the
enforcement proceedings.
A. Permit holders giving the permit to anyone other than a patron of its
business.
B. For a patron of said business to use the permit to park while attending
any other business than that of the permit holder.
§ 260-56 CATASAUQUA CODE § 260-59
170:666
Chapter 265
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water Department and Sewage
Department — See Ch. 95.
Uniform codes — See Ch. 130.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 210.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 225.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
235.
Wellhead protection — See Ch. 275.
Zoning — See Ch. 280.
§ 260-59 JUNKYARDS § 260-59
170:667

ARTICLE I
Assessments; Service Pipes
[Adopted 8-6-1923 by Ord. No. 255 (Ch. XVIII, Secs. 34 to 35, of the
1962 Code)]
§ 265-1. Connections not permitted until assessments for mains
paid.
The Water Department is hereby directed not to permit any connection to
be made with mains for which the assessments have not been paid.
§ 265-2. Responsibility of property owner for service pipes.
Service pipes connecting with the street mains to the house, property
or building shall be laid and maintained by the owner of such house,
property or building, and the owner of such pipe or the property connecting
therewith shall be responsible for any damage caused by leakage or
otherwise, in such pipe or any fixture connected thereto.
§ 265-1 JUNKYARDS § 265-2
170:669

ARTICLE II
Fluoridation
[Adopted 10-5-1959 by Ord. No. 410 (Ch. XVIII, Sec. 31, of the 1962
Code)]
§ 265-3. Fluoride to be introduced into water.
Subject to the approval of the Department of Health of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, and until further direction of Borough Council, the Fire and
Water Committee is hereby authorized and directed to provide necessary
equipment and to proceed with the addition of approximately one and not
more than 1.5 parts of fluoride to every million parts of water distributed in
the water supply system of Borough of Catasauqua. Funds for the purchase
of said equipment, to the extent not available in the budget of said Fire and
Water Committee, shall be provided from unappropriated balances in the
General Fund.
§ 265-3 JUNKYARDS § 265-3
170:671

ARTICLE III
Prospect Street and High Street Connections
[Adopted 6-5-1961 by Ord. No. 440 (Ch. XVIII, Secs. 32 to 33, of the
1962 Code)]
§ 265-4. Conditions for connecting with water mains.
Any owner of property abutting water mains in Prospect Street from Poplar
Street to New York Street, and in High Street where it intersects with and
in an easterly and westerly direction from said Prospect Street, shall be
authorized upon application for a proper permit to connect with said water
mains upon paying the proportionate share of the cost of laying the same as
determined by the Borough Engineer and the Water Department is hereby
directed not to permit any connection to be made with said water mains for
which the proportionate cost and expense shall not have been paid.
§ 265-5. Assessment of cost of laying mains.
The Borough Engineer is designated as the person to estimate and assess
the proportionate cost of the laying of said water mains according to the
front-foot rule.
§ 265-4 JUNKYARDS § 265-5
170:673

ARTICLE IV
Rates and Charges; Meters; Water Usage
[Adopted 2-3-1975 by Ord. No. 715 (Ch. XVIII, Secs. 36 to 50, of the
1962 Code)]
§ 265-6. Definitions. [Amended 12-21-1978 by Ord. No. 776;
6-2-1980 by Ord. No. 800]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Catasauqua.
CONSUMER — Any person who is supplied by water service from the
Borough of Catasauqua.
COUNCIL — The Council of the Borough of Catasauqua.
ENGINEER — The Engineer of the Borough of Catasauqua.
HOTEL — A building in which 50% of the gross habitable floor area is used
for sleeping.
MANAGER — The Manager of the Borough of Catasauqua.
MULTIUNIT STRUCTURES — All structures or buildings of more than one
unit, as defined above.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, firm, association or corporation.
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT — The Public Works Department of the
Borough of Catasauqua.
ROOMING HOUSE — A dwelling or other residential structure in which
lodging facilities are supplied.
SERVICE LATERALS — The lines servicing a building which run from the
water main to the building.
WATER MAINS — The water transmission lines within the streets or other
rights-of-way of the Borough of Catasauqua.
WATER SYSTEM — Water pumping station, water mains, service laterals,
fire hydrants, wells and all other appurtenances thereto owned by the
Borough of Catasauqua.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT — One or more rooms, including kitchen and
sanitary facilities, designed for occupancy by not more than one family
for living or sleeping purposes, or by a group of persons who are not
all related by blood or marriage, living together and sharing the same
water services.
A.
NONRESIDENTIAL UNIT — One or more rooms, with water fixtures,
designed or used for the purpose of engaging in activities of, or
connected with, commerce, industry or education.
B.
§ 265-6 JUNKYARDS § 265-7
170:675
§ 265-7. Nonmetered rates. [Amended 12-21-1978 by Ord. No. 776;
12-28-1982 by Ord. No. 843]
Nonmetered rates for flat-rate consumers shall be as established by
resolution of Borough Council.
§ 265-8. Metered rates. [Amended 12-21-1978 by Ord. No. 776;
12-28-1982 by Ord. No. 843]
The rates for metered consumers shall be as established by resolution of
Borough Council.
§ 265-9. Connection charges. [Amended 6-2-1980 by Ord. No. 800;
10-3-1988 by Ord. No. 935]
The service charge for new services for each residential unit and for each
nonresidential unit shall be established by resolution of Borough Council.
§ 265-10. Off-premises fee. [Amended 6-2-1980 by Ord. No. 800179]
Any consumer who permits his neighbor or any other person not a resident
of his premises to use water shall be charged at the same rates as the
neighbor or nonresident would have to pay if he had attachments of his own,
and where such consumer refuses to pay for his neighbor or nonresident,
the water shall be turned off the premises, and will so remain until a fee as
set from time to time by resolution of Borough Council180 for restoring the
service shall have been paid in full.
§ 265-11. Sprinkling permit charges.181
A. Streets and alleys. A permit from the Borough shall be required before
any person shall be permitted to sprinkle or wash down any Borough
street or alley unless the property from which the water is taken is
metered. The cost for the permit shall be as set from time to time by
resolution of Borough Council182 and shall be valid for a three-month
period from the date of issuance. No permit shall be required from any
metered property.
B. Lawns. A permit from the Borough shall be required before any person
shall be permitted to use a lawn sprinkler, soil soaker or other device
other than a spray nozzle. The costs for the permit shall be as set from
time to time by resolution of Borough Council. All permits shall be valid
for a three-month period from the date of issuance. No permit shall be
required for any metered property.
179. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
180. Editor's Note: See Ch. A285, Fees.
181. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
182. Editor's Note: See Ch. A285, Fees.
§ 265-7 CATASAUQUA CODE § 265-12
170:676
§ 265-12. Water Department contingency fund. [Amended 6-2-1980
by Ord. No. 800]
Each year 5% of the total Water Department operating budget shall be set
aside in an interest-bearing account to be used, as directed by Council, for
nonanticipated requirements of the water system.
§ 265-13. Water meters. [Amended 12-21-1978 by Ord. No. 776;
6-2-1980 by Ord. No. 800; 6-5-1989 by Ord. No. 944]
A. It shall be the duty of the Borough Manager to establish a procedure for
the gradual installation of meters in all industrial, commercial and
residential structures. All industrial, commercial and residential
structures shall be metered at the time any of the following events
occur:
(1) Installation or continued existence of a swimming pool with a depth
to top of wall of two feet anywhere around the perimeter;
(2) Any work for which a plumbing permit is obtained;
(3) Transfer of property, whether with or without consideration, in
which event the new owner shall be responsible for meter
installation;
(4) Whenever requested by a flat rate customer;
(5) Whenever a structure is converted from single- to multi-unit.
(6) Upon notification by the Borough Manager, acting in accordance
with an established procedure or segment thereof, which has been
approved by resolution of Council.
B. It shall be the duty of the persons designated by the Borough Manager
to inspect all existing water meters to assure that they are in proper
working condition and to repair or replace those meters which are
working improperly.
C. The Borough shall furnish and install all water meters up to one inch in
size which shall be of the same size as the service pipe entering the
building or of such size as determined to be adequate by the Borough
Engineer. The property owner shall, however, be responsible at his own
expense for having a registered plumber prepare the pipe for the
installation as well as any appurtenances necessary for the installation.
The meter shall be placed within the property line of the customer in a
convenient, accessible and unobstructed position within the building.
When it is not convenient to place the meter within a building, it shall
be placed in a suitable meter box or masonry pit, the cost for which
shall be borne by the owner. No person other than an authorized
employee of the Borough shall install, remove, change or interfere with
any water meter or part thereof. [Amended 12-6-2010 by Ord. No.
1259]
§ 265-12 JUNKYARDS § 265-13
170:677
D. All meters greater than one inch in size shall be installed by the
property owner at his expense under the direction of the Borough. The
size and type of meter shall be approved by the Borough Engineer.
[Amended 12-6-2010 by Ord. No. 1259]
E. The customer shall properly protect the meter that is installed on his
property at all times. It shall be the customer's responsibility to protect
the meter against frost, back pressure or other damages. The cost for
the repair or replacement of a water meter including the Public Works
man-hours shall be borne by the property owner for any meter which is
damaged. Payment shall be made within 30 days from the date invoiced
on any damaged meter.
F. If a meter fails to register or otherwise becomes inoperative, the meter
shall be replaced or repaired by the Public Works Department and the
current bill shall be estimated and determined by the average amount
of water used in a previous corresponding period. No deduction from
any water bill shall be allowed on account of leakage.
G. If any customer shall doubt the correctness of the meter on his
property, he can request that the meter be tested provided that he
makes a written request to the Borough within 15 days of receipt of his
quarterly bill and provided that he place a deposit on the meter in
accordance with the "Schedule of Fees" established by resolution of
Council. Upon receipt of the written request and the placing of the
proper deposit, the Public Works Department shall have the meter
tested. In the event the test should show the meter to be registering
incorrectly beyond 4% of the accurate amount, such deposit shall be
refunded to the customer, his account shall be adjusted accordingly, the
meter shall be replaced, and the entire cost shall be borne by the
Borough. In the event the meter is working properly within the 4% of
the accurate amount, the customer shall forfeit his deposit, and the
same meter shall be reinstalled.
H. In all cases where the service connection serves a building or structure
occupied by two or more units, either residential or commercial, only
one meter shall be furnished by the Borough to such building, and the
water rate shall be chargeable and must be paid by the owner of said
building. For the purposes of this article, each individual unit shall be
billed to the owner of the building pursuant to the rates set forth in
§ 265-8 of this article.
I. No customer serviced with metered water shall take or receive, or
permit to be taken or received, any water from the Borough into a
building in any way other than through the meter servicing the
building.
J. The owner of a metered property shall notify the Borough immediately
of any change of ownership of his property so that the meter can be
read and final consumption can be billed to the seller.
§ 265-13 CATASAUQUA CODE § 265-13
170:678
§ 265-14. Payment of water bills. [Amended 6-2-1980 by Ord. No.
800; 6-5-1989 by Ord. No. 944]
§ 265-15. Investigation of water usage.
The Borough Manager or his designates shall have the authority to enter
any building, yard or grounds at any reasonable time with the consent of
the owner or occupant of said premises or, in the absence of such consent,
by means of a properly secured warrant, for the purpose of investigating
therein the use of water, water connections or any other conditions or
matters affecting the usage of Borough water. Any person who refuses
to consent to an entry upon his premises at a reasonable time for the
aforesaid purposes shall be subject to having the water supply to the
premises in question disconnected by the Borough. Furthermore, nothing
in this section shall be deemed to prohibit an entry for the aforementioned
purposes without obtaining consent or the assistance of a warrant in cases
of emergency.
K. For the purposes of this article, rooming houses and hotels shall be
calculated at one residential unit for every three residential rooms or
fraction thereof.
A. All bills for water service shall be billed quarterly and shall be paid
within 30 days from the date of billing. If said bills shall not be paid
within 30 days from the billing date, there shall be an additional sum of
15% added to the bill.
B. If the water bill shall remain unpaid for a period of 60 days from the
date of billing, formal notice of water shutoff within 15 days and
institution of lien procedures shall be sent. Fifteen days thereafter the
water shall be shut off at the delinquent premises. If the property is
such that the "Utility Service Tenants' Rights Act" (1978, November 26,
P.L. 1255, No. 299) applies, then the water shall not be shut off except
in compliance with that Act. However, the Solicitor shall be notified to
immediately file a lien against said property and proceed under the
"Municipal Claims and Liens Act" to collect the sum due and owing. For
all other properties, if the delinquency persists into the next quarter, a
lien shall be filed and collection sought by all legal means. When
payment has been made in full of all bills, penalties, legal costs and the
like, plus a turn-on fee as set from time to time by resolution of Borough
Council,183 the Borough shall turn on the water and resume service.184
C. Any payment or payments made on a water bill shall be credited in the
following order: first, to any interest accrued, then to any legal costs
(including turn-on fees), then penalties, then delinquent balances, then
current balances.
183. Editor's Note: See Ch. A285, Fees.
184. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 265-13 JUNKYARDS § 265-16
170:679
§ 265-16. Responsibility for water mains and service laterals.
[Amended 6-2-1980 by Ord. No. 800]
§ 265-17. New outlets.
All consumers who are billed under the flat-rate system shall notify the
Borough of any additions, deletions or modifications to outlets within their
buildings prior to making any changes. It shall be the responsibility of any
plumber who installs any additional outlets to any structures within the
Borough to notify the Borough Office of the additional facilities that are
installed. All work performed shall comply in all respects to the Plumbing
Code of the Borough.185
§ 265-18. Prohibitions. [Amended 6-2-1980 by Ord. No. 800]
A. Responsibility of the Borough. The Borough shall be responsible for all
water mains and service lines located within the streets or other rightsof-
way acquired for water main purposes. In the streets the Borough
shall be responsible for the service line from the main to the curbline
including the curb box if located within two feet of the curbline.
B. Responsibility of property owner. The property owner shall be
responsible for the service lateral from the curbline to his building. In
the event that there is a leak on a service lateral between the curbline
and the building or within the building, the property owner shall correct
the leak within 10 days from written notification from the Borough that
the leak must be corrected. Failure to comply with the notice will result
in the water being turned off and/or legal action in accordance with the
penalty provisions of this article.
C. All systems, existing or new, served by a fire protection water system in
addition to regular service shall have flow alarms on said fire systems at
an outside location approved by the Borough which shall provide
notification to the public of its use; separate notification shall also be
made to the Borough Water Department. Further, when said fire system
is to be checked or cleaned, the Borough Water Department shall be
notified in advance.
D. In any structure where a bypass around the water meter is installed,
said bypass shall be valved. Further, the valve shall be sealed by the
Borough Water Department. At any time the bypass is to be used, said
Department shall be given prior notification.
A. No person shall be permitted to sprinkle or wash adjoining or
neighboring premises with Borough water.
B. No owner of any property shall be permitted nor shall the owner permit
connections from his property to an adjoining or neighboring property
185. Editor's Note: See Ch, 130, Codes, Uniform.
§ 265-16 CATASAUQUA CODE § 265-18
170:680
§ 265-19. Liability of Borough.
§ 265-20. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-2-1980 by Ord. No.
800; 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1288]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof before any District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of
not more than $300 for each violation, plus the costs of prosecution, and, in
default of payment of such fines and costs, to imprisonment in the Lehigh
County Prison for a period of not more than 30 days. In addition to the
above, the violator shall be charged for water usage in an amount estimated
by the Borough Manager to be that improperly obtained or supplied to
unless required to do so for emergency purposes by the Borough
Manager or his designates.
C. No attachments shall be made to the water mains or to any private
pipes without a permit to do so from the Borough.
D. No person shall allow water fixtures to run when not in use for the
purpose for which it was intended.
E. No person shall allow water to flow continuously in order to guard
against freezing or for any other purpose except for emergency
purposes as may be determined by the Borough Manager or his
designates.
F. No person shall use any water fixtures for street or lawn sprinkling
other than between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. and between
the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m. and provided that the proper
permits are taken out as stipulated in this article.
G. No owner of any property shall be permitted nor shall the owner permit
the use of Borough water for the washing of any vehicle other than a
vehicle owned by the owner of the property from which the water is
utilized.
H. No person shall be permitted to use any fixtures that cause water
hammers to the Borough water system.
I. No person other than Borough authorized personnel shall be permitted
to install, connect or tamper with any part of the Borough water system,
including the breaking of a Water Department seal.
A. Borough Council or its designate may limit or stop the supply of water
in case of emergency and may shut off water for repairs, replacements
or extensions. In no case shall the Borough of Catasauqua be liable for
damages for any insufficient supply of water.
B. No claim shall be allowed by the Borough for any damages arising from
shutting off of water to repair mains or service lines or for any defective
mains, service lines or curb stops.
§ 265-18 JUNKYARDS § 265-20
170:681
another. Any person found guilty of violating an ordinance shall be assessed
court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in the
enforcement proceedings.
§ 265-20 CATASAUQUA CODE § 265-20
170:682
ARTICLE V
Connection Requirements
[Adopted 7-6-1992 by Ord. No. 987 (Ch. XVIII, Part 4, of the 1962
Code)]
§ 265-21. Definitions.
§ 265-22. Permit required.
No person shall connect any residential or nonresidential facility to the
Borough of Catasauqua's public water supply system without first obtaining
a permit for the same.
§ 265-23. Certification of materials.
A permit for connection to the Borough of Catasauqua's water supply
system shall require that the person applying for the same certify in writing
that the materials used in the construction of the plumbing system to be
connected are lead free.
§ 265-24. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord. No.
1288]
Any connection to the Catasauqua public water system without a permit
shall constitute a violation of this article with a fine of up to $1,000 and/
or 90 days in jail. Any person found guilty of violating an ordinance shall
be assessed court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the
Borough in the enforcement proceedings.
§ 265-25. False information; violation.
Any person making a false statement or false certification on the said permit
application shall constitute a violation of this article and shall subject the
violator to a fine of up to $1,000 and/or 90 days' imprisonment.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONNECTION — The attachment of any person's water system for
any residential or nonresidential water facility to the Borough of
Catasauqua's water supply system.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, company,
corporation, municipality, municipal authority or political subdivision,
or any agency of the federal or state government. The term includes
officers, employees and agents of any partnership, association,
company, corporation, municipality, municipal authority or political
subdivision or of any agency of the federal or state government.
B. All definitions found in the Plumbing System Lead Ban and Notification
Act or amendments thereto shall be applied to this article.
§ 265-21 JUNKYARDS § 265-26
170:683
§ 265-26. Continuation of offense.
Each day that the party is in violation of this article shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense.
§ 265-27. Conflict with other ordinances.
Whenever the requirements of this article are in conflict with other
requirements of the codified ordinances of the Borough of Catasauqua, the
most restrictive, or those imposing the higher standards, shall govern.
§ 265-26 CATASAUQUA CODE § 265-27
170:684
ARTICLE VI
Water Connection, Customer Facilities and Tapping Fees
[Adopted 7-17-2006 by Ord. No. 1198]
§ 265-28. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this § 265-28, unless the context otherwise indicates:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Catasauqua, a municipal corporation,
incorporated under the Borough Code.
DESIGN CAPACITY — The permitted or rated capacity of facilities
expressed as a multiple of 100 gallons per day.
DESIGN CAPACITY REQUIRED BY A NEW RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMER —
The design capacity required by a new residential customer used in
calculating the water tapping fees shall not exceed an amount established
by multiplying 65 gallons per capita per day times the average number
of persons per household as established by the most recent census data
provided by the United States Census Bureau. Alternatively, the design
capacity required by a new residential customer shall be determined by a
study, but shall not exceed the average water consumption per residential
customer. The average residential water consumption shall be determined
by dividing the total water consumption for all metered residential
customers in the Borough's service area over at least a twelve-consecutivemonth
period within the most recent five years by the average number of
customers during the period.
DWELLING UNIT — Any structure, or part thereof, designed and intended
to be occupied as the living quarters of a single family or housekeeping unit,
and having separate kitchen and separate bathroom facilities.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property located within the area served by
the water system upon which there is erected a structure intended for
continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy, or use by human beings or
animals.
OUTSTANDING DEBT — The principal amount outstanding of any bonds,
notes, loans or other form of indebtedness used to finance or refinance
facilities included in the tapping fee.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any improved property. When more than one person is the owner
of any particular parcel of improved property, all such persons shall be
jointly and severally liable for the payment of the fees and charges imposed
under this chapter.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, society,
corporation, or other group or entity.
SERVICE LINE — A water line that directly connects a single building or
structure to a distribution facility.
§ 265-28 JUNKYARDS § 265-28
170:685
STANDARD METER — A water meter which accommodates a water
connection of less than two inches in diameter.
SYSTEM DESIGN CAPACITY — The design capacity of the system for
which the tapping fee is being calculated which represents the total design
capacity of the water system.
WATER LATERAL — A distribution facility that connects a service line to a
water system main.
WATER SYSTEM — All facilities, as of any particular time, for producing,
pumping, transporting, treating, storing, or distributing potable water,
which are situate in or adjacent to the Borough and owned, leased or
operated by the Borough.
§ 265-29. Water connection fees.
A. Imposition of fee. Except as provided in Subsections C through E and in
§§ 265-32 and 265-33, the owner of each improved property which is to
be newly connected to the water system shall pay a connection fee to
the Borough in the amount in effect under Subsection B as of the time of
payment, at or before the time the owner or his agent obtains a permit
to connect into the water system. The connection fee is a charge for the
cost of constructing a water lateral from the water system main to the
curb stop or property line fronting the property to be connected, and
connecting the water lateral to the water system main.
B. Amount of standard connection fee. The standard water connection fee
shall be $3,687. [Amended 11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 1318]
C. Construction of facilities by owner.
(1) No water connection fee shall be charged to any owner who
constructs the water lateral and connects the water lateral to the
water system main by himself or through his agent at his own
expense. However, in that event, the owner shall pay the Borough
an inspection fee for inspecting the construction of the water
lateral and the connection with the water system in the amount of
$170. [Amended 11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 1318]
(2) In any case in which the Borough performs some of the labor and/or
provides some of the materials for the water lateral construction
and connection, and the owner performs or provides the remainder,
the connection fee shall be equal to the actual cost incurred by the
Borough in connection with the construction of the water lateral
and the making of the connection with the water system (including
actual inspection costs).
(3) No owner shall have the right to construct and connect a water
lateral to the water system without the approval of the Borough,
which approval may be withheld for any reason or no reason. If the
Borough agrees to permit an owner or his agent to construct a
water lateral or make a water lateral connection, it may impose any
§ 265-28 CATASAUQUA CODE § 265-29
170:686
§ 265-30. Water customer facilities fees.
conditions it desires in connection with the approval, and may
require the payment of the Borough's review, inspection,
administrative, legal, engineering, and other costs, and an advance
deposit or other security to insure such payment.
D. Exceptional connections. In any case in which the Borough constructs a
water lateral and/or makes the connection with the water system, and
in which the length of the water lateral exceeds 40 feet or the diameter
of the water lateral exceeds one inch, the connection fee shall be equal
to the actual cost incurred by the Borough in connection with the
construction of the water lateral and the making of the connection with
the water system main (including inspection costs).
E. Actual costs. In determining the actual costs incurred by the Borough
under Subsection C or D, all materials used shall be billed at their cost
to the Borough, time expended by the Borough or Borough employees
shall be billed at their hourly cost to the Borough (including benefits),
time expended by Borough agents other than employees shall be billed
at their cost to the Borough (to the extent that they are reasonable and
do not exceed normal charges when fees are not reimbursed by
property owners) and other Borough expenses (including
administration, overhead, and use of equipment) shall be billed at their
cost to the Borough, as reasonably estimated by the Borough. Before
any work is begun by the Borough, the owner shall pay the Borough's
reasonable estimate of the connection fee due; after the work is
completed, the Borough shall refund any excess or charge any shortage
of the estimated connection fee as compared to the actual connection
fee for the work.
A. Imposition of fee. Except as provided in Subsections C through E and in
§§ 265-32 and 265-33, the owner of each improved property which is to
be newly connected to the water system shall pay a customer facilities
fee to the Borough in the amount in effect under Subsection B as of the
time of payment, at or before the time the owner or his agent obtains a
permit to connect into the water system. The customer facilities fee is a
charge for the cost of purchasing and installing a water meter.
B. Amount of standard customer facilities fee. The standard water
customer facilities fee shall be $230. [Amended 11-2-2015 by Ord.
No. 1318]
C. Installation of meter by owner.
(1) No water customer facilities fee shall be charged to any owner who
purchases and installs the water meter by himself or through his
agent at his own expense.
(2) No owner shall have the right to purchase and install the water
meter without the approval of the Borough, which approval may be
§ 265-29 JUNKYARDS § 265-30
170:687
withheld for any reason or no reason. Generally, the Borough shall
purchase and install all water meters. If the Borough agrees to
permit an owner or his agent to purchase and install a water meter,
it may impose any conditions it desires in connection with the
approval, and may require the payment of the Borough's review,
inspection, administrative, legal, engineering, and other costs, and
an advance deposit or other security to insure such payment.
D. Nonstandard meters. In any case in which the Borough purchases and
installs a water meter other than its standard meter, the water
customer facilities fee shall be equal to the actual cost incurred by the
Borough in connection with the purchase and installation of the water
meter. Before any work is begun by the Borough, the owner shall pay
the Borough's reasonable estimate of the customer facilities fee due;
after the work is completed, the Borough shall refund any excess or
charge any shortage of the estimated customer facilities fee as
compared to the actual customer facilities fee for the work.
E. Other customer facilities.
(1) All other customer facilities to connect the structure served on an
improved property with the water system at the termination of the
water lateral shall be constructed by the owner or his agent. The
construction shall be in accordance with the Borough's regulations,
requirements, rules, and standards and shall be performed by a
contractor acceptable to the Borough and shall be subject to
inspection by the Borough. Prior to construction, the owner must
deposit with the Borough the Borough's estimated reasonable and
necessary costs of review, construction, inspection, administrative,
legal, engineering, and other services in connection with the work.
Inspection fees under the preceding sentence shall be in addition to
any inspection fees otherwise imposed in relation to the
construction of a structure on the improved property or under
§ 265-29. After the completion of the construction, the Borough
may retain all costs actually incurred, and charge any additional
amount of costs in excess of the amount deposited.
(2) The owner shall pay the Borough an inspection fee in the amount of
$132 for inspecting the construction and connection of the service
line from the building or structure to the curb stop or property line
fronting the property to be connected to the water lateral.
F. Actual costs. In determining the actual costs incurred by the Borough
under Subsections D and E, all materials used shall be billed at their
cost to the Borough, time expended by Borough employees shall be
billed at their hourly cost to the Borough (including benefits), time
expended by Borough agents other than employees shall be billed at
their cost to the Borough (to the extent that they are reasonable and do
not exceed normal charges when fees are not reimbursed by property
owners), and other Borough expenses (including administration,
§ 265-30 CATASAUQUA CODE § 265-30
170:688
§ 265-31. Water tapping fees.
overhead, and use of equipment) shall be billed at their cost to the
Borough, as reasonably estimated by the Borough.
A. Initial connection.
(1) New connection. Except as provided in §§ 265-32 and 265-33, the
owner of each improved property which is to be newly connected to
the water system shall pay a tapping fee to the Borough in the
amount specified under Subsection D as of the earlier of the time of
connection or the time the owner or his agent obtains a permit to
connect into the water system.
(2) Improper connection. The owner of each improved property which
is improperly connected to the water system without a permit shall
pay a tapping fee to the Borough, in the amount specified under
Subsection D as of the time of actual payment, immediately upon
demand by the Borough.
(3) Failure to make required connection. The owner of each improved
property which is not connected to the water system within 120
calendar days after the date the Borough serves a notice to connect
such improved property to the water system, shall pay a tapping
fee to the Borough, in the amount specified under Subsection D as
of the time of actual payment, on the 121st calendar day after the
date the notice was served. Service for this purpose shall be
complete when a notice to connect is deposited, postage prepaid, in
the United States mail, addressed to the legal owner(s) of the
improved property at their last known address according to the
records of the Lehigh County real estate tax office.
(4) Amount of water flow.
(a) For residential use, the amount of water flow for an improved
property which is being assessed a tapping fee under this
Subsection A shall be equal to the design capacity required by
a new residential customer for the improved property as of the
later of the date of payment, the date the use intended for the
improved property is established, or the date the
improvements contemplated for the improved property are
completed.
(b) For nonresidential use, the amount of water flow for an
improved property which is being assessed a tapping fee under
this Subsection A shall be equal to the daily anticipated amount
of peak flow, as if full building utilization is being realized, for
the proposed nonresidential use for the improved property as
of the later of the date of payment, the date the use intended
for the improved property is established, or the date the
§ 265-30 JUNKYARDS § 265-31
170:689
improvements contemplated for the improved property are
completed.
(c) The Borough shall have the option of estimating the amount of
water flow using flow calculations available from the
Department of Environmental Protection, from public utility
industry publications, or from user estimates, so long as the
latter has an empirical and readily verifiable basis; provided
that no estimate shall be made in a manner which conflicts
with Acts 2003-57 or 1990-203.
(5) Purpose. The water tapping fee is imposed for the ability to use
water system facilities to the extent of the amount of water flow
associated with the use of the improved property.
B. Increase in potential usage.
(1) Imposition of fee. The owner of each improved property which is
connected to the water system shall pay a tapping fee to the
Borough, in the amount specified under Subsection D as of the time
of payment, whenever the use of the improved property is to be
changed, the use of the improved property is to be intensified, or
constructed or made on the improved property, unless the amount
of additional water flow for the improved property as of the date
the new use intended for the improved property is established, the
date the existing use of the improved property is intensified, or the
date the improvements, alterations, extensions, or modifications
contemplated for the improved property are completed, is less than
or equal to the amount of water flow assigned to the improved
property at the time the most recent water tapping fee was paid.
(2) Time of payment. The water tapping fee described in Subsection D
shall be paid:
(a) At or before the time the owner or his agent obtains a building
permit, if a building permit is required in connection with the
circumstances under which the tapping fee is imposed;
(b) At or before the time the owner or his agent obtains a zoning
permit, if a building permit is not required but a zoning permit
is required in connection with the circumstances under which
the tapping fee is imposed;
(c) At or before the time the owner or his agent completes his
improvements, alterations, extensions, or modifications, or
establishes his new use, or intensifies his existing use, if
neither a building permit, nor a zoning permit, is required in
connection with the circumstances under which the tapping
fee is imposed;
(d) Immediately upon demand by the Borough, if a building
permit, or zoning permit is required by the Borough but not
§ 265-31 CATASAUQUA CODE § 265-31
170:690
obtained, and activity which would have to be authorized by a
valid building permit, or zoning permit is undertaken.
(3) Amount of water flow.
(a) The amount of additional water flow for an improved property
which is being assessed a tapping fee under this Subsection B
shall be equal to:
[1] The amount or anticipated amount of water flow for the
improved property as of the later of the date of payment,
the date the use (or intensified use) intended for the
improved property is established, or the date the
improvements contemplated for the improved property are
completed; less
[2] The amount of water flow assigned to the improved
property (for water purposes) at the time the most recent
water tapping fee was paid.
(b) The Borough shall have the option of estimating the amount of
water flow using flow calculations available from the
Department of Environmental Protection, from public utility
industry publications, or from user estimates, so long as the
latter has an empirical and readily verifiable basis, provided
that no estimate shall be made in a manner which conflicts
with Acts 2003-57 or 1990-203.
(4) Purpose. The water tapping fee is imposed for the ability to use
water system facilities to the extent of the amount of additional
water flow associated with a new, changed, or intensified use of the
improved property.
C. Excess actual usage.
(1) Imposition of fee. The owner of each improved property which is
connected to the water system shall pay a tapping fee to the
Borough, in the amount specified under Subsection D as of the time
of payment, whenever the Borough shall reasonably determine that
the actual average flow of water to the improved property from the
water system during the thirty-day period for which the flow is
greatest in a year is more than 110% of the flow for which a water
tapping fee has been paid with respect to the improved property.
(2) Time of payment. The water tapping fee described in Subsection D
shall be paid within 30 days after demand by the Borough.
(3) New or additional water flow. The new or additional water flow for
which an improved property shall be assessed a tapping fee under
this Subsection C shall be equal to:
§ 265-31 JUNKYARDS § 265-31
170:691
(a) Actual water flow for the improved property as reasonably
determined by the Borough during the most recent fifteenmonth
period; less
(b) Amount of water flow assigned to the improved property (for
water purposes) at the time the most recent water tapping fee
was paid.
(4) Purpose. The water tapping fee is imposed for the ability to use
water system facilities to the extent of the full water usage
associated with the use of the improved property.
D. Amount of fees.
(1) For residential use, the water tapping fee shall be equal to the
design capacity required by a new residential customer multiplied
by the number of new dwelling units for which the fee is being
assessed multiplied by the sum of the following fee parts:
(a) Capacity part: a capacity part in the amount of $1,465.
[Amended 11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 1318]
(b) Distribution part: a distribution part in the amount of $808.
[Amended 11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 1318]
(c) Special purpose part: a special purpose part, but only with
respect to customers in areas served by special purpose
facilities, as described below:
Special Purpose Area Amount
None established to date ———
All other areas of the water system
area
$0.00
(d) Reimbursement part: a reimbursement part, but only with
respect to customers in the following areas served by facilities
constructed by private persons:
Reimbursement Area
Dates
Applicable Amount
None established to date ——— ———
All other areas of the water
system area
——— $0.00
(2) For nonresidential use, the water tapping fee shall be equal to the
daily anticipated amount of peak flow, as if full building utilization
is being realized, for the proposed use for which the fee is being
assessed multiplied by the sum of the following fee parts:
(a) Capacity part: a capacity part in the amount of $1,465 per 156
gallons per day. [Amended 11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 1318]
§ 265-31 CATASAUQUA CODE § 265-31
170:692
§ 265-32. Installment payments for existing residential
developments.
(b) Distribution part: a distribution part in the amount of $808 per
156 gallons per day. [Amended 11-2-2015 by Ord. No.
1318]
(c) Special purpose part. A special purpose part, but only with
respect to customers in areas served by special purpose
facilities, as described below:
Special Purpose Area Amount
None established to date ———
All other areas of the water system
area
$0.00
(d) Reimbursement part.
[1] Reimbursement part: a reimbursement part, but only with
respect to customers in the following areas served by
facilities constructed by private persons:
Reimbursement Area
Dates
Applicable Amount
None established to date ——— ———
All other areas of the
water system area
——— $0.00
[2] Optional or mandatory reimbursement agreements with
persons who construct water facilities may be entered into
from time to time by the Borough in accordance with the
provisions of 53 Pa.C.S. § 5607(d)(24)(i)(C)(IV).
A. In general. Notwithstanding the general provisions of §§ 265-29A,
265-30A and 265-31A(1), in the case of any owner of an improved
property which is being used for residential purposes, and is being
served by a functioning on-lot well which was installed before water
lines were extended to serve the improved property, the owner may
elect to pay the water connection fee, customer facilities fee and
tapping fee described in such sections in installments in accordance
with the provisions of Subsections B through D instead of paying such
fees at or before the time the owner (or his agent) obtains a permit to
connect into the water system. The election shall be made at or before
the time the owner (or his agent) obtains a permit to connect into the
water system.
B. Installment payments. Any person who elects the relief granted by this
§ 265-32 shall pay to the Borough:
§ 265-31 JUNKYARDS § 265-32
170:693
§ 265-33. Deferral of payment for certain residential property
owners.
(1) Fifty percent of the amount of fees which would otherwise have
been due at the time the owner (or his agent) obtains a permit to
connect into the water system at or before the time the owner (or
his agent) obtains a permit to so connect; and
(2) The remaining 50% of the amount of fees which would otherwise
have been due at the time the owner (or his agent) obtains a permit
to connect into the water system, plus simple interest on that fiftypercent
amount at the rate of 6% per annum from the date the
owner (or his agent) obtains a permit to so connect until payment,
on or before the first anniversary of the date the owner (or his
agent) obtains a permit to connect into the water system.
C. Liens. Any owner who elects the relief granted by this § 265-32 shall
consent to the placement of a lien on his improved property by the
Borough in the amount described in Subsection B(2). The consent shall
be granted on or before the date of the payment described in
Subsection B(1). The owner shall pay the costs of filing and satisfying
the lien, up to a maximum of $100, at the time of the payment described
in Subsection B(1). Any additional costs shall be borne by the Borough.
D. Property owner must connect. The relief provided by this section shall
only be available if the owner actually connects to the water system
within the period granted by the Borough in its notice to connect.
A. In general. Notwithstanding the general provisions of §§ 265-33A,
265-30C and 265-31A, in the case of any owner of an improved property
which is being used for residential purposes, and is being served by a
functioning on-lot water system which was installed less than one year
prior to the commencement of construction of a water system main
extension which may serve the improved property; and after Borough
officials informed the owner that a water system main extension to
serve the improved property was not contemplated within a period of at
least three years, the owner may elect to defer the payment of the water
connection fee, customer facilities fee and tapping fee described in
such sections until the fifth anniversary of the date the owner (or his
agent) obtains a permit to connect into the water system, subject to the
requirements of Subsections B through D. The amount of the fees so
paid shall be equal to the fees in effect at the time the owner (or his
agent) obtains a permit to connect into the water system, without
adjustment for subsequent increases or for any interest or other time
charges. The elections shall be made at or before the time the owner (or
his agent) obtains a permit to connect into the water system.
B. Liens. Any owner who elects the relief granted by this § 265-33 shall
consent to the placement of a lien on his improved property by the
Borough in the amount of the fees so deferred. The consent shall be
granted on or before the date the owner (or his agent) obtains a permit
§ 265-32 CATASAUQUA CODE § 265-33
170:694
§ 265-34. Calculations.
A detailed itemization of all calculations clearly showing the manner in
which the fees were determined has been marked as Exhibit A attached
hereto and made a part hereof.186
§ 265-35. Word usage.
All references to he, him and himself shall be considered gender neutral,
and shall be deemed to represent masculine, feminine and neuter subjects
and objects.
to connect into the water system. The Borough shall pay all the costs of
filing and satisfying the lien.
C. Property owner must connect. The relief provided by this section shall
only be available if the owner actually connects to the water system,
within the period granted by the Borough in its notice to connect.
D. No exemption from periodic rental payments. Nothing in this § 265-33
shall be construed to exempt any owner from the requirements to make
timely payments of all periodic water rental/usage charges for the
services provided by the water system.
186. Editor's Note: See Exhibit A immediately following Chapter 237, Tapping Fees.
§ 265-33 JUNKYARDS § 265-35
170:695
Chapter 275
WELLHEAD PROTECTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Floodplain management — See Ch. 145.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 225.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
235.
Water — See Ch. 265.
Zoning — See Ch. 280.
§ 275-1. Statement of findings.
The Council of the Borough of Catasauqua finds that:
§ 275-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and
welfare through the preservation of the Borough of Catasauqua's major
ground water resources to ensure a future supply of safe and healthful
drinking water for the municipality, local residents and employees and the
general public.
A. The ground water underlying the municipality is a major source of its
existing and future water supply, including drinking water.
B. The ground water aquifers are integrally connected with, are recharged
by, and flow into the surface waters, lakes and streams which constitute
a major source of drinking water for the region.
C. Accidental spills and discharges of toxic and hazardous materials may
threaten the quality of such ground water supplies and related water
resources in the Borough, thereby posing potential public health and
safety hazards.
D. Unless preventive measures are adopted to control the discharge and
storage of toxic and hazardous materials within the municipality, spills
and discharges of such materials may tend to occur and with greater
frequency and degree of hazard by reason of increasing construction,
commercial and industrial development, population and vehicular
traffic in the Borough.
E. The designation of Wellhead Protection Areas 1, 2 and 3 and careful
regulation of land use, physical facilities and other activities within
these areas can reduce the potential for ground water contamination.
§ 265-35 CATASAUQUA CODE § 275-3
170:696
§ 275-3. Statutory authority.
The Borough is empowered to regulate these activities under the provisions
of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (MPC) (Act of 1968, P.L.
805, No. 247, as reenacted and amended).187
§ 275-4. Zoning and subdivision amendments.
By this chapter, §§ 275-7, 275-8, 275-9, 275-11, 275-12, 275-13 and
Appendix A188 are enacted as amendments to the Borough Zoning
Ordinance [Chapter 280]. By this chapter, §§ 275-7, 275-10, 275-13 and
Appendix A are enacted as amendments to the Borough Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance [Chapter 235].
§ 275-5. Applicability.
This chapter shall only apply to those areas of the Borough which are
located within Wellhead Protection Areas 1, 2 and 3 surrounding a
protected public water supply well as delineated on an official map available
for inspection at the Borough office. A map of the wellhead protection areas
is included in Appendix A for general reference.189 this chapter regulates
the following land uses, physical facilities and activities which have the
potential to contaminate ground water:
§ 275-6. Compatibility with other requirements.
Approvals issued pursuant to this chapter do not relieve the applicant of
the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities
regulated by other applicable code, rule, act or ordinance.
A. Light industry.
B. Agricultural operations.
C. Sewage disposal.
D. Manufacturing.
E. Injection wells.
F. Storage tanks, underground and aboveground.
G. Disposal facilities; solid waste dump sites.
H. Sewage sludge land application.
I. Subdivisions.
J. Land developments.
187. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
188. Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Borough offices.
189. Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 275-3 JUNKYARDS § 275-7
170:697
§ 275-7. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGRICULTURAL OPERATIONS — Those operations which include tilling,
cultivation and animal husbandry and which qualify as earthmoving
pursuant to DEP Chapter 102 Rules and Regulations.
CARBONATE BEDROCK — Limestone or dolomite rock formations.
CLOSED DEPRESSION — In a karst area, a distinctive bowl-shaped
depression in the land surface. It is characterized by internal drainage,
varying magnitude and an unbroken ground surface.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Northampton County Conservation
District or Lehigh County Conservation District, as applicable.
CONSERVATION PLAN — An erosion and sedimentation control plan
prepared for agricultural properties as required by Chapter 102 of the DEP
Rules and Regulations and as reviewed and approved by the Conservation
District.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DETENTION POND — A basin designed to retard stormwater runoff by
temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a predetermined rate
through a defined outlet structure.
ENVIRONMENTAL HAZARD SURVEY FORM — A document authorized
by the Pennsylvania Worker and Community Right-to-Know Act which, if
required by the Department of Labor and Industry for a facility, describes
the hazardous substances emitted, discharged or disposed of from the
workplace.
EPA — The Federal Environmental Protection Agency.
FRACTURE TRACE — Linear features in bedrock caused by erosion along
fractures or zones of fractures and readily visible on aerial photographs.
GHOST LAKES — Transient surface water bodies formed in sinks and closed
depressions after heavy precipitation, due to poor internal drainage. This
poor drainage may be due to residual clay remaining after solution of
limestone minerals.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — A product or waste, or combination of
substances that because of the quantity, concentration, physical, chemical
or infectious characteristics, if not properly treated, stored, transported,
used or disposed of, or otherwise managed, would create a potential threat
to public health through direct or indirect introduction into ground water
resources and the subsurface environment which includes the soil and all
subsequent materials located below. Such hazardous material includes, but
is not limited to, materials which may be included on one or more of the
following lists:
§ 275-7 CATASAUQUA CODE § 275-7
170:698
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SURVEY FORM — A document required by the
Pennsylvania Worker and Community Right-to-Know Act which provides a
listing of all hazardous substances found in the workplace.
KARST — A type of topography characterized by closed depressions or
sinkholes, caves, rock pinnacles and underground drainage, resulting from
solution of limestone and dolomite bedrock.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
CFR, Part 1910, Subpart Z — th Act, 29 CFR, Part 1910, Subpart Z -
Extremely Hazardous Substance List.
A.
American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists, Threshold
Limit Values for Chemical Substances and Physical Agents in the Work
Environment (latest edition).
B.
National Toxicology Program, Annual Report on Carcinogens (latest
edition).
C.
International Agency for Research on Cancer Monographs (latest
edition).
D.
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Labor and Industry,
Hazardous Substance List (latest edition).
E.
"Hazardous substances" defined pursuant to § 311 of the Federal Clean
Water Act.
F.
"Toxic materials" defined pursuant to § 307 of the Federal Clean Water
Act.
G.
"Hazardous wastes" defined pursuant to Chapter 75 of DEP Rules and
Regulations.
H.
"Hazardous wastes" defined pursuant to § 101 of the Federal Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act.
I.
"Hazardous substances" defined pursuant to the Federal
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability
Act.
J.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of, streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
A.
§ 275-7 JUNKYARDS § 275-7
170:699
LARGE VOLUME SPRAY IRRIGATION SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — A
sewage disposal facility which is designed to treat wastewater with ultimate
disposal of effluent being to the land surface via a spray mechanism and
which is designed for more than 2,000 gallons per day.
LARGE VOLUME SUBSURFACE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — A sewage
disposal facility which is designed to discharge directly to the soil profile,
whether natural or enhanced, and which has a design capacity in excess of
10,000 gallons per day.
LIGHT INDUSTRY — Industrial, commercial, public or retail establishments
which engage in manufacturing, fabrication or service activities and which
appear on the following list:
B. A subdivision of land.
Development in accordance with § 503(1.1) of the Municipalities
Planning Code.190
C.
A. Herbicide, pesticide and fertilizer products dealers and distributors.
B. Mining and quarrying.
C. Highway deicing material storage.
D. Textile and apparel products.
E. Lumber and wood preserving.
F. Printing and publishing.
G. Chemical products.
H. Leather products.
I. Mineral products; glass and cement.
J. Metal products.
K. Machine shops.
L. Electronics and electronic equipment.
M. Transportation maintenance.
N. Scrap trade and metal container recyclers.
O. Chemical and petroleum storage and sales.
P. Automotive repair, services and related parking.
Q. Personal services; laundry; pest control; and photofinishing.
R. Repair services; furniture, welding and septage services.
190. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 275-7 CATASAUQUA CODE § 275-7
170:700
MANUFACTURING — Industrial establishments which produce primary
products from raw materials.
NUTRIENT MANAGEMENT PLAN — A document applicable to agricultural
properties which describes the storage, handling and application of
fertilizers, including manure, related to agricultural production.
PERSON — An individual, association, public or private corporation for
profit or not for profit, partnership, firm, trust, estate, department, board,
bureau or agency of the commonwealth, political subdivision, municipality,
district authority or any other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized
by law as the subject of rights and duties.
PESTICIDE MANAGEMENT PLAN — A document applicable to agricultural
properties which describes the storage, handling and application of
products to control pests and undesirable vegetation related to agricultural
production.
POLLUTION INCIDENT PREVENTION (PIP) PLAN — An environmental
emergency response document authorized by Chapter 101 of the DEP Rules
and Regulations which is applicable to facilities which handle materials with
the potential for accidental pollution of the waters of the commonwealth.
Specific requirements for a PIP plan are contained in "Guidelines for the
Development and Implementation of Environmental Emergency Response
Plans," PADEP, September 1990.
PREPAREDNESS, PREVENTION AND CONTINGENCY (PPC) PLAN — An
environmental emergency response document required by the Federal
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (as amended by the Hazardous
and Solid Waste Amendments of 1984), the Pennsylvania Solid Waste
Management Act and the DEP Hazardous Waste Regulations (Chapters
260-270) applicable to facilities which generate, store, treat or dispose
of hazardous wastes. Hazardous wastes are those defined within the DEP
regulations or other wastes which meet specific characteristic tests.
PROFESSIONAL — A person who, by education, experience, certification or
licensure, has a demonstrated expertise in a particular field.
PROTECTED PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY WELL — Any well used or intended
to be used as a ground water supply source as part of a public water supply
system for which wellhead protection areas have been established.
RETENTION POND — A basin designed to retard stormwater runoff, by
temporarily storing the runoff, which does not have a defined outlet
structure and which empties through a combination of evaporation,
transpiration and infiltration.
SARA TITLE III OFF-SITE PLAN — A document required by the Federal
Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act (SARA) which applies to
employers who have extremely hazardous substances in the workplace.
The document identifies the transportation routes of extremely hazardous
S. Amusement and recreation.
T. Educational, medical and engineering laboratories.
§ 275-7 JUNKYARDS § 275-7
170:701
substances, a description of the workplace and a risk analysis of the
operation to the surrounding community.
SARA TITLE III TIER I AND TIER II REPORTS — Documents required
by the Federal Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act (SARA)
which apply to employers who have extremely hazardous substances in the
workplace. The Tier I document lists the amounts and locations within the
workplace of extremely hazardous substances by type of hazard (e.g., fire,
explosion, acute health hazard). The Tier II document provides a listing of
each specific extremely hazardous substance in the workplace and each
specific hazardous substance exceeding 10,000 pounds on site at any one
time.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products or
excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals
and any noxious or deleterious substances being harmful or inimical to the
public health, or to animal or aquatic life, or to the use of water for domestic
water supply or for recreation, or which constitutes pollution under the Act
of June 22, 1937 (P.L. 1987 No. 394), known as the "Clean Streams Law," as
amended.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — A combination of piping, tanks or other
facilities for the collection, conveyance, treatment and disposal of sewage.
SEWAGE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER (SEO) — The official hired by the
Borough who issues and reviews sewage system disposal permits and
conducts such inspections and investigations as are necessary to implement
the provisions of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act.191
SEWAGE SLUDGE — The coarse screenings, grit and dewatered or air-dried
products of sewage treatment, septic and holding tank pumpings and any
other residues from sewage collection and treatment systems which require
disposal.
SINKHOLE — A closed, generally circular, depression in the land surface of
variable depth and width, characterized by a distinct breaking of the ground
surface, and formed by solution of carbonate bedrock and downward
movement of soil into bedrock voids or by collapse of underlying caves.
SPILL PREVENTION CONTROL AND COUNTERMEASURE (SPCC) PLAN
— An environmental emergency response document required by the Federal
Clean Water Act for facilities which handle hazardous substances as defined
in the Clean Water Act. The plan requirements are virtually the same as for
a PIP plan.
SPILL PREVENTION RESPONSE (SPR) PLAN — An environmental
emergency response document required by the Pennsylvania Storage Tank
and Spill Prevention Act (STSPA) for facilities with an aboveground storage
tank exceeding a volume of 21,000 gallons. The plan requirements are
specified in §§ 902 and 903 of the STSPA. A downstream notification
requirement applies to regulated tanks adjacent to surface waters.
191. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 275-7 CATASAUQUA CODE § 275-7
170:702
STORAGE OF HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — The containment of hazardous
material on a temporary basis in such a manner as not to constitute disposal
of such waste. It shall be presumed that the containment of hazardous
material in excess of one year constitutes disposal. This presumption can be
overcome by clear and convincing evidence to the contrary.
STORAGE TANK, ABOVEGROUND — A tank which contains substances as
regulated under the Storage Tank and Spill Prevention Act (STSPA) which
meets the following criteria: a stationary tank with 250 gallons or more
of capacity with greater than 90% of its capacity aboveground. Specific
exceptions to this definition are included within the STSPA.
STORAGE TANK, UNDERGROUND — A tank which contains substances as
regulated under the Storage Tank and Spill Prevention Act (STSPA) which
meets the following criteria: a tank with 110 gallons or more of capacity
with 10% or greater of its capacity beneath the ground surface. Specific
exceptions to this definition are included within the STSPA.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
UNDERGROUND INJECTION WELL — A bored, drilled, driven or dug well
for the emplacement of fluids into the ground (except drilling muds and
similar materials used in well construction).
WASTE — Garbage, refuse and other discarded materials including, but not
limited to, solid and liquid materials resulting from municipal, industrial,
commercial, institutional, agricultural and residential activities.
WELLHEAD PROTECTION AREA 1 — Wellhead Zone (WHZ); that area of
the land surface within a calculated fixed radius of a protected public water
supply well. The fixed radius is determined using a volumetric flow equation
with a ninety-day time interval except that the radius is no smaller than 100
feet nor larger than 400 feet.
WELLHEAD PROTECTION AREA 2 — Zone of Diversion (ZOD); that area of
the land surface which represents the zone of diversion associated with a
protected public water supply well. The zone of diversion is that area within
which water will be drawn into the well as a result of the design pumping
rate for the well.
WELLHEAD PROTECTION AREA 3 — Zone of Contribution (ZOC); that area
of the land surface which, through recharge or other means, provides water
to sustain the yield of a protected public water supply well.
§ 275-8. Wellhead protection requirements.
§ 275-7 JUNKYARDS § 275-8
170:703
A. General requirements. No land use, physical facilities or activity
specified in § 275-5 shall occur within Wellhead Protection Areas 1, 2 or
3 except in strict conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Wellhead protection areas.
(1) Mapping of wellhead protection areas. In order to implement the
provisions of this chapter, wellhead protection areas surrounding
protected public water supply wells are hereby established. The
boundaries of Wellhead Protection Areas 1, 2 and 3 are shown on
an official map which is available for inspection at the Borough
office. A copy of the official map at a reduced scale is included in
Appendix A for general reference.192 Should any person challenge
the boundary of Wellhead Protection Areas 1, 2 or 3, it shall be the
responsibility of that person to retain a recognized professional
with competence in the field to determine more accurately the
precise boundary of the disputed area. The final boundary to be
used will be determined by the Zoning Officer with assistance from
the Borough Engineer and/or a professional hydrogeologist, as
appropriate.
(2) Prohibitions within wellhead protection areas.
(a) Wellhead Protection Area 1. Except as provided for in § 275-10,
the following land uses, physical facilities and activities are
prohibited:
[1] Facilities which generate, store, treat or dispose of
hazardous material and which are required to maintain a
Pollution Incident Prevention (PIP); Spill Prevention
Control and Countermeasure (SPCC); Preparedness,
Prevention and Contingency (PPC); Spill Prevention
Response (SPR) or SARA Title III Off-Site Plan.
[2] Herbicide, pesticide and fertilizer products dealers and
distributors.
[3] Large volume subsurface sewage disposal systems.
[4] Large volume spray irrigation sewage disposal systems.
[5] Underground injection wells.
[6] Aboveground storage tanks, except those in accord with
the requirements of § 275-11B.
[7] Underground storage tanks.
[8] Waste disposal facilities.
[9] Land application of sewage sludge.
192. Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 275-8 CATASAUQUA CODE § 275-8
170:704
[10] Stormwater retention facilities.
[11] Unlined stormwater detention facilities.
[12] Operations and/or facilities which are involved with the
manufacture, storage or processing of materials which
require the use of potential groundwater pollutants for
such manufacture or processing and which fall within the
following categories unless exempted pursuant to
§ 275-9D:
[a] Herbicide, pesticide and fertilizer products dealers
and distributors.
[b] Mining and quarrying.
[c] Highway deicing material storage.
[d] Textile and apparel products.
[e] Lumber and wood preserving.
[f] Printing and publishing.
[g] Chemical products.
[h] Leather products.
[i] Mineral products; glass and cement.
[j] Metal products.
[k] Machine shops.
[l] Electronics and electronic equipment.
[m] Transportation maintenance.
[n] Scrap trade and metal container recyclers.
[o] Chemical and petroleum storage and sales.
[p] Automotive repair, services and related parking.
[q] Personal services; laundry, pest control and
photofinishing.
[r] Repair services; furniture, welding and septage
services.
[s] Amusement and recreation.
[t] Educational, medical and engineering laboratories.
§ 275-8 JUNKYARDS § 275-8
170:705
§ 275-9. General regulations.
(b) Wellhead Protection Area 2. Except as provided for in § 275-9,
the following land uses, physical facilities and activities are
prohibited:
[1] Facilities which generate, store, treat or dispose of
hazardous material which are required to maintain a
Pollution Incident Prevention (PIP); Spill Prevention
Control and Countermeasure (SPCC); Preparedness,
Prevention and Contingency (PPC); Spill Prevention
Response (SPR) or SARA Title III Off-Site Plan.
[2] Herbicide, pesticide and fertilizer products dealers and
distributors.
[3] Large volume subsurface sewage disposal systems.
[4] Large volume spray irrigation sewage disposal systems.
[5] Underground injection wells.
[6] Aboveground storage tanks.
[7] Underground storage tanks, except those in accord with
the requirements of § 275-11B.
[8] Waste disposal facilities.
[9] Land application of sewage sludge.
[10] Stormwater retention facilities.
[11] Unlined stormwater detention facilities.
(c) Wellhead Protection Area 3. Except as provided for in § 275-9,
the following land uses, physical facilities and activities are
prohibited:
[1] Facilities which dispose of hazardous material through
land surface or subsurface means including, but not
limited to, Class IV injection wells and waste disposal
facilities.
A. Continuation of existing land uses, physical facilities and activities. Any
land use, physical facility or activity prohibited within § 275-8 lawfully
in existence within Wellhead Protection Areas 1, 2 or 3 prior to the
effective date of this chapter may continue to exist on the parcel upon
which it is located so long as it remains in compliance with applicable
federal, state and local regulations including the requirements included
within § 275-11.
B. Existing sewage disposal problems. Notwithstanding the provisions of
§ 275-8, large volume subsurface sewage disposal systems or large
§ 275-8 CATASAUQUA CODE § 275-9
170:706
§ 275-10. Subdivision and land development.
volume spray irrigation sewage disposal systems may be used if
necessary to solve sewage disposal problems associated with existing
development.
C. Public water supply projects. Notwithstanding the provisions of § 275-8,
public water supply projects which require the use of chemicals for
disinfection or treatment or the above ground storage and use of fuel
will be allowed in all wellhead protection areas subject to their
approval, construction and operation in accordance with DEP
regulations.
D. Request for exemption. Notwithstanding the provisions of § 275-8,
operations and facilities in all wellhead protection areas may apply to
the Catasauqua Zoning Hearing Board for a variance. An applicant for a
variance must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing
Board that there is no potential for contamination due to the nature of
the facility or operation as well as meeting the standards for a variance
as required by law.
A. General requirements. No subdivision or land development shall occur
within Wellhead Protection Areas 1, 2 or 3 except in strict conformance
with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Wellhead protection areas mapping. In order to implement the
provisions of this chapter, wellhead protection areas surrounding
protected public water supply wells are hereby established. The
boundaries of Wellhead Protection Areas 1, 2 and 3 are shown on an
official map which is available for inspection at the Borough office. A
copy of the official map at a reduced scale is included in Appendix A for
general reference.193 Should any person challenge the boundary of
Wellhead Protection Areas 1, 2 or 3, it shall be the responsibility of that
person to retain a recognized professional with competence in the field
to determine more accurately the precise boundary of the disputed
area. The final boundary to be used will be determined by the Borough
with assistance from the Borough Engineer and/or a professional
hydrogeologist, as appropriate.
C. Wellhead protection area restrictions.
(1) Subdivisions and land developments within Wellhead Protection
Areas 1, 2 or 3 for which stormwater management controls are
required pursuant to the municipal subdivision and land
development ordinance shall be designed consistent with the
following:
(a) Stormwater retention basins shall be prohibited.
193. Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 275-9 JUNKYARDS § 275-10
170:707
(b) Stormwater detention basins shall be designed with an
impermeable liner to prohibit the infiltration of impounded
water to the subsurface.
(2) Subdivisions and land developments within Wellhead Protection
Areas 1, 2 or 3 which are proposed for subsurface sewage disposal
shall provide a tested and suitable primary absorption area and a
tested and suitable secondary absorption area on each lot.
(3) Subdivisions and land developments within both wellhead
protection areas and carbonate bedrock areas as mapped in
Appendix A shall have the following preliminary plan requirements
in addition to those requirements of the Borough Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance [Chapter 235]:
(a) A recognized professional with competence in the field shall
review aerial photographs, soils, geologic and other available
related data as the data relates to the subject property. The
professional shall also conduct a site inspection of the property.
(b) Based on the work required in Subsection C(3)(a), the
professional shall prepare a map of the site showing all karst
features or feature indicators. The mapping shall indicate, but
shall not be limited to, the following:
[1] Closed depressions.
[2] Open sinkholes.
[3] Seasonal high water table indicators.
[4] Outcrops of bedrock.
[5] Unplowed areas in plowed fields.
[6] Surface drainage into ground.
[7] "Ghost lakes" after rainfall.
[8] Lineaments and faults.
[9] Limonite excavations and quarries.
[10] Geologic contacts.
(c) Based upon the work performed in Subsection C(3)(a) and (b),
the professional shall determine what further testing should be
done by the applicant to ensure compliance with the
performance standards set forth in Subsection C(4). Testing
methodology shall be reasonable under the circumstances,
including the scale of the proposed development, and the
hazards revealed by examination of available data and site
inspection.
§ 275-10 CATASAUQUA CODE § 275-10
170:708
(d) The applicant shall cause the additional testing established in
Subsection C(3)(c) to be done. A study report shall be
submitted and referred to the municipal engineer. This study
shall include a map of the area, all test results and a
recommendation on the mitigating measures to be taken to
meet the standards of Subsection C(4).
(e) The Borough Engineer shall report to the Planning
Commission, with a copy to the landowner, his or her opinion
as to the adequacy of the study and as to the capability of the
site to support the proposed development in a manner in which
the risks attendant to the development in carbonate areas are
either eliminated or minimized. Recommendations for site
development including stormwater management, the layout of
utility lines, grading and building location may be included.
Additional studies or testing as deemed necessary by the
municipal engineer in order to produce an adequate study
given the scale of the proposed development and the hazards
revealed may be required of the applicant.
(4) Subdivision and land developments within both wellhead
protection areas and carbonate bedrock areas as mapped in
Appendix A194 shall have the following design requirements:
(a) All buildings, structures, impervious surfaces and utilities shall
be so situated, designated and constructed as to minimize the
risk of new sinkhole formation and of the accelerated
introduction of contaminants and pollution into the wellhead
protection area through existing or future sinkholes.
(b) Buildings, structures, impervious surfaces and utilities shall
not be located within 100 feet of the karst features identified
pursuant to Subsection C unless a recognized professional with
competence in the field demonstrates that a minimal risk of
sinkhole formation or enlargement will exist, or mitigating
measures are taken to minimize the risk of sinkhole formation
or enlargement. These mitigating measures shall be designed
by a recognized professional with competence in the field.
(c) Stormwater management facilities including, but not limited
to, detention basins, shall not be located within 100 feet of the
karst features identified pursuant to Subsection C(3) unless a
recognized professional with competence in the field
demonstrates that a minimal risk of sinkhole formation or
enlargement will exist, or mitigating measures are taken to
minimize the risk of sinkhole formation or enlargement. These
measures shall be designed by a recognized professional with
competence in the field.
194. Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 275-10 JUNKYARDS § 275-10
170:709
§ 275-11. Special wellhead protection provisions.
(d) Regrading shall not alter drainage patterns unless a
recognized professional with competence in the field
demonstrates that a minimal risk of sinkhole formation or
enlargement will exist, or mitigating measures are taken to
minimize the risk of sinkhole formation of enlargement. These
mitigating measures shall be designed by a recognized
professional with competence in the field.
(e) Stormwater shall not be redirected into a sinkhole.
A. General requirements. No land use, physical or activity specified in
§ 275-5 shall occur within Wellhead Protection Areas 1, 2 or 3 except in
strict conformance with the requirements of this section.
B. Wellhead protection area requirements. The following land uses,
physical facilities and activities, located within Wellhead Protection
Areas 1, 2 or 3, which are specifically allowed in §§ 275-8 and 275-9 of
this chapter, shall meet the following conditions:
Land Use, Physical Facility or
Activity Conditions
1. Facilities which generate, store,
treat or dispose of hazardous
material which are required to
maintain a Pollution Incident
Prevention (PIP); Spill Prevention
Control and Countermeasure
(SPCC); Preparedness, Prevention
and Contingency (PPC); Spill
Prevention Response (SPR); or
SARA Title III Off-Site Plan.
(a) A current PIP, SPCC, PPC, SPR
or SARA Title III Off-Site Plan
must be filed with the Borough.
(b) A current Hazardous
Substance Survey Form,
Environmental Hazard Survey
Form and SARA Title III Tier I and
Tier II Report must be filed with
the Borough.
2. Herbicide, pesticide and
fertilizer products dealers and
distributors
(a) At minimum, a current plan
meeting the requirements of a PIP
plan must be filed with the
Borough.
(b) A current Hazardous
Substance Survey Form,
Environmental Hazard Survey
Form and SARA Title III Tier I and
Tier II report must be filed with
the Borough.
§ 275-10 CATASAUQUA CODE § 275-11
170:710
Land Use, Physical Facility or
Activity Conditions
3. Large volume subsurface
sewage disposal system and large
volume spray irrigation sewage
disposal systems.
(a) A current permit from the
Department of Environmental
Protection must be filed with the
Borough.
(b) DEP required water quality
monitoring reports must be filed
with the Borough.
4. Underground Injection Wells
(Classes I, II, III and V)
(a) A current registration from the
Environmental Protection Agency
must be filed with the Borough.
5. Aboveground storage tanks and
underground storage tanks.
(a) A current registration from the
Department of Environmental
Protection must be filed with the
Borough.
(b) Shall comply with DEP
regulations which are enacted in
response to the Storage Tank and
Spill Prevention Act of 1989.
6. Waste Disposal Facilities (a) A current permit from the
Department of Environmental
Protection must be filed with the
Borough.
(b) A current PPC plan, if required
for the facility by DEP regulations,
must be filed with the Borough.
(c) DEP required water quality
monitoring reports must be filed
with the Borough.
(d) DEP required water pollution
abatement plans must be filed
with the Borough.
7. Sewage Sludge Land
Application
(a) A current permit from the
Department of Environmental
Protection must be filed with the
Borough.
(b) Sewage sludge tests
associated with the permit
application must be filed with the
Borough.
(c) DEP required water quality
monitoring reports must be filed
with the Borough.
§ 275-11 JUNKYARDS § 275-11
170:711
§ 275-12. Inspection.
Land Use, Physical Facility or
Activity Conditions
8. Agricultural Operations (a) The Conservation Plan
prepared according to Chapter
102 of DEP regulations must
include a Pesticide Management
Plan and a Nutrient Management
Plan.
(b) Within areas of carbonate
bedrock as delineated in Appendix
A, the Conservation Plan prepared
according to Chapter 102 of DEP
Regulations must include the
identification of sinkholes and a
mitigation plan.
9. Sewage Disposal Facilities (a) Sewage disposal facilities must
be operated and maintained to
prevent discharge of untreated or
partially treated sewage to
surface or ground waters.
(b) On-lot sewage disposal
systems must be inspected by the
Sewage Enforcement Officer
(SEO) and any necessary repairs
or maintenance must be
performed prior to the expansion
or conversion of the land use
served.
(c) On-lot sewage disposal systems
must be inspected by the Sewage
Enforcement Officer and any
necessary repairs or maintenance
must be performed prior to
transfer of property ownership.
10. Lined Stormwater Detention
Facilities
(a) The facility shall provide the
degree of impermeability required
by the Borough Engineer.
A. Municipal inspections.
(1) The Borough Engineer or his designee shall be authorized to
inspect the following facilities located within Wellhead Protection
Areas 1, 2 or 3 for purposes of determining compliance with this
chapter and any federal or state permit or regulation requirements
upon direction by the Borough Council:
§ 275-11 CATASAUQUA CODE § 275-12
170:712
§ 275-13. Wellhead protection area map.
The attached map depicting Wellhead Protection Areas 1, 2 and 3 and the
carbonate bedrock areas is declared to be a part of this chapter as Appendix
A.195
(a) Facilities with PIP, SPCC, PPC, SPR or SARA Title III Off-Site
Plans.
(b) Herbicide, pesticide and fertilizer products dealers and
distributors.
(c) Large volume subsurface sewage disposal systems.
(d) Large volume spray irrigation sewage disposal systems.
(e) Underground and aboveground storage tanks.
(f) Underground injection wells.
(g) Waste disposal facilities.
(h) Sewage sludge land application sites.
(i) Other industrial and commercial facilities.
(2) The schedule of inspections shall be determined by the Borough for
each type of facility. Inspectors shall be responsible for reporting
any violations to the Borough. The Borough may inform DEP or
EPA, as appropriate, of any possible violations of their regulations
for the purpose of follow-up actions by those agencies.
B. Inspections by the County Conservation District. The County
Conservation District shall be authorized to perform monthly inspection
of the following activities located within Wellhead Protection Areas 1, 2
or 3:
(1) Agricultural operations covered by a conservation plan under
Chapter 102 of DEP regulations.
(2) Earthmoving activities covered by an erosion and sedimentation
plan under Chapter 102 of DEP regulations.
C. Right-of-entry. Upon presentation of the proper credentials and
execution of release/waiver of claims, duly authorized representatives
of the Borough may enter at reasonable times upon any property within
a wellhead protection area to investigate or ascertain whether the
requirements of this chapter are being met.
195. Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 275-12 JUNKYARDS § 275-14
170:713
§ 275-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord. No.
1288]
Anyone violating the terms and conditions of this chapter is guilty of a
summary offense which is punishable by a fine of up to $300 or
imprisonment of up to 90 days. Each day for each individual violation shall
be considered a separate and distinct offense. Nothing contained herein
shall be construed to prohibit the Borough from taking any other legal
remedies necessary to enforce the terms and conditions of this chapter
including civil actions and/or injunctive relief. Any person violating the
terms and conditions of this chapter causing damage to the Borough's wells
or public water supply shall be responsible for the full cost of remediation
of said problem. Any person found guilty of violating an ordinance shall
be assessed court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the
Borough in the enforcement proceedings.
Chapter 280
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 105.
Apartment licensing — See Ch. 108.
Uniform codes — See Ch. 130.
Fair housing — See Ch. 138.
Firearms — See Ch. 140.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 145.
Garage sales — See Ch. 160.
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 165.
Junkyards — See Ch. 170.
Noise — See Ch. 185.
Signs and billboards — See Ch. 215.
Solid waste — See Ch. 220.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 225.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 230.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
235.
Trees — See Ch. 245.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 255.
§ 275-14 CATASAUQUA CODE § 275-14
170:714
ARTICLE I
Administration
§ 280-1. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply throughout the Borough of Catasauqua. Any
activity regulated by this chapter shall only occur in such a way that
conforms with the regulations of this chapter. See § 280-3A.
§ 280-2. Purposes and community development objectives.
This chapter is hereby adopted in accordance with the following purposes,
which shall serve as community development objectives, in addition the
purposes provided for each district in § 280-20:
A. The requirements and purposes of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended, including but not limited to Sections 604
and 605, or their successor section(s);196
B. The goals and objectives of the Catasauqua Comprehensive Plan; and
C. The following additional objectives:
(1) Support the goals established in the Comprehensive Plan for
Lehigh-Northampton Counties.
(2) Promote innovative residential design that encourages the creation
of a sense of community for undeveloped parcels.
(3) Provide diverse housing opportunities, including housing that is
affordable.
(4) Encourage adaptive reuse and infill development.
(5) Protect sensitive and important natural features from
indiscriminate development.
(6) Stimulate economic development and revitalization by attracting
commercial uses (such as retail, service and specialty stores) to
appropriate areas.
(7) Provide opportunities for home occupations of limited intensity.
(8) Promote the preservation of historic resources.
(9) Coordinate future land and roadway functions to maximize safe and
efficient use of major roads.
(10) Coordinate road improvements with planned roadway functions,
design standards and planned land uses.
196. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10604 and 10605.
§ 280-1 JUNKYARDS § 280-2
170:715
§ 280-3. Permits and certificates.
(11) Assure that future development provides for access designs and
planned locations that minimize traffic congestion and safety
problems. Encourage needed improvements to be completed by
developers.
(12) Promote alternative means of transportation, such as pedestrian
movement, bicycles, public transit and carpooling.
(13) Seek to minimize the need for zoning variances for routine
improvements.
A. Applicability.
(1) Any of the following activities or any other activity regulated by this
chapter shall only be carried out in conformity with this chapter:
(a) Erection, construction, movement, alteration, razing,
demolition, removal, placement or extension of a structure,
building or sign;
(b) Change of the type of use or expansion of the use of a structure
or area of land;
(c) Creation of a lot or alteration of lot lines; and/or
(d) Creation of a new use.
(2) Zoning permit. A zoning permit indicates that a zoning application
complies with this chapter to the best knowledge of the applicable
Borough staff.
(a) A zoning permit is required to be issued prior to the start of
any of the following activities:
[1] Erection, construction, movement, placement, razing,
demolition, removal, alteration or expansion of a structure,
building or sign;
[2] Change of the type of use or expansion of the use of a
structure or area of land;
[3] Creation of a new use;
[4] Demolition of a building; and/or
[5] Other activity that is required to have a permit under
§ 280-27 of this chapter.
(b) The Borough may, at its option, issue combined or separate
building permits and zoning permits and/or may utilize a single
or separate applications for the permits.
§ 280-2 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-3
170:716
(c) The only determinations by the Zoning Officer that shall be
official shall be a written determination after the Zoning
Officer receives a duly submitted written official application.
(3) Certificate of use and occupancy.
(a) It shall be unlawful to use and/or occupy any structure, sign,
land area or portion thereof for which a zoning permit is
required until a certificate of use and occupancy for such
activity has been issued by the Borough staff.
(b) The Borough staff may permit the zoning permit application to
serve as the application for the certificate of use and
occupancy.
(c) The certificate of use and occupancy shall only be issued by the
Zoning Officer if the Zoning Officer determines that the activity
complies with this chapter, to the best knowledge of the Zoning
Officer. The Borough may also withhold issuance of the
certificate until there is compliance with other Borough
ordinances.
(d) The applicant shall keep a copy of the certificate of use and
occupancy available for inspection.
(e) Upon the request of an applicant, the Zoning Officer may issue
a temporary certificate of use and occupancy. Such temporary
certificate may permit an activity to occur in all or part of a
structure before the entire work covered by the permit has
been completed.
[1] However, such temporary certificate shall only be issued if
the applicant proves to the Zoning Officer that the activity
or occupancy can occur safely without endangering public
health or safety.
[2] The temporary certificate shall establish in writing a
maximum time period under which it is valid. A six-month
maximum time period shall apply if not otherwise
specified.
[3] Failure to receive a permanent certificate of use and
occupancy within such time period shall be a violation of
this chapter.
[4] The temporary certificate may be conditioned upon
compliance with certain specific requirements within
certain time periods.
[5] See also § 280-3F.
B. Types of uses.
§ 280-3 JUNKYARDS § 280-3
170:717
(1) Permitted-by-right uses. The Zoning Officer shall issue a permit
under this chapter in response to an application for a use that is
"permitted by right" if it meets all of the requirements of this
chapter.
(2) Special exception use or application requiring a variance. A permit
under this chapter for a use requiring a special exception or
variance shall be issued by the Zoning Officer only in response to a
written approval by the Zoning Hearing Board following a hearing.
C. Applications.
(1) Submittal. All applications for a zoning permit or a decision by the
Zoning Hearing Board shall be made in writing on a form provided
by the Borough. Such completed application, with required fees,
shall be submitted to a designated Borough staff-person.
(2) Site plan. The applicant shall submit a minimum of two copies of a
site plan with the application if the application involves a new
principal building, expansion of a principal building or addition of
three or more parking spaces. The site plan shall be drawn to scale
and show the following:
(a) Locations, dimensions and uses of existing and proposed
structures, parking and loading areas, and locations of existing
and proposed uses of areas of land, with existing features
clearly distinguished from proposed features;
(b) Notes showing the dimensions of all buildings from lot lines
and street rights-of-way;
(c) Locations of any watercourses and any one-hundred-year
floodplain;
(d) Proposed lot areas, lot widths and other applicable
dimensional requirements;
(e) Locations and widths of existing and proposed sidewalks.
(3) Additional information. Any application under this chapter shall
include the following information, unless the Zoning Officer
determines such information is unnecessary to determine
compliance with this chapter:
(a) The address of the lot;
(b) Name and address of the applicant, and of the owner of the
property if different from the applicant;
(c) A description of the proposed use of the property;
(d) All other applicable information listed on the official Borough
application form; and
§ 280-3 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-3
170:718
(e) Such additional information that the Zoning Officer may
determine is reasonably necessary to determine compliance
with this chapter.
(4) Submittals to the Board. In addition to the information listed in
Subsection C(3) above, an application requiring a site plan and
action by the Zoning Hearing Board shall also include the following
information, unless the Zoning Officer determines that such
information is unnecessary to determine compliance with this
chapter:
(a) The present zoning district and major applicable lot
requirements;
(b) For a nonresidential use:
[1] A description of the proposed nonresidential operations
and storage in sufficient detail to indicate potential
nuisances and hazards regarding noise, large truck traffic,
glare, odors, dust, fire or toxic or explosive hazards or
other significant public health and safety hazards;
[2] A list of the maximum hours of operation;
(c) The existing directions of stormwater flow (and any proposed
revisions), and any proposed methods of stormwater
management;
(d) A listing of any sections of this chapter being appealed, with
the reasons for any appeal;
(e) Approximate locations of principal buildings and locations of
streets and alleys and zoning district boundaries within 100
feet of the boundaries of the tract, and description of uses of
adjoining properties (such as "drug store" or "single-family
detached dwelling");
(f) Heights, locations, methods of illumination and intensity of
exterior lighting and sign lighting;
(g) Name and address of person who prepared the site plan;
(h) Signed acknowledgment of the site plan by the applicant; and
(i) Such additional information required under applicable sections
of this chapter.
(5) Ownership. No person other than a landowner or their specifically
authorized agent or a tenant or lessee with written permission of
the landowner shall submit a zoning application (see definition of
"landowner" in Article II).
D. Issuance of permits.
§ 280-3 JUNKYARDS § 280-3
170:719
(1) At least one copy of each permit application and any other zoning
approval shall be retained in Borough files.
(2) PennDOT permit. Where necessary for access onto a state road, a
Borough zoning or building permit shall be automatically
conditioned upon issuance of a PennDOT highway occupancy
permit.
E. Revocation of permits; appeal of permit or approval.
(1) Revocation. The Zoning Officer shall revoke, withhold or suspend a
permit or approval issued under the provisions of this chapter in
case of one or more of the following:
(a) Any false statement or misrepresentation of fact in the
application or on the plans on which the permit or approval
was based (Note: The Pennsylvania Criminal Code provides for
penalties for providing false information to a municipal
employee in the carrying out of his/her duties);
(b) Upon violation of any condition lawfully imposed by the Zoning
Hearing Board upon a special exception use or variance;
(c) Any work being accomplished or use of land or structures in
such a way that does not comply with this chapter or an
approved site plan or approved permit application; and/or
(d) For any other just cause set forth in this chapter.
(2) Appeals. A party with legitimate standing, or as otherwise provided
by state law, may appeal decisions under this chapter within the
provisions of the State Municipalities Planning Code. Any such
appeal shall occur within the time period established in the State
Municipalities Planning Code. (As of the adoption date of this
chapter, such provisions were in Sections 914.1 and 1002-A.197)
F. Zoning permit for temporary uses and structures.
(1) A zoning permit for a temporary use or structure may be issued by
the Zoning Officer for any of the following:
(a) Customary, routine and accessory short-term special events,
provided that only a well-established nonprofit organization or
a permitted place of worship proposing a temporary use to
clearly primarily serve a charitable, public service or religious
purpose shall be eligible to receive approval for commercialtype
activities in a district where a commercial use would not
otherwise be permitted;
197. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10914.1 and 11002-A.
§ 280-3 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-3
170:720
§ 280-4. General procedure for permits.
§ 280-5. Interpretation and uses not regulated.
(b) Temporary storage and office trailers that are necessary to
serve on-site construction, while such construction is actively
underway;
(c) Such other activities that the applicant proves are routine,
customary and temporary.
(2) Time period. The Zoning Officer shall state a reasonable maximum
time period on the temporary permit. If no time limit is stated, then
a six-month maximum period shall apply. A temporary permit may
be renewed for just cause.
G. Compliance with Borough Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance. If an application under this chapter would also be regulated
by the Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
("SALDO"),198 then any permit or approval under this chapter shall
automatically be conditioned upon compliance with the SALDO. See the
definitions of "land development" and "subdivision" in the SALDO.
(1) For example, if an applicant applies for a single-family detached
dwelling on a proposed new lot, the construction permit for such
dwelling shall not be valid until after the lot is granted final
subdivision approval and the lot is officially recorded by the County
Recorder of Deeds.
A. After receiving a proper application, the Zoning Officer shall either:
(1) Issue the applicable permit(s); or
(2) Deny the application(s) as submitted, indicating one or more
reasons.
B. After the permit under this chapter has been issued, the applicant may
undertake the action specified by the permit, in compliance with other
Borough ordinances. However, it is recommended that applicants wait
30 days to begin construction if there is a possibility of an appeal by
another party to have the permit revoked. Any commencement of
construction or a use within this thirty-day appeal period shall be at the
risk of the applicant.
A. Minimum requirements. Where more than one provision of this chapter
controls a particular matter, the provision that is more restrictive upon
uses and structures shall apply. The provisions of this chapter are in
addition to any other applicable Borough ordinance.
198. Editor's Note: See Ch. 235, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 280-3 JUNKYARDS § 280-5
170:721
§ 280-6. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
All of the enforcement, violations and penalty provisions of the State
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, are hereby incorporated into
this chapter by reference. (Note: As of the adoption date of this chapter,
these provisions were primarily in Sections 616.1, 617 and 617.2 of such
Act.199)
B. Uses not specifically regulated. If a use clearly is not permitted by right,
or as a special exception use by this chapter within any zoning district,
the use is prohibited, except that the Zoning Hearing Board may permit
such use as a special exception use if the applicant specifically proves
to the clear satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board that all of the
following conditions would be met:
(1) The proposed use would be less intensive in external impacts and
nuisances than uses that are permitted in the district;
(2) The proposed use would be closely similar in impacts and character
to uses permitted in that district, considering the standards in
§ 280-58F;
(3) The use would meet the standards that would apply under
§ 280-16C to a special exception use; and
(4) The use is not specifically prohibited in that district.
C. Interpretation of chapter text and boundaries.
(1) The Zoning Officer shall literally apply the wording of this chapter
and the location of all district boundaries to particular applications.
In any case, the Zoning Officer may also request an advisory
opinion from the Borough Solicitor or the Zoning Hearing Board
Solicitor to aid in the Zoning Officer's determination.
(2) If an applicant disagrees with the Zoning Officer's determination
and believes that the chapter should be interpreted in the
applicant's favor, the applicant may appeal to the Zoning Hearing
Board. See § 280-11.
D. Undefined terms/ interpretation of definitions. See § 280-18.
E. Interpretation of zoning boundaries. See § 280-23.
A. Violations. Any person who shall commit or who shall permit any of the
following actions violates this chapter:
(1) Failure to secure a zoning permit prior to a change in use of land or
structure, or the erection, construction or alteration of any
structure or portion thereof, or the excavation of land to prepare
199. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10616.1, 10617 and 10617.2.
§ 280-5 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-6
170:722
for the erection, construction or alteration of any structure or
portion thereof.
(2) Placement of false statements on or omitting relevant information
from an application for a zoning permit.
(3) Undertaking any action in a manner which does not comply with a
zoning permit.
(4) Violation of any condition imposed by a decision of the Zoning
Hearing Board in granting a variance or special exception or other
approval.
(5) Violation of any condition imposed by a decision of the Borough
Council in granting a conditional use.
B. Causes of action; enforcement; remedies.
(1) Enforcement. If it appears to the Borough that a violation of this
chapter has occurred, the Borough shall initiate enforcement
proceedings by sending an enforcement notice. Prior to sending an
official enforcement notice, the Zoning Officer may at his/her
option informally request compliance.
(2) Enforcement notice. The enforcement notice shall be sent to the
owner of record of the parcel on which the violation has occurred,
to any person who has filed a written request to receive
enforcement notices regarding that parcel, and to any other person
requested in writing by the owner of record. An enforcement notice
shall state the following, at a minimum:
(a) The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the municipality intends to take action.
(b) The location of the property in violation.
(c) The specific violation with a description of the requirements
which have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable
provisions of this chapter.
(d) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
(e) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board within a prescribed period of time in
accordance with procedures set forth in this chapter.
(f) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board,
constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly
described.
§ 280-6 JUNKYARDS § 280-6
170:723
(3) Evidence; fees. In any appeal of an enforcement notice to the
Zoning Hearing Board, the Borough shall have the responsibility of
presenting its evidence first. Any filing fees paid by a party to
appeal an enforcement notice to the Zoning Hearing Board shall be
returned to the appealing party by the Borough if the Zoning
Hearing Board, or any court in a subsequent appeal, rules in the
appealing party's favor.
(4) Causes of action. If the enforcement notice is not complied with,
within the specified time period, the Zoning Officer shall notify
Borough Council. With the consent of Borough Council, the Zoning
Officer, Borough Solicitor or other officer of the Borough may
institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain,
correct or abate such building, structure, landscaping or land, or to
prevent, in or about such premises, any act, conduct, business or
use constituting a violation. (Note: Section 617 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code200 also addresses actions by other
parties.)
(5) Violations and penalties. Any person, partnership or corporation
who or which has violated or permitted the violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in
a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Borough, pay a
judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs, including the
reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the Borough as a result
thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or be
payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the
District Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals
the judgment, the Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to
the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless a District
Justice determining that there has been a violation further
determines that there was a good faith basis for the person,
partnership or corporation violating this chapter to have believed
that there was no such violation, in which event there shall be
deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day
following the date of the determination of a violation by the District
Justice, and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation. All judgments, costs and reasonable
attorney's fees collected for the violation of this chapter shall be
paid over to the Borough. Imprisonment shall not be authorized by
this chapter. Any person found guilty of violating an ordinance shall
be assessed court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by
the Borough in the enforcement proceedings. [Amended
4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 1288]
200. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10617.
§ 280-6 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-7
170:724
§ 280-7. Fees.
A Borough fee schedule for permits and applications may be established
and amended by written resolution of Borough Council.201 No application or
appeal shall be considered filed until all fees are paid.
§ 280-8. Amendments to chapter.
Within the requirements of the State Municipalities Planning Code, Borough
Council may amend, or repeal any or all portions of this chapter:
§ 280-9. Curative amendments.
A landowner or Borough Council may utilize the "curative amendment"
provisions of the State Municipalities Planning Code. (Note: As of the
adoption date of this chapter, these provisions were in Sections 609.1, 609.2
and 916.1 of such Act.202)
§ 280-10. Zoning Officer.
A. On its own motion; or
B. After agreeing to hear a written request of any person, entity,
landowner or the Planning Commission.
A. Appointment. The Zoning Officer shall be appointed by Borough
Council. The Borough Manager may designate other persons to serve as
Assistant Zoning Officer(s). Such designations shall be subject to
concurrence by Borough Council. Assistant Zoning Officers may serve
with the same authority and duties as the Zoning Officer. The Zoning
Officer shall not hold any elective office within the Borough, but may
hold other appointed offices.
B. Duties and powers. The Zoning Officer's duties and powers shall
include the following:
(1) Administer this chapter in accordance with its literal terms,
including to receive and examine all applications required under
the terms of this chapter, and issue or refuse permits within the
provisions of this chapter;
(2) Conduct inspections to determine compliance, and receive
complaints of violation of this chapter;
(3) Keep records of applications, permits, certificates, written
decisions, and variances granted by the Board, and of enforcement
orders, with all such records being the property of the Borough and
being available for public inspection;
201. Editor's Note: See Ch. A285, Fees.
202. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10609.1, 10609.2 and 10916.1.
§ 280-7 JUNKYARDS § 280-10
170:725
§ 280-11. Zoning Hearing Board actions and variances.
(4) Review proposed subdivisions and land developments for
compliance with this chapter; and
(5) Take enforcement actions as provided by the State Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended.
A. Membership of Board.
(1) The Zoning Hearing Board shall consist of three residents of the
Borough appointed by Borough Council. The existing terms of
office shall continue, with terms of office being three years, and
with the terms being so fixed that the term of office of one member
shall expire each year. Members of the Board shall hold no other
office in the Borough.
(2) Alternate members. Borough Council may appoint alternate
members of the Zoning Hearing Board within the applicable
provisions of the State Municipalities Planning Code. [Note: As of
the adoption date of this chapter, such provisions were in Section
903(b) of such Act.203]
B. Vacancies. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only for the unexpired
portion of a term.
C. Organization. The applicable provisions of the State Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended, shall apply. [As of the adoption date of this
chapter, these provisions were in Sections 906(a), (b) and (c) of such
Act.204]
D. Zoning Hearing Board jurisdiction and functions. The Zoning Hearing
Board shall be responsible for the following:
(1) Appeal of a decision by the Zoning Officer.
(a) The Board shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by
an affected person, entity or Borough Council that the Zoning
Officer has improperly acted under the requirements and
procedures of this chapter.
(b) See time limitations for appeals in § 280-11F.
(2) Challenge to the validity of the ordinance or map. The applicable
provisions of the State Municipalities Planning Code, as amended,
shall apply. (Note: As of the adoption date of this chapter, these
provisions were primarily in Sections 909.1 and 916 of such Act.205)
(3) Variance.
203. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10903(b).
204. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10906.
205. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10909.1 and 10916.
§ 280-10 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-11
170:726
(a) The Board shall hear requests for variances filed with the
Borough staff in writing.
(b) Standards. The Board may grant a variance only within the
limitations of state law. Note: As of the adoption date of this
chapter, the Municipalities Planning Code provided that all of
the following findings must be made, where relevant:
[1] There are unique physical circumstances or conditions
(including irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot
size or shape, or exceptional topographical or other
physical conditions peculiar to the particular property)
and that the unnecessary hardship is due to such
conditions and not the circumstances or conditions
generally created by the provisions of this chapter in the
neighborhood or district in which the property is located;
[2] Because of such physical circumstances or conditions,
there is no possibility that the property can be developed
in strict conformity with the provisions of this chapter and
a variance is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable
use of the property;
[3] Such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
appellant;
[4] The variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the
property is located, nor substantially or permanently
impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent
property, nor be detrimental to the public welfare; and
[5] The variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue.
(c) In granting any variance, the Board may attach such
reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem
necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter.
(4) Special exception.
(a) The Board shall hear and decide requests for all special
exceptions filed with the Borough staff in writing. The Board
shall only permit a special exception that is authorized by this
chapter. See § 280-16.
(b) Conditions. In granting a special exception, the Zoning
Hearing Board may attach such reasonable conditions and
safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this chapter, as it
may deem necessary to implement the purposes and intent of
this chapter.
§ 280-11 JUNKYARDS § 280-11
170:727
(5) Persons with disabilities. After the Zoning Officer receives a
complete written application, the Zoning Hearing Board shall grant
a special exception allowing modifications to specific requirements
of this chapter if the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the
Zoning Hearing Board that such modifications are necessary to
provide a "reasonable accommodation" under applicable federal
law to serve persons who the applicant proves have "disabilities" as
defined in and protected by such laws.
(a) Such reasonable accommodations shall be requested in
accordance with the United States Fair Housing Amendments
Act of 1988, 42 U.S.C. § 3601 et seq., or the Americans with
Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq., and the federal
regulations adopted pursuant to such statutes, as amended,
and/or the accompanying regulations of the Pennsylvania
Human Relations Commission.
(b) If the applicant is requesting a reasonable accommodation
under such laws and regulations for persons with disabilities,
the applicant shall identify the disability which is protected by
such statutes, the extent of the modification of the provisions
of this chapter necessary for a reasonable accommodation, and
the manner by which the reasonable accommodation
requested may be removed when such person with a protected
disability no longer will be present on the property.
(6) The Zoning Hearing Board shall also hear any other matters as set
forth in the State Municipalities Planning Code, as amended. (Note:
As of the adoption date of this chapter, such provisions were
primarily within Section 909.1 of such law.206)
E. Time limits for appeals. The applicable provisions of the State
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, shall apply. (Note: As of the
adoption date of this chapter, these provisions were in Section 914.1 of
such Act.207)
F. Stay of proceedings. The stay of proceedings provisions of the State
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, shall apply. (Note: As of the
adoption date of this chapter, such provisions were in Section 915.1 of
such Act.208)
G. Time limits on permits and approvals.
(1) Unless otherwise provided by the Zoning Hearing Board of
Borough Council in a decision granting approval, after a variance is
approved or other zoning approval is officially authorized, then any
applicable zoning and building permits shall be secured by the
applicant within 12 months after the date of such approval or
206. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10909.1.
207. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10914.1.
208. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10915.1.
§ 280-11 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-11
170:728
§ 280-12. Board hearings and decisions.
The following requirements shall apply to procedures, hearings and
decisions of the Zoning Hearing Board:
authorization. The work authorized by such permits shall then be
completed within 12 months after the issuance of the permits.
(2) Extension. Unless otherwise provided by the Zoning Hearing Board
of Borough Council in a decision granting approval, in response to
an applicant stating good cause in writing, the Zoning Officer may
extend in writing the time limit for completion of work to a
maximum total of 36 months after permits are issued.
(3) If an applicant fails to obtain the necessary permits or begin
construction within the above time periods, or allows interruptions
in substantial construction of longer than 12 months, the Zoning
Officer may conclusively presume that the applicant has waived,
withdrawn or abandoned approvals and permits under this chapter
and may consider all such approvals and permits to have become
null and void.
A. Notice of hearings. Notice of all hearings of the Board shall be given as
follows:
(1) Ad. Public notice shall be published, as defined by Section 107 of
the State Municipalities Planning Code.209 The notice shall state
the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the
matter to be considered.
(2) Posting. Notice of such hearing shall be conspicuously posted on
the affected tract of land at least one week prior to the hearing. The
Borough staff shall post the property. It is the responsibility of the
applicant to make sure that such notice remains posted until the
hearing.
(3) Persons given notice. The Borough shall provide written notice to
the applicant of the time and place of the hearing. The Borough
should also provide notice to the President of Borough Council. In
addition, the Borough should provide notice to the last known
principal owner of record of each property that is immediately
adjacent to or immediately across a street from the subject
property; however, failure to provide such notice shall not be
grounds for an appeal. Also, such notice shall be given to any other
person or group (including civic or community organizations) who
has made a written timely request for such notice. Any such notices
should be mailed or delivered to the last known address.
B. Initiation of hearings. A hearing required under this chapter shall be
initiated within 60 days of the date of an applicant's request for a
209. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10107 et seq.
§ 280-11 JUNKYARDS § 280-12
170:729
§ 280-13. Appeals to court.
The provisions for appeals to court that are stated in the State
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, shall apply. (Note: As of the
adoption date of this chapter, these provisions were in Sections 1001-A,
1002-A, 1003-A, 1004-A, 1005-A and 1006-A of such Act.212)
§ 280-14. Limited public utility exemptions.
See the provisions of the State Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
(Note: As of the adoption date of this chapter, such provisions were within
Section 619 of such Act.213)
hearing, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of
time.
C. Decision/findings.
(1) The Board shall comply with the time period established in Section
908(1.2) of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended,210 for
the scheduling of hearings.
(2) The Board shall render a written decision on each application
within 45 days after the last hearing on that application before the
Board, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of
time.
(3) Where the application is contested or denied, the decision shall be
accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based thereon,
together with the reasons for such conclusions.
(4) References shall be provided to the most pertinent section(s) of this
chapter and/or the State Municipalities Planning Code.
D. Notice of decision. A copy of the final decision shall be personally
delivered or mailed to the applicant or his/her representative or their
last known address not later than the time limit established by the State
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended. [Note: As of the adoption
date of this chapter, such provisions were within Sections 908(9) and
908(10) of such Act, including provisions regarding notice to other
parties.211]
E. State law. See also Section 908 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.
210. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10908.
211. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10908.
212. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 11001-A et seq.
213. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10619.
§ 280-12 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-15
170:730
§ 280-15. Limited Borough and municipal authority exemption.
The minimum lot area, minimum lot width and minimum street frontage
requirements of this chapter shall not apply to uses or structures owned
by Catasauqua Borough or by a municipal authority created solely by
Catasauqua Borough for uses and structures that are intended for a valid
public purpose.
§ 280-16. Special exception use process.
A. Purpose. The special exception process is designed to allow careful
review of uses that have some potential of conflicts with adjacent uses
or areas.
B. Special exception procedure.
(1) See submission provisions in § 280-3.
(2) All site plans shall contain the information required in § 280-3C.
(3) The Zoning Officer should provide a review to the Board regarding
the compliance of the application with this chapter.
(4) The Board shall follow the procedures provided in § 280-12.
C. Consideration of special exception applications. When special exception
uses are provided for in this chapter, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
hear and decide requests for such uses in accordance with stated
standards and criteria for the use and the following standards. The
burden of proof shall rest with the applicant.
(1) Compliance with this chapter. The applicant shall establish by
credible evidence compliance with all requirements upon the use
that are established by this chapter. The applicant shall provide the
Zoning Hearing Board with sufficient plans, studies or other data to
demonstrate compliance with all applicable regulations.
(2) Compliance with other requirements. Will not clearly be in conflict
with other Borough ordinances or state or federal laws or
regulations known to the Zoning Hearing Board. The Board may
condition zoning approval upon future proof of compliance with
another ordinance, law or regulation.
(3) Transportation. The traffic generated by the subject of the
application shall be accommodated in a safe and efficient manner,
after considering any improvements that the applicant commits to
complete or fund. The applicant shall show that the use will not
result in or substantially add to a significant traffic hazard,
significant traffic congestion or a significant pedestrian safety
hazard.
(4) Neighborhood. The proposed use shall not significantly negatively
impact upon the desirable character of an adjacent established
§ 280-15 JUNKYARDS § 280-16
170:731
§ 280-17. Liability.
residential neighborhood, such as causing substantial amounts of
heavy truck traffic to travel through a residential neighborhood,
or a significant odor or noise nuisance or very late night/early
morning hours of operation, without proper safeguards.
(5) Site planning. The applicant shall establish by credible evidence
that the proposed use will be properly designed with regard to
internal circulation, driveway access, site layout, parking layout,
buffering, and all other elements of proper site design.
(6) Safety. The applicant shall establish by credible evidence that the
proposed use will not create a significant hazard to the public
health and safety, such as fire, toxic or explosive hazards.
(7) Historic impact. The application shall not severely negatively
impact upon historically significant buildings on the same lot, as
viewed from a street.
D. Conditions. In granting a special exception, the Board may require such
reasonable conditions and safeguards (in addition to those expressed in
this chapter) as it determines are necessary to implement the purposes
of this chapter. Conditions imposed by the Zoning Hearing Board shall
automatically become conditions of the building permit issued pursuant
thereto, and any failure to comply with said conditions shall be a
violation of this chapter.
A. Any review of activity within the floodplain, site plan review, subdivision
or land development approval, erosion control review, wetland
delineation review, stormwater runoff review, review of activity on
steep slopes, or any other review, approval or permit under this chapter
by an officer, employee, board, commission, solicitor, consultant or
agency of the Borough shall not constitute a representation, guarantee
or warranty of any kind by the Borough, or its employees, officials,
boards, solicitor(s), consultants or agencies of the practicality or safety
of any structure, use or subdivision, and shall create no liability upon
nor a cause of action against such entity or person for any damage that
may result pursuant thereto.
B. If the Zoning Officer mistakenly issues a permit under this chapter, the
Borough shall not be liable for any later lawful withdrawal of such
permit.
§ 280-16 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-17
170:732
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 280-18. Interpretation and word usage.
For the purposes of this chapter, words and terms used herein shall be
interpreted as follows:
§ 280-19. Definitions.
When used in this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall
have the following meanings, unless expressly stated otherwise or unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise:
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE — The definition in the State Motor
Vehicle Code214 shall apply. As of 2003, such definition was as follows:
A. Words in the present tense shall include the future tense.
B. "Used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building include the
words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied."
C. "Should" means that it is strongly encouraged but is not mandatory.
"Shall" is always mandatory.
D. "Sale" shall also include rental.
E. Unless stated otherwise, the singular shall also regulate the plural, and
the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa.
F. Any word or term not defined in this chapter shall have its plain and
ordinary meaning within the context of the section. A standard
reference dictionary should be consulted.
G. The words "such as," "includes," "including" and "specifically" shall
provide examples. These examples shall not, by themselves, limit a
provision to the examples specifically mentioned if other examples
would otherwise comply with the provision.
H. The word "person" includes a firm, company, corporation, partnership,
trust, organization or association, as well as an individual.
A motor vehicle that is inoperable and is left unattended on public
property for more than 48 hours; or
A.
A motor vehicle that has remained illegally on public property for a
period of more than 48 hours; or
B.
A motor vehicle without registration plates left standing on or along the
highway; or
C.
214. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 280-18 JUNKYARDS § 280-19
170:733
ABUT or ABUTTING — Areas of contiguous lots that share a common lot
line, except not including lots entirely separated by a street or a perennial
waterway. See definition of "adjacent."
ACCESSORY EQUIPMENT — Any equipment serving or being used in
conjunction with a wireless telecommunications facility or wireless support
structure. The term includes utility or transmission equipment, power
supplies, generators, batteries, cables, equipment buildings, cabinets and
storage sheds, shelters or similar equipment.[Added 8-7-2017 by Ord.
No. 1354]
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (includes ACCESSORY BUILDING) — A
structure serving a purpose customarily incidental to and subordinate to
the use of the principal use and located on the same lot as the principal
use. Accessory structures include but are not limited to a household garage,
household storage shed, detached carport, a household swimming pool, or
an accessory storage building to a business use. An "accessory building" is
any accessory structure that meets the definition of a building. A portion of
a principal building used for an accessory use shall not be considered an
accessory building.
ACCESSORY USE — A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the
principal use or building and located on the same lot with such principal
use.
ADAPTIVE REUSE OF BUILDING(S) — The use of an existing building for
a purpose other than the use for which it was originally designed, that
conserves a substantial portion of the original/existing exterior walls of the
building and any portion of the roof integral thereto, and that conserves
a substantial portion of the footprint of the building, consistent with the
uses and the dimensional requirements permitted in the district.[Added
6-1-2009 by Ord. No. 1238]
ADJACENT — Two or more lots that share a common lot line or that are
separated only by a street or waterway from each other.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment in which over 10% of the total
floor area is occupied by books, films, periodicals and video tapes which are
distinguished by a clear emphasis on displaying uncovered male or female
genitals or specified sexual activities or by or paraphernalia or novelties
related to specified sexual activities and which items are offered for sale,
rent or receipt of coins or tokens. If such items are within a room(s) that is
restricted to persons age 18 or older, then this definition shall apply to any
establishment in which over 10% of the floor area is within such restricted
room(s).
A motor vehicle that has remained on private property without the
consent of the owner or person in control of the property for more than
48 hours; provided that vehicles and equipment used or to be used in
construction, or the operation or maintenance of public utility facilities
and which are left in a manner which does not interfere with the normal
movement of traffic shall not be considered abandoned vehicles for the
purposes of this Act.
D.
§ 280-19 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-19
170:734
ADULT DAY CARE CENTER — A use providing supervised care and
assistance primarily to persons who are over age 60 and/or mentally
retarded and/or physically handicapped who need such daily assistance
because of their limited physical abilities, Alzheimers disease, mental
abilities or mental retardation. This use shall not include persons who need
oversight because of behavior that is criminal or violent. This use may
involve occasional overnight stays, but shall not primarily be a residential
use. The use shall involve typical stays of less than a total of 60 hours per
week per person.
ADULT LIVE ENTERTAINMENT FACILITY — A use including live
entertainment involving persons (which may include, but not be limited
to, waiters, waitresses, dancers, clerks, bartenders, contractors or others)
displaying uncovered male or female genitals or nude or almost nude female
breasts or engaging in simulated or actual specified sexual activities related
to some form of monetary compensation paid to a person or entity involved
in such activity or establishment.
ADULT MOVIE THEATER — A use involving the presentation to three or
more persons at one time in a room of motion pictures, video tapes or
similarly reproduced images distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on depiction of specified sexual activities for observation by such persons
and that is related to some form of monetary compensation paid by the
persons viewing such matter.
ADULT USE — Includes any of the following uses: adult bookstore, adult
movie theater, massage parlor or adult live entertainment facility/use.
AFTER HOURS CLUB — A use that permits the consumption of alcoholic
beverages by five or more unrelated persons between the hours of 2:00 a.m.
and 6:00 a.m. and that involves some form of monetary compensation paid
by such persons for the alcohol or for the use of the premises.
ALLEY — A vehicle right-of-way having a maximum right-of-way width of 16
feet and that usually provides secondary access to the side or rear on one
or more lots, and which is not intended for through traffic.
ANTENNA, STANDARD — A device, partially or wholly exterior to a
building, that is used for receiving electronic signals (other than a satellite
dish antenna which is treated separately) or for transmitting short-wave
or citizens band radio frequencies. This shall include antennae used by
an amateur ham radio operator or by a contracting business or utility
to communicate with its employees, but shall not include a commercial
communications antenna. This term includes any accessory supporting
structures.
APARTMENT — See "dwelling types."
APPLICANT — The definition in the State Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended, shall apply.
APPLICANT, WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — Any entity or
person that applies for a wireless communications facility building permit,
§ 280-19 JUNKYARDS § 280-19
170:735
zoning approval and/or permission to use the public right-of-way, Boroughowned
land, or other property.[Added 8-7-2017 by Ord. No. 1354]
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY — Coordinated and centrally managed rental
housing including self-contained units designed to provide a supportive
environment and to accommodate a relatively independent lifestyle. Such a
development may contain a limited number of supportive services, such as
meals, transportation, housekeeping, linen and organized social activities
for residents and their invited guests. Such a use shall primarily serve
persons 55 and older, persons with physical handicaps and/or the
developmentally disabled. Assisted living facilities shall be licensed as
personal care centers by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
AUTO, BOAT AND/OR MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME SALES — An
area, other than a street, used for the outdoor or indoor display, sale
or rental of one or more of the following in operable condition: motor
vehicles, recreation vehicles, boat trailers, farm machinery, motorcycles,
trucks, utility trailers, construction vehicles, boats, or transportable mobile/
manufactured homes in a livable condition. This use may include an auto
repair garage as an accessory use provided that all requirements of such
use are complied with. This use shall not include a mobile/manufactured
home park (unless the requirements for that use are also met) or a junkyard.
See requirements in § 280-29.
AUTO REPAIR GARAGE — An area where repairs, improvements and
installation of parts and accessories for motor vehicles and/or boats are
conducted that involves work that is more intense in character than work
permitted under the definition of "auto service station." An auto repair
garage shall include, but not be limited to, a use that involves any of
the following work: major mechanical or body work, straightening of body
parts, painting, welding or rebuilding of transmissions. Any use permitted
as part of an auto service station is also permitted as part of an auto repair
garage. See requirements in § 280-29.
AUTO SERVICE STATION — An area where gasoline is dispensed into motor
vehicles, and where no repairs are conducted, except work that may be
conducted that is closely similar in character to the following: sale and
installation of oil, lubricants, batteries and belts and similar accessories
and safety and emission inspections, and sale of prepackaged propane. This
use may include a convenience store, provided that all of the requirements
for such use are also met. A business that maintains an accessory use of
providing motor fuel only for use by vehicles operated by that business shall
not, by itself, be considered to be an auto service station. This use shall not
include activity meeting the definition of a "truck stop." See storage limits
and other requirements in § 280-29.
BASEMENT — The portion of a building that is partly or completely below
grade. See the definition of "story."
BASE STATION — A structure or equipment at a fixed location that enables
FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communications between user
equipment and a communications network. The term does not encompass
§ 280-19 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-19
170:736
a tower as defined in this section or any equipment associated with a
tower.[Added 8-7-2017 by Ord. No. 1354]
BED-AND-BREAKFAST INN — A dwelling and/or its accessory structure
which includes the rental of overnight sleeping accommodations and
bathroom access for temporary overnight guests, and that meets the
maximum number of overnight guests specified in § 280-29 for this use, and
which does not provide any cooking facilities for actual use by guests, and
which only provides meals to overnight guests, employees and residents of
the dwelling. Overnight stays shall be restricted to transient visitors to the
area, employees and their family. See requirements in § 280-29.
BOARDINGHOUSE (includes ROOMING HOUSE) — A residential use in
which: (a) room(s) that do not meet the definition of a lawful dwelling
unit are rented for habitation; or (b) a dwelling unit includes greater than
the permitted maximum number of unrelated persons. A boardinghouse
shall not include a use that meets the definition of a hotel, dormitory,
motel, life care center, personal care center, bed-and-breakfast inn, group
home or nursing home. A college fraternity or sorority house used as a
residence shall be considered a type of boardinghouse. A boardinghouse
may either involve or not involve the providing of meals to residents, but
shall not include a restaurant open to the public unless the use also meets
the requirements for a restaurant. A boardinghouse shall primarily serve
persons residing on-site for five or more consecutive days.
BOROUGH — Borough of Catasauqua, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania.
BUFFER YARD — A strip of land that (a) separates one use from another use
or feature; and (b) is not occupied by any building, parking, outdoor storage
The term includes, but is not limited to, equipment associated with
wireless communications services such as private, broadcast, and
public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services (i.e.,
wi-fi) and fixed wireless services (i.e., point-to-point microwave
transmissions) such as microwave backhaul.
A.
The term includes, but is not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas,
coaxial or fiberoptic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and
comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration
[including distributed antenna systems (DAS) and small-cell networks].
B.
The term includes any structure other than a tower that, at the time
the relevant application is filed with the Borough under this chapter,
supports or houses equipment described in Subsections A and B of this
definition that has been reviewed and approved under the applicable
zoning or siting process, or under another state or local regulatory
review process, even if the structure was not built for the sole or
primary purpose of providing such support.
C.
The term does not include any structure that, at the time the relevant
application is filed with the Borough under this chapter, does not
support or house equipment described in Subsection A or B of this
definition.
D.
§ 280-19 JUNKYARDS § 280-19
170:737
or any use other than open space or approved pedestrian pathways. A buffer
yard may be a part of the minimum setback distance, but land within an
existing or future street right-of-way shall not be used to meet a buffer yard
requirement. See § 280-56.
BUILDING — Any structure having a permanent roof and walls and that
is intended for the shelter, work area, housing or enclosure of persons,
animals, vehicles, equipment or materials and that has a total area under
roof of greater than 50 cubic feet. "Building" is interpreted as including
"or part thereof." See the separate definition of "structure." Any structure
involving a permanent roof (such as a covered porch or a carport) that
is attached to a principal building shall be considered to be part of that
principal building.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The percentage obtained by dividing the
maximum horizontal area in square feet of all principal and accessory
buildings and attached structures covered by a permanent roof on a lot, by
the total lot area of the lot upon which the buildings are located.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building used for the conduct of the principal
use of a lot, and which is not an accessory building.
BUILDING WIDTH — The horizontal measurement between two vertical
structural walls that are generally parallel of one building, measured in one
direction that is most closely parallel to the required lot width. For attached
housing, this width shall be the width of each dwelling unit, measured from
the center of each interior party wall and from the outside of any exterior
wall. For detached buildings, this width shall be measured from the outside
of exterior walls.
BULK RECYCLING CENTER — A use involving the bulk commercial
collection, separation and/or processing of types of waste materials found
in the typical household or office for some productive reuse, but which
does not involve the actual processing or recycling of hazardous or toxic
substances, and which does not primarily involve the processing of
nonrecycled solid waste, unless the use also meets the applicable
requirements for a solid waste transfer facility. This definition shall not
include a junkyard.
CALIPER — The diameter of a tree trunk measured at a point six inches
from the top of the root ball of the tree.[Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
1189]
CAMPUS-TYPE SETTING — A low intensity character of a tract with five
or more acres involving low lot coverage by buildings (typically less than
20%) and substantial open space and green area (typically more than
35%).[Added 6-1-2009 by Ord. No. 1238]
CARTWAY — The paved portion of a street designed for vehicular traffic and
on-street parking, but not including the shoulder of the street.
CHRISTMAS TREE FARM or TREE FARM — A type of crop farming
involving the raising and harvesting of evergreen trees for commercial
§ 280-19 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-19
170:738
purposes. This may include the retail sale from November 15 to December
30 of trees that were produced on the premises.
CHURCH — See "place of worship."
CIVIC USE — A use that is integral to the Waterfront Overlay District that
consists of common areas that enhance the quality of life of the residents
and property owners and are open to the general public, such as a green
area.[Added 11-7-2005 by ord. No. 1189]
CO-LOCATION — The mounting or installation of transmission equipment
on an eligible support structure for the purpose of transmitting and/or
receiving radio frequency signals for communications purposes.[Added
8-7-2017 by Ord. No. 1354]
COMMERCIAL COMMUNICATIONS TOWER OR ANTENNA — A structure,
partially or wholly exterior to a building, used for transmitting or
retransmitting electronic signals, and that does not meet the definition of
a "standard antenna." Commercial communications antennae shall include,
but are not limited to, antennae used for transmitting commercial radio
or television signals, or to receive such signals for a cable system or for
cellular telephone communications. See § 280-29.
COMMERCIAL DISTRICT — The CD, CG, TC, O, A and INS-1 and INS-2
Zoning Districts.[Amended 6-1-2009 by Ord. No. 1238]
COMMERCIAL USE — A use permitted in the Commercial and Town Center
Districts.[Amended 6-1-2009 by Ord. No. 1238]
COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA (ANTENNA) — Telecommunications
equipment that transmits and receives electromagnetic radio signals used
in the provision of all types of wireless communications services. An
antenna shall not include private residence-mounted satellite dishes or
television antennas or amateur radio equipment including, without
limitation, ham or citizen band radio antennas.[Added 8-7-2017 by Ord.
No. 1354]
COMMUNITY CENTER — A use that exists solely to provide primarily
indoor leisure and educational activities and programs and meeting space
to members of the surrounding community and/or certain age groups, and
which does not involve substantial use of machinery or noise producing
equipment. The use also may include the preparation and/or provision of
meals to low-income elderly persons, as accessory to leisure activities. This
shall not include residential uses or a treatment center.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use that is only allowed under this chapter if
conditional use approval is obtained. Conditional use approval shall be
required from Borough Council, after the Planning Commission is provided
an opportunity for a review. See Article I.
CONDOMINIUM — A set of individual dwelling units or other areas of
buildings each owned by an individual person(s) in fee simple, with such
owners assigned a proportionate interest in the remainder of the real estate
which is designated for common ownership, and which is created under
§ 280-19 JUNKYARDS § 280-19
170:739
the Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act of 1980 or Uniform Planned
Community Act of 1996, as amended.215
CONSERVATION EASEMENT — A legal agreement granted by a property
owner that strictly limits the types and amounts of development that may
take place on such property. Such easement shall restrict the original and
all subsequent property owners, lessees and all other users of the land.
CONVENIENCE STORE — A use that primarily sells routine household
goods, groceries, prepared ready-to-eat foods and similar miscellaneous
items to the general public, but that is not primarily a restaurant, and
that includes a building with a floor area of less than 7,000 square feet. A
convenience store involving the sale of gasoline shall be regulated as an
auto service station.
CRAFT BEVERAGE — An alcoholic beverage product manufactured by a
small, independent and privately held brewery, limited winery or limited
distillery with a principal office for doing business, or a craft beverage
production facility, located in the Borough of Catasauqua and subject to
regulation and licensing by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the flavor
of which is derived from traditional or innovative ingredients,
manufacturing techniques and their fermentation. This term shall include
wine, liquor, mead, malt or brewed beverages, potable distilled spirits and
other, similar alcoholic drinks or drinkable liquids, all as defined in and
regulated under the Pennsylvania Liquor Code.216[Added 6-6-2016 by
Ord. No. 1332; amended 2-5-2018 by Ord. No. 1364]
CRAFT BEVERAGE PRODUCTION FACILITY — A small, independent
facility that manufactures craft beverages, including breweries of malt
or brewed beverages, limited wineries and limited distilleries. A craft
beverage production facility is a special exception use which shall include
a tasting room, and which shall offer for retail sale craft beverages
manufactured on the premises. A craft beverage production facility may
offer for retail sale craft beverages manufactured off of the premises by
the owner thereof, or others, and may distribute on a wholesale basis craft
beverages manufactured by the owner of the craft beverage production
facility. See § 280-29A(40) for specific requirements relating to the
use.[Added 6-6-2016 by Ord. No. 1332; amended 2-5-2018 by Ord.
No. 1364217]
CRAFTS OR ARTISAN'S STUDIO — A use involving the creation, display
and sale of arts and crafts, such as paintings, sculpture and fabric crafts.
The creation of arts and crafts may also be permitted within a home
occupation, provided the requirements for such use are met.
CURATIVE AMENDMENT, MUNICIPAL — A process provided in the
Municipalities Planning Code that permits a municipality to address the
potential invalidity of portions or all of its own Zoning Ordinance.
215. Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 3101 and 5101 et seq., respectively.
216. Editor's Note: See 47 P.S. § 1-101 et seq.
217. Editor's Note: This ordinance also deleted the former definition of “craft beverage
restaurant,” which immediately followed this definition.
§ 280-19 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-19
170:740
DAY CARE, CHILD — A use involving the supervised care of children under
age 16 outside of the children's own home(s) primarily for periods of less
than 18 hours per child during the average day. This use may also include
educational programs that are supplementary to state-required education,
including a nursery school or "Head Start" programs. See also the definition
of "adult day care center."
DENSITY — The total number of dwelling units proposed on a lot divided by
the lot area, unless otherwise stated.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and its
relevant bureaus.
DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITY — A disability of a person which has
continued or can be expected to continue indefinitely; a disability which is:
The following three types of day care are permitted without regulation
by this chapter:
(1) Care of children by their own relatives;
Care of children within a place of worship during regularly
scheduled religious services; and
(2)
Care of one to three children within any dwelling unit, in addition
to children who are relatives of the care giver.
(3)
A.
FAMILY DAY CARE HOME or CHILD DAY CARE AS AN ACCESSORY
USE — A type of day care use that is accessory to and occurs within a
dwelling unit, and provides care for four to six children at one time who
are not relatives of the primary care giver. See § 280-30.
B.
GROUP DAY CARE HOME — A type of day care use that provides care
for between seven and 12 children at one time who are not relatives
of the primary care giver; provides care within a dwelling unit; and is
registered with the applicable state agency. [Note: As of the adoption
date of this chapter, such agency was the Pennsylvania Department of
Public Welfare.]
C.
CHILD DAY CARE CENTER — A type of day care use that provides care
for seven or more children at any one time who are not relatives of the
primary care giver; does not meet the definition of a "group day care
home"; and is registered with the applicable state agency. [Note: As of
the adoption date of this chapter, such agency was the Pennsylvania
Department of Public Welfare.] See § 280-29.
D.
A. Attributable to mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy or autism.
Found to be attributable to any other conditions found to be closely
related to mental retardation because such condition results in similar
impairment of general intellectual functioning or adaptive behavior to
that of mentally retarded persons or requires treatment and services
similar to those required for such persons.
B.
§ 280-19 JUNKYARDS § 280-19
170:741
DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEM (DAS) — A small network of antennas
that are connected to a common source that provides coverage in a building
or a small geographic area.[Added 8-7-2017 by Ord. No. 1354]
DISTRICT or ZONING DISTRICT — A land area within the Borough within
which certain uniform regulations and requirements apply under the
provisions of this chapter.
DORMITORY — A residential facility that only houses full-time students and
staff-persons of an accredited college or university, and which does not meet
the definition of "dwelling units."
DRIVE-THROUGH SERVICE — An establishment where at least a portion of
patrons are served while the patrons remain in their motor vehicles.
DRIVEWAY — A privately owned, constructed, and maintained vehicular
access from a street to one or two principal buildings or their accessory
buildings, and which does not meet the definition of a "street" or an "alley."
DWELLING — A building used as nontransient living quarters, but not
including a boardinghouse, hotel, motel, hospital, nursing home or
dormitory. A dwelling may include a use that meets the definition of a
"sectional home."
DWELLING TYPES — This chapter categorizes dwellings into the following
types:218
Attributable to dyslexia resulting from a disability described in the
above Subsections A and B of this definition.
C.
CONVERSION APARTMENT — A new dwelling unit created within an
existing building within the standards of Article IV and where permitted
by Article III and meeting the floor area requirements of Article VIII.
A.
APARTMENTS — Two or more dwelling units within a building that
do not meet the definition of a single-family detached dwelling, twin
dwelling or townhouse/rowhouse. The individual dwelling units may be
leased or sold for condominium ownership.
B.
MIDRISE APARTMENTS — Three or more dwelling units within a
building that is higher than 35 feet or 3 1/2 stories.
C.
SECTIONAL OR "MODULAR" HOME — A type of dwelling that meets
a definition of single-family detached dwelling, single-family
semidetached dwelling, townhouse or low-rise apartment that is
substantially but not wholly produced in two or more major sections
off the site and then is assembled and completed on the site, and that
does not meet the definition of a "mobile/ manufactured home" and
that is supported structurally by its exterior walls and that rests on a
permanent foundation.
D.
218. Editor's Note: The sketches of dwelling types which originally accompanied this definition
are on file in the Borough offices.
§ 280-19 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-19
170:742
DWELLING UNIT — A single habitable living unit occupied by only one
family. (See definition of "family.") Each dwelling unit shall have its own
toilet, bath or shower, sink, sleeping and cooking facilities, and separate
access to the outside or to a common hallway or balcony that connects to
outside access at ground level. A dwelling unit shall not include either or
both of the following: two or more separate living areas that are completely
separated by interior walls so as to prevent interior access from one living
area to another; or two separate and distinct sets of kitchen facilities.
ELIGIBLE FACILITIES REQUEST — Any request for modification of an
existing tower or base station that does not substantially change the
physical dimensions of such tower or base station, involving: i) co-location
of new transmission equipment; ii) removal of transmission equipment; or
iii) replacement of transmission equipment.[Added 8-7-2017 by Ord. No.
1354]
ELIGIBLE SUPPORT STRUCTURE — Any tower or base station, provided
that it is existing at the time the relevant application is filed.[Added
8-7-2017 by Ord. No. 1354]
EMERGENCY — A condition that:[Added 8-7-2017 by Ord. No. 1354]
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING — One dwelling unit in one
building accommodating only one family and having open yard areas
on all sides. A single-family detached dwelling may be a mobile/
manufactured home.
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME — A type of single-family
detached dwelling that meets all of the following requirements: is
transportable in a single piece, or two substantial pieces designed
to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being separated
for towing; is designed for permanent occupancy; which arrives
at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and
incidental unpacking and assembly operations; is constructed so
that it may be used with or without a permanent foundation; and
is not a recreation vehicle. The terms "mobile home" and
"manufactured home" have the same meaning. This term is
different from a "sectional home," which is defined above. See
standards in § 280-29.
(1)
E.
TWIN DWELLING UNIT — One dwelling unit accommodating one
family that is attached to and completely separated by a vertical
unpierced fire resistant wall to only one additional dwelling unit. One
side yard shall be adjacent to each dwelling unit. Each unit may or may
not be on a separate lot from the attached dwelling unit.
F.
TOWNHOUSE or ROWHOUSE — One dwelling unit that is attached
to two or more dwelling units, and with each dwelling unit being
completely separated from and attached to each other by unpierced
vertical fire resistant walls. Each dwelling unit shall have its own
outside access. Side yards shall be adjacent to each end unit. See
standards in § 280-29.
G.
§ 280-19 JUNKYARDS § 280-19
170:743
EMERGENCY SERVICES STATION — A building for the housing of fire,
emergency medical or police equipment and for related activities. A
membership club may be included if it is a permitted use in that district.
This use may include housing for emergency personnel while on-call.
EMPLOYEES — The highest number of workers (including both part-time
and full-time, both compensated and volunteer and both employees and
contractors) present on a lot at any one time, other than clearly temporary
and occasional persons working on physical improvements to the site.
EQUIPMENT COMPOUND — An area surrounding or adjacent to a wireless
support structure within which base stations, power supplies or accessory
equipment are located.[Added 8-7-2017 by Ord. No. 1354]
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — Utility or municipal uses that are necessary
for the preservation of the public health and safety and that are routine,
customary and appropriate to the character of the area in which they are to
be located. See standards in § 280-25. Essential services shall not include
a central sewage treatment plant, a solid waste disposal area or facility,
commercial communications towers, a power generating station, septic or
sludge disposal, offices, storage of trucks or equipment or bulk storage of
materials.
FAMILY — One or more individuals related by blood, marriage or adoption
(including persons receiving formal foster care) or a maximum of three
unrelated individuals who maintain a common household and live within
one dwelling unit. A dwelling unit shall be occupied by a maximum of
one family. A "family" shall also expressly include numbers of unrelated
persons allowed by the group home provision of § 280-29 residing within
an approved group home, as defined herein. It is the express intent of the
Borough to comply with all provisions of the Federal Fair Housing Act, as
amended, and regulations promulgated thereunder, in the construction of
this term.
FCC — Federal Communications Commission.[Added 8-7-2017 by Ord.
No. 1354]
FENCE — A man-made barrier placed or arranged as a line of demarcation,
an enclosure or a visual barrier that is constructed of wood, chain-link
metal, vinyl or aluminum and/or plastic inserts. Man-made barriers
constructed principally of masonry, concrete or similar materials shall be
considered a wall. The term "wall" does not include engineering retaining
walls, which are permitted uses as needed in all districts. See § 280-30.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION — An establishment primarily involved with
monetary, not material, transactions and that has routine interactions with
the public.
Constitutes a clear and immediate danger to the health, welfare, or
safety of the public; or
A.
Has caused or is likely to cause facilities in the rights-of-way to be
unusable and result in loss of the services provided.
B.
§ 280-19 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-19
170:744
FLOODPLAIN — See definitions of "floodplain" and related terms in
§ 280-34.
FLOODPLAIN SOILS (ALLUVIAL SOILS) — Soil types found in the latest
version of the Soil Survey of Lehigh County, Pennsylvania, prepared by the
United States Department of Agriculture (Natural Resources Conservation
Service), dated November 1963, including all updates and revisions as
being "on the floodplain" or "subject to flooding." Floodplain soils include,
but are not limited to: alluvial land; Alton gravelly loam, flooded,
Bowmansville silt loam; Hatboro silt loam; marsh; Pope loam; Rowland silt
loam.[Added 8-7-2017 by Ord. No. 1354]
FLOOR AREA, TOTAL — The total floor space within a building(s) measured
from the exterior faces of exterior walls or from the center lines of walls
separating buildings. Floor area shall specifically include, but not be limited
to: fully enclosed porches; and basement or cellar or attic space that is
potentially habitable and has a minimum head clearance of at least seven
feet. Floor area shall not include unenclosed porches, decks or breezeways.
FT. WORTH ATTACHMENT — A nonfreestanding pole which is attached
to an electrical transmission tower which is used to support antennas and
accessory equipment and which is anchored to the ground and obtains
lateral bracing by direct attachment to the electrical transmission
tower.[Added 8-7-2017 by Ord. No. 1354]
GARAGE SALE — The accessory use of any lot for the occasional sale
or auction of only common household goods and furniture and items of a
closely similar character. See § 280-30.
GLARE — A sensation of brightness within the visual field which causes
annoyance, discomfort or loss in visual performance, visibility and/or ability
to focus. See § 280-37.
GOVERNMENT FACILITY, OTHER THAN BOROUGH-OWNED — A use
owned by a government, government agency or government authority for
valid public health, public safety, recycling collection or similar
governmental purpose, and which is not owned by Catasauqua Borough.
This term shall not include uses listed separately in the table of uses in
Article III, such as publicly owned recreation. This term shall not include a
prison.
GREEN AREA — The landscaped space among buildings within which a
civic use is located. The green area shall include a plaza, courtyard,
promenade, or other outdoor space in which features are installed and
maintained, such as benches, gazebos, pergolas, trellises, planters,
plantings, lighting, kiosks, fountains, clock towers, and the like.[Added
11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 1189]
GROUP HOME — A dwelling unit operated by a responsible individual,
family or organization with a program to provide a supportive living
arrangement for individuals where special care is needed by the individual
served due to age, emotional, mental or physical handicap. This definition
shall expressly include facilities for the supervised care of developmentally
disabled persons and all persons subject to protection under the Federal
§ 280-19 JUNKYARDS § 280-19
170:745
Fair Housing Act Amendments of 1988. Group homes must be licensed
where required by any appropriate government agencies, and a copy of
any such license must be delivered to the Zoning Officer prior to the
initiation of the use. [Note: The Federal Fair Housing Act Amendments
defined "handicap" as follows: "1) a physical or mental impairment which
substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities; 2) a
record of having such an impairment; or 3) being regarded as having such
an impairment, but such term does not include current, illegal use of or
addiction to a controlled substance as defined in Section 802 of Title 21."
This definition was subsequently adjusted by Section 512 of the Americans
with Disabilities Act to address certain situations related to substance abuse
treatment.]
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES — A product or waste, or combination of
substances, that because of the quantity, concentration, physical or
infectious characteristics, if not properly treated, stored, transported, used
or disposed of, or otherwise managed, would create a potential threat to
public health through direct or indirect introduction into ground water
resources and the subsurface environment which includes the soil and all
subsequent materials located below. Such hazardous material includes, but
is not limited to, materials which are included on the latest edition of one or
more of the following lists:
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES, EXTREMELY — Amounts above the federally
required reportable volumes of hazardous substances included on the list of
"Extremely Hazardous Substances" in 29 Code of Federal Regulations Part
1910, or its successor provisions.
HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of
the proposed ground level along the front of the building to the highest
point of a structure. For a building with a defined and pitched roof, an area
equal to 20% of the building coverage may exceed the maximum height to
provide for the roof peak, provided such 20% is not occupied by persons.
See exemptions for certain types of structures in § 280-55. A maximum of
one more story may be exposed in the rear of a building compared to what is
Group homes shall be subject to the same limitations and regulations
by the Borough as the type of dwelling unit they occupy.
A.
It is the express intent of the Borough to comply with all provisions
of the Federal Fair Housing Act, as amended, and regulations
promulgated thereunder, in the construction of this term.
B.
C. A group home shall not include a treatment center.
D. See standards in § 280-29.
"Hazardous substances" as defined pursuant to Section 311 of the
Federal Clean Water Act, or its successor provisions.
A.
"Hazardous substances" as defined pursuant to the Federal
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability
Act, or its successor provisions.
B.
§ 280-19 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-19
170:746
visible in the front of a building. For height of signs, see Article VII, entitled
"Signs."
HOME OCCUPATION — A routine, accessory and customary nonresidential
use conducted within or administered from a portion of a dwelling or its
permitted accessory building and that meets all of the home occupation
requirements of § 280-30. A light home occupation shall be a home
occupation that meets the additional requirements for a light home
occupation stated in § 280-30. A general home occupation shall be a home
occupation that does not meet the requirements for a light home
occupation.
HOSPITAL — A use involving the diagnosis, treatment or other medical
care of humans that includes, but is not limited to, care requiring stays
overnight. A medical care use that does not involve any stays overnight shall
be considered an "office." A hospital may involve care and rehabilitation for
medical, dental or mental health, but shall not primarily include housing
or treatment of the criminally insane or persons actively serving an official
sentence after being convicted of a felony. A hospital may also involve
medical research and training for health care professionals.
HOTEL or MOTEL — A building or buildings including rooms rented out to
persons as clearly transient and temporary living quarters. Any such use
that customarily involves the housing of persons for periods of time longer
than 30 days shall be considered a "boardinghouse" and shall meet the
requirements of that use. See also "bed-and-breakfast" use. A hotel or motel
may also include a restaurant, meeting rooms, nightclub, newsstand, gift
shop, swim club or tavern, provided that such use(s) is not the principal use
of the property.
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — A surface that prevents the percolation of
water into the ground.
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT — The IO and A Zoning Districts.
INSTITUTIONAL USE — A use by a governmental, public, municipal, civic,
or other like-type entity in the form of a public or private school, library,
museum, community center, meeting hall, or the like.[Added 6-1-2009 by
Ord. No. 1238]
JUNK — Any discarded, unusable, scrap or abandoned man-made or manprocessed
material or articles, such as the following types: metal, furniture,
appliances, motor vehicle parts, aircraft, glass, plastics, machinery,
equipment, containers and building materials. Junk shall not include:
Solid waste that is temporarily stored as is customary in an appropriate
container that is routinely awaiting collection and disposed of in a
manner consistent with state regulations;
A.
B. Toxic wastes;
C. Grass clippings, leaves, tree limbs or similar yard waste materials; or
§ 280-19 JUNKYARDS § 280-19
170:747
JUNK VEHICLE —
JUNKYARD —
KENNEL — The keeping of a greater number of dogs and/or cats than are
permitted under the "keeping of pets" provisions of this chapter. A kennel
may also serve other animals.
LANDOWNER — The owner of a legal or equitable interest in land,
including the holder of a written, signed and active option or contract to
purchase or a person leasing the property (if authorized under the lease
Items clearly awaiting imminent recycling at an approved recycling
facility.
D.
Includes any vehicle or trailer that meets any of the following
conditions:
Cannot be moved under its own power, in regards to a vehicle
designed to move under its own power, other than a vehicle clearly
needing only minor repairs;
(1)
(2) Cannot be towed, in regards to a trailer designed to be towed;
(3) Has been demolished beyond repair;
(4) Has been separated from its axles, engine, body or chassis;
Includes only the axle, engine, body parts and/or chassis, separated
from the remainder of the vehicle; and/or
(5)
Has had all of the tires removed from the vehicle or has had one or
more windows broken or removed from the vehicle for more than
10 days.
(6)
A.
B. See also the definition of "unregistered vehicle."
Land or a structure used for the collection, storage, dismantling,
processing and/or sale, other than within a completely enclosed
building, of material of one or more of the following types:
(1) Junk. (See definition.)
Three or more junk vehicles that are partly or fully visible from an
exterior lot line, dwelling and/or public street. This shall not apply
to such vehicles allowed to be stored within the requirements of
§ 280-29 for an auto repair garage or auto service station.
(2)
One or more mobile/manufactured homes that are not in a
habitable condition.
(3)
A.
Junk stored within a completely enclosed building for business
purposes shall be considered a warehouse.
B.
A junkyard specifically shall include but not be limited to any metal
scrap yard or auto salvage yard.
C.
§ 280-19 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-19
170:748
to exercise the right of the landowner and if such lease is for a remaining
period of at least 12 months) or authorized officers of a partnership or
corporation that is a landowner.
LIFE CARE CENTER — A residential use designed and operated exclusively
for adults of 55 years of age or older and/or physically handicapped persons
that includes a nursing home and certain limited support facilities intended
specifically to serve the needs of these residents.
LIGHTING, DIFFUSED — Illumination that passes from the source through
a translucent cover or shade.
LIVESTOCK (AND POULTRY), RAISING OF — The raising and keeping
of livestock, horses, poultry or insects beyond what is allowed under the
"keeping of pets" section of § 280-30 and the definition of "kennel." Raising
of livestock shall not include a slaughterhouse nor a stockyard used for the
housing of animals awaiting slaughter.
LIVE-WORK UNIT — A ground floor business use, such as an office, studio,
shop, cafe, or personal service establishment, or other place of business in
combination with a dwelling unit and/or an office located above such place
of business. A person or persons other than the proprietor of the ground
floor business may occupy the dwelling unit portion and/or office portion
of a live-work unit.[Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 1189; amended
6-1-2009 by Ord. No. 1238]
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit. A lot may or may not coincide with a lot of record and includes one or
more adjacent pieces, parcels or plots of land of record held in single and
separate ownership, including adjacent pieces, parcels or plots bisected by
public or private streets. The area and depth of a lot shall be measured to
the legal right-of-way line of the street, and all lots shall front on public or
private streets.
LOT AREA — The horizontal land area contained within the lot lines of a
lot (measured in acres or square feet). For the purposes of determining
compliance with the minimum lot area, the following shall be excluded:
LOT, CORNER — A lot abutting on two or more intersecting streets which
has an interior angle of less than 135° at the intersection of right-of-way
lines of two streets. A lot abutting upon a curved street or streets shall be
Areas within the designated future or existing legal rights-of-way of:
any proposed or existing public streets or alleys; or any proposed or
existing commonly maintained private streets that serve more than
one lot. (Note: Other sections of this chapter may specifically permit
proposed streets to be included in determining density for a specific
use.)
A.
Areas that are currently or will be required to be dedicated as common
open space on a separate lot. (Note: Other sections of this chapter may
specifically permit proposed common open spaces to be included in
determining density for a specific use.)
B.
§ 280-19 JUNKYARDS § 280-19
170:749
considered a corner lot if the tangent to the curve at the points beginning
within the lot or at the points of intersection of the side lot lines with the
street lines intersect at an angle of less than 135°.
LOT LINES — The property lines bounding the lot. Wherever a property line
borders a public street, for the purposes of determining setbacks, the lot
line shall be considered to be the street right-of-way line that will exist at
the time of completion of a subdivision or development.219
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured
at the minimum prescribed front yard setback line, unless otherwise stated.
In the event of a curved lot line, such lot width at the minimum prescribed
front yard setback line shall be measured along the curve. Where buildings
are permitted to be attached, the lot width shall be measured from the
center of the party wall.
MASSAGE — The performance of manipulative exercises using the hands
and/or a mechanical or bathing device on a person's or persons' skin other
than the face or neck by another person(s) that is related to certain
monetary compensation, and which does not involve persons who are
related to each other by blood, adoption, marriage or official guardianship.
MASSAGE PARLOR — An establishment that meets all of the following
criteria:
FRONT LOT LINE (STREET LINE) — A lot line separating the lot from
the existing street right-of-way. A corner lot shall have two front yards.
See § 280-56B concerning corner lots.
A.
REAR LOT LINE — Any lot line which is parallel to or within 45° of
being parallel to a front street right-of-way line. In the case of a lot
having no street frontage, or a lot of an odd shape, or a flag lot, only the
one lot line furthest from any street shall be considered a rear lot line.
B.
C. SIDE LOT LINE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
A. Massages are conducted.
The use does not meet the definition of "massage therapy, certified"
and the person conducting the massage is not licensed as a health care
professional by the state.
B.
The massages are not conducted within a licensed hospital or nursing
home or an office of a medical doctor or chiropractor.
C.
D. The massages are conducted within private or semiprivate rooms.
The use is not clearly a customary and incidental accessory use to a
permitted exercise club or to a high school or college athletic program.
E.
219. Editor's Note: The sample lot line configuration sketches which originally accompanied
this definition, the sketch of lot lines and sketch of lot terms, are on file in the Borough
offices.
§ 280-19 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-19
170:750
MASSAGE THERAPY, CERTIFIED — A use involving performance of
massages by a person licensed or certified by the state as a massage
therapist or certified by a recognized national organization that requires
over 60 hours of professional training. This use shall be considered a type
of personal service.
MEMBERSHIP CLUB — An area of land or building routinely used by
a recreational, civic, social, fraternal, religious, political or labor union
association of persons for meetings and routine socializing and recreation
that is limited to members and their occasional guests, and persons
specifically invited to special celebrations, but which is not routinely open
to members of the general public and which is not primarily operated as a
for-profit business.
MINERAL EXTRACTION — The removal from the surface or beneath the
surface of the land of bulk mineral resources using significant machinery.
This use also includes accessory stockpiling and processing of mineral
resources. Mineral extraction includes but is not limited to the extraction of
sand, gravel, topsoil, limestone, sandstone, oil, coal, clay, shale and iron ore.
The routine movement of and replacement of topsoil during construction
shall not by itself be considered to be mineral extraction.
MINIMUM FUNCTIONAL HEIGHT — Minimum height necessary for a WCF
to function satisfactorily.[Added 8-7-2017 by Ord. No. 1354]
MIXED-USE — Two or more principal uses on a lot that are permitted in
specified districts.[Added 6-1-2009 by Ord. No. 1238]
MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT — Development in the Waterfront Overlay
District consisting of three or more uses, often involving a new street and/
or alley, and always including civic or green space.[Added 11-7-2005 by
Ord. No. 1189]
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME — See under "dwelling types."
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK — A parcel of land under single
ownership which includes three or more mobile/manufactured homes for
residential use. The individual manufactured homes may be individually
owned. A development of mobile/manufactured homes that is subdivided
into individual lots shall be regulated in the same manner as a subdivision
of site-built homes, and shall not be considered to be a "mobile home park."
See § 280-29.
MODIFICATION — The improvement, upgrade or expansion of existing
wireless telecommunications facilities or base stations on an existing
wireless support structure or the improvement, upgrade or expansion of the
wireless telecommunication facilities located within an existing equipment
This use shall not include a target range for outdoor shooting of
firearms, boardinghouse, tavern, restaurant or retail sales unless that
particular use is permitted in that district and the requirements of that
use are met.
A.
B. See § 280-29. See also "after hours club."
§ 280-19 JUNKYARDS § 280-19
170:751
compound, if the improvement, upgrade, expansion or replacement does
not substantially change the physical dimensions of the wireless support
structure.[Added 8-7-2017 by Ord. No. 1354]
MONOPOLE — A tower which consists of a single pole structure without
any guy wires, designed and erected on the ground or on top of a structure,
to support communications antennas and connect appurtenances.[Added
8-7-2017 by Ord. No. 1354]
MOTOR VEHICLE — An automobile, recreational vehicle, truck, bus,
motorcycle, all-terrain vehicle or similar means of transportation designed
to operate to carry persons or cargo on roads and that is powered by
mechanized means.
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE or STATE PLANNING CODE — The
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247,
as reenacted and amended.220
MUNICIPAL USE — Any use owned or operated by the Borough of
Catasauqua.[Added 6-1-2009 by Ord. No. 1238]
MUSEUM — A building owned, operated and maintained by a lawful entity,
which is devoted to the acquisition, conservation, study, exhibition, and
educational interpretation of objects having scientific, historical, or artistic
value.[Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 1189]
NIGHT CLUB — An establishment dispensing meals and beverages, and in
which music and entertainment is conducted, excluding adult uses.[Added
11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 1189]
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot which does not conform with the minimum
lot width or area dimensions specified for the district where such lot is
situated, but was lawfully in existence prior to the effective date of this
chapter, or amendments hereinafter enacted.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or part of a structure
that does not comply with the applicable lot coverage, dimensional and
other provisions in this chapter, as amended, where such structure lawfully
existed prior to the enactment of such chapter or applicable amendment(s).
Such nonconforming structures include but are not limited to signs. See
§ 280-58.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or of a structure,
which does not comply with the applicable use provisions in this chapter
or amendment(s), where such use was lawfully in existence prior to the
enactment of this chapter or applicable amendment(s). A use granted by
variance is not a nonconforming use. See § 280-58.
NURSING HOME — A facility licensed by the state for the housing and
intermediate or fully skilled nursing care of three or more persons. See
§ 280-29.
220. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 280-19 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-19
170:752
OFFICE — A use that involves administrative, clerical, financial,
governmental or professional operations and operations of a similar
character. This use shall not include retail uses, hospital uses, and kennels,
but may include business offices, medical offices, veterinary offices,
laboratories, photographic studios and/or television or radio broadcasting
studios.[Amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 1189]
OFFICIAL ZONING MAP — The map as adopted by Borough Council which
designates the location and boundaries of zoning districts.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON — A parcel or parcels of land within a tract which
meets all of the following standards:
ORDINANCE, THIS — The Catasauqua Borough Zoning Ordinance,
including the Official Zoning Map, as amended.
Is designed, intended and suitable for active or passive recreation by
residents of a development or the general public;
A.
Is covered by a system that ensures perpetual maintenance, if not
intended to be publicly owned;
B.
Will be deeded to the Borough and/or deed restricted to permanently
prevent uses of land other than "common open space" and
noncommercial recreation; and
C.
Does not use any of the following areas to meet minimum open space
requirements:
(1) Existing street rights-of-way;
(2) Vehicle streets or driveways providing access to other lots;
Land beneath building(s) or land within 20 feet of a building (other
than accessory buildings and pools clearly intended for
noncommercial recreation and other than agricultural buildings
and a farmstead which are permitted within land approved by the
Borough for agricultural preservation);
(3)
Off-street parking (other than that clearly intended for
noncommercial recreation);
(4)
(5) Area(s) needed to meet a requirement for an individual lot;
For land intended to be open to the public, that does not have
provisions for entry with a twenty-foot minimum width by
pedestrians from a street open to the public or from an adjacent
common open space area that has access to such a street;
(6)
Land that includes a stormwater detention basin, except for a basin
or portions of a basin that the applicant proves to the satisfaction of
Borough Council would be reasonably safe and useful for active or
passive recreation during the vast majority of weather conditions;
(7)
(8) Portions of land that have a width of less than 20 feet.
D.
§ 280-19 JUNKYARDS § 280-19
170:753
OUTDOOR CAFE — A courtyard of a building used for the purpose of
furnishing food and beverages to the public to be consumed on the
premises, or an area on the sidewalk directly abutting and adjacent to and
upon the same lot as a restaurant or other permitted use.[Added 6-1-2009
by Ord. No. 1238]
PA — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
PARKING — Off-street parking and aisles for vehicle movement unless
otherwise stated.
PennDOT — The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, or its
successor, and its subparts.
PERMITTED-BY-RIGHT USES — Allowed uses in which zoning matters
may be approved by the Zoning Officer, provided the application complies
with all requirements of this chapter. A nonconforming use shall not be
considered to be a permitted-by-right use, a special exception use or a
conditional use.
PERSONAL CARE HOME OR CENTER — Shall mean "assisted living
facility."
PERSONAL SERVICE — An establishment that provides a service oriented
to personal needs of the general public and which does not involve primarily
retail or wholesale sales or services to businesses. Personal services include
barber and beauty shops, photography studios, shoe repair shops,
household appliance repair shops, and other similar establishments, but
shall not include any "adult uses," as herein defined.
PETS, KEEPING OF — The keeping of domesticated animals of types that
are normally considered to be kept in conjunction with a dwelling for the
pleasures of the resident family. This shall include dogs, cats, small birds,
gerbils, rabbits and other animals commonly sold in retail pet shops. See
§ 280-30.
PLACES OF WORSHIP — Buildings, synagogues, churches, religious
retreats, monasteries, seminaries and shrines used primarily for religious
and/or spiritual worship and that are operated for nonprofit and
noncommercial purposes. If a religious use is primarily residential in
nature, it shall be regulated under the appropriate dwelling type. See
standards in § 280-29.
PLANNED MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL COMMUNITY — A planned
community consisting of one or more of the following dwelling types:
apartments, mid-rise apartments, twin dwelling units and townhouses;
meeting the specific standards set forth in Article IV hereof; and to the
extent not inconsistent with the requirements of Article IV, meeting all
other applicable requirements of this chapter.[Added 3-4-2013 by Ord.
No. 1286]
PLANNING COMMISSION — See "Commission."
PRIMARY FRONTAGE STREET — The main street along which an existing
or proposed building has frontage, and from which access to a building is
§ 280-19 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-19
170:754
achieved through a front door and entryway.[Added 11-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 1189]
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A principal structure which is also a building.
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE — The structure in which the principal use of a
lot is conducted. Any structure that is physically attached to a principal
structure shall be considered part of that principal structure.
PRINCIPAL USE — A dominant use(s) or main use on a lot, as opposed to an
accessory use.
PUBLICLY OWNED RECREATION — Leisure facilities owned, operated or
maintained by governmental entities for use by the general public.
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice required by the Municipalities Planning Code.
(Note: As of the adoption date of this chapter, for a Zoning Hearing Board
hearing or an amendment to this chapter, such Act generally required a
legal advertisement published once each week for two successive weeks in
a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough, which states the time
and place of a meeting/hearing and the particular nature of the matter to
be considered. The first publication shall not be more than 30 days and the
second publication not less than seven days from the meeting/hearing date.)
PUBLIC PARKING GARAGE — A parking deck with up to three levels, not
exceeding 45 feet in height, which is owned by a public entity, and which
may include ground floor offices and/or shops.[Added 6-1-2009 by Ord.
No. 1238]
RECREATION — The offering of leisure-time activities to unrelated persons.
This term shall not include any adult use. For the purposes of this chapter,
recreation facilities shall be permitted by right as an accessory use when
clearly limited to residents of a development and their occasional invited
guests. Publicly owned recreation is a distinctly different use from indoor
recreation or outdoor recreation.
RECYCLING COLLECTION CENTER — A use for collection and temporary
storage of more than 500 pounds of common household materials for
recycling, but that does not involve processing or recycling other than
routine sorting, baling and weighing of materials. This term shall not
include the indoor storage of less than 500 pounds of household recyclables
INDOOR RECREATION — A type of recreation use that does not meet
the definition of "outdoor recreation," and is used principally for active
or passive recreation, such as a bowling alley, roller skating, ice
skating, commercial batting practice use and similar uses. This term
shall not include any use listed separately as a distinct use by § 280-25.
A.
OUTDOOR RECREATION — A type of recreation use that has a total
building coverage of less than 15%, and is used principally for active or
passive recreation, such as a golf driving range, miniature golf course,
amusement park and similar uses. This term shall not include any use
listed separately as a distinct use by § 280-25, such as a firearms target
range.
B.
§ 280-19 JUNKYARDS § 280-19
170:755
and their customary collection, which is a permitted-by-right accessory use
in all zoning districts, without additional regulations. A recycling collection
center is also a permitted-by-right accessory use to a public or private
primary or secondary school, a place of worship, a Borough-owned use or
an emergency services station.
RELATED or RELATIVE — Persons who are related by blood, marriage,
adoption or formal foster relationship to result in one of the following
relationships: spouse, brother, sister, parent, child, grandparent, greatgrandparent,
grandchild, great-grandchild, uncle, aunt, niece, nephew,
sister-in-law, brother-in-law, parent-in-law or first cousin. This term
specifically shall not include relationships such as second, third or more
distant cousins. See definition of "dwelling unit."
REPAIR SERVICE — Shops for the repair of appliances, watches, guns,
bicycles and other household items.
REPLACEMENT — The replacement of existing wireless
telecommunications facilities on an existing wireless support structure or
within an existing equipment compound due to maintenance, repair or
technological advancement with equipment composed of the same wind
loading and structural loading that is substantially similar in size, weight
and height as the wireless telecommunications facilities initially installed
and that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of the
existing wireless support structure.[Added 8-7-2017 by Ord. No. 1354]
RESIDENTIAL ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (INCLUDES "BUILDING") OR
USE — A use or structure that is clearly accessory, customary and incidental
to a principal residential use on a lot, including the following uses and uses
that are very similar in nature: garage (household), carport, tennis court,
garage sale, basketball backboard, household swimming pool, gazebo,
storage shed, greenhouse, children's playhouse or children's play
equipment. No business shall be conducted in a household garage or
storage shed that is accessory to a dwelling, except as may be allowed as a
home occupation.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT — The R-1, R-2, R-3 and CN Zoning Districts.
RESIDENTIAL LOT LINES — The lot line of a lot that:
RESTAURANT —
A. Contains an existing primarily residential use; or
B. Is undeveloped and zoned as a residential district.
An establishment that sells ready-to-consume food or drink and that
routinely involves the consumption of at least a portion of such food on
the premises.
A.
A restaurant may include the accessory sale of alcoholic beverages.
However, if such sale is a primary or substantial portion of the total
trade, the requirements of a tavern or nightclub, as applicable, must be
met.
B.
§ 280-19 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-19
170:756
RETAIL STORE — A use in which merchandise is sold or rented to the
general public, but not including the following: sales of motor vehicles
or boats, adult movie theater, adult bookstore, manufacturing, tavern, car
wash, auto service station, auto repair garage, convenience store or any
restaurant.
RIGHT-OF-WAY (ROW) — The surface of and space above and below any
real property in the Borough in which the federal government,
commonwealth, municipality or municipal authority has a regulatory
interest, or interest as a trustee for the public, as such interests now or
hereafter exist, including, but not limited to, all streets, highways, avenues,
roads, alleys, sidewalks, tunnels, viaducts, bridges, skyways, or any other
public places, area or property under the control of the federal government,
commonwealth, municipality or municipal authority, and any nonexclusive
public or utility easement established, dedicated, platted, improved or
devoted for utility purposes. Private rights-of-way and other governmentowned
lands not listed above shall not be considered a right-of-way. The
phrase "in the right(s)-of-way" means in, on, over, along, above and/or under
the right(s)-of-way.[Amended 8-7-2017 by Ord. No. 1354]
ROOMING HOUSE — See "boardinghouse."
SCHOOL — [Amended 6-1-2009 by Ord. No. 1238]
SCREENING — Year-round plant material of substantial height and density
designed to provide a buffer. See requirements in § 280-56D.
SECTIONAL DWELLING — See under "dwelling units."
SELF-STORAGE DEVELOPMENT — A building or group of buildings divided
into individual separate access units which are rented or leased for the
storage of personal and small business property.
C. See "drive-through service" in this section.
STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY, EXISTING OR LEGAL — The official
established street right-of-way that either the Borough or the state
presently own or hold another interest in the land, or will own after
the completion of any proposed subdivision, land development or
development of a use under this chapter, whether by dedication or
otherwise.
A.
PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PRIMARY OR SECONDARY — An educational
institution primarily for persons between the ages of five and 19 that
primarily provides state-required or largely state-funded educational
programs. This term shall not include trade schools (such as privately
operated schools of trade, vocation or business).
A.
OTHER SCHOOL — A school, other than a public or private primary
or secondary school, including a vo-tech school, trade school, business
school, nursing or medical school, a community college.
B.
§ 280-19 JUNKYARDS § 280-19
170:757
SETBACK LINE —
SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area required to be kept free of certain visual
obstructions to traffic. See § 280-56.
SIGN — Any physical device for visual communication that is used for the
purpose of attracting attention from the public and that is visible from
beyond an exterior lot line, including all symbols, words, models, displays,
banners, flags, devices or representations. See definitions of types of signs
in §§ 280-52 and 280-44. This shall not include displays that only involve
symbols that are clearly and entirely religious in nature, and which do not
include advertising.
SIGN AREA — See § 280-52.
SIGN, OFF-PREMISES — A sign which directs attention to an object,
product, service, place, activity, person, institution, organization, or
business that is primarily offered or located at a location other than the lot
upon which the sign is located.
SINGLE AND SEPARATE OWNERSHIP — The ownership of a lot by one or
more persons, partnerships or corporations, which ownership is separate
and distinct from that of any abutting or adjoining lot.
SITE — For towers other than towers in the public right-of-way, the current
boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding the tower and
any access or utility easements currently related to the site, and, for other
eligible support structures, further restricted to that area in proximity to
the structure and to other transmission equipment already deployed on the
ground.[Added 8-7-2017 by Ord. No. 1354]
SOLID WASTE TRANSFER FACILITY — Land or structures where solid
waste is received and temporarily stored, at a location other than the
site where it was generated, and which facilitates the bulk transfer of
accumulated solid waste to a facility for further processing or disposal.
The line within a lot defining the required minimum distance between
any structure to be erected or use to be developed and the adjacent
future street right-of-way or exterior lot line (when the property is not
abutted by a right-of-way). Such line shall be measured at right angles
from and parallel to the front lot line.
A.
Any building setbacks shall be measured from the foundation, exterior
wall or other component of a structure that is closest to the right-ofway
line or lot line from which the setback is being measured. See
exceptions for eaves and cornices in § 280-56B.
B.
Unless otherwise stated, setback distances are for both accessory and
principal structures.
C.
Private streets. For a building setback measured from a private street,
the setback shall be measured from the existing right-of-way of such a
street, if a right-of-way exists. If a private street does not have a rightof-
way, the setback shall be measured from the edge of the cartway.
D.
§ 280-19 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-19
170:758
Such facility may or may not involve the separation of recyclables from solid
waste. Such facility shall not include a junkyard, leaf composting, clean fill
or septage or sludge application.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A use for which the Zoning Hearing Board may
grant permission following a public hearing and findings of fact consistent
with this chapter, provided the use complies with the conditions and
standards required by this chapter. See § 280-16.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — One or more of the following:
STATE — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and its agencies.
STEALTH TECHNOLOGY — State-of-the-art design techniques used to
blend objects into the surrounding environment and to minimize the visual
impact as much as possible. These design techniques are applied to wireless
communications towers, antennas and other facilities which blend the
proposed WCF into the existing structure or visual backdrop in such a
manner as to render it less visible to the casual observer. Such methods
include, but are not limited to, architecturally screened roof-mounted
antennas, building-mounted antennas painted to match the existing
structure and facilities constructed to resemble trees, shrubs, light poles,
utility poles or flag poles.[Added 8-7-2017 by Ord. No. 1354]
STORY (and HALF-STORY) — A portion of a building between the upper
surface of a floor and the upper surface of the floor or roof next above. For
the purposes of determining maximum height in this chapter, a floor level
shall be considered a story if it meets the definition of an "aboveground
story" in the Building Code.221 (Note: Such provisions often allow a rear
walkout basement to not count as a story.) If a floor level has a clear ceiling
height less than seven feet and is not designed for habitation (such as attic
storage), then the level shall be considered a half-story.
STREET — A public or private thoroughfare which provides the principal
means of vehicle access to three or more lots or that is an expressway,
but not including an alley or a driveway. The terms "street," "highway" and
"road" have the same meaning and are used interchangeably. Streets shall
be classified as "arterial streets," "collector streets" and "local streets" as
categorized in the Borough Comprehensive Plan.
STREETSCAPE — The space formed by buildings located close to the street
which is embellished with sidewalks, street trees, streetlights, curbs, onstreet
parking, and cartways. The streetscape is framed by buildings
located across from one another that create an “outdoor room” character,
A. Human male genitals in a visible state of sexual stimulation.
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, oral sex or sodomy.
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals. See definition of
"adult use."
C.
221. Editor's Note: See Ch. 130, Codes, Uniform.
§ 280-19 JUNKYARDS § 280-19
170:759
the horizontal dimension of which is in the range of 60 to 95 feet.[Added
11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 1189]
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having a stationary location on, below
or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land. Any structure shall be
subject to the principal or accessory setbacks of this chapter, as applicable,
unless specifically exempted or unless a specific setback is established for
that particular type of structure by this chapter.
SUBDIVISION — The definition in the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance shall apply.
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE or SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
ORDINANCE — The Catasauqua Borough Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, as amended.222
SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE or SUBSTANTIALLY CHANGE — The
modifications or proposed modifications to the physical dimensions of a
tower, tower-based WCF, or base station that meet any of the following
criteria:[Added 8-7-2017 by Ord. No. 1354]
Towers outside rights-of-way:
It increases the original height of the tower by more than 10% or by
the height of one antenna array with separation from the nearest
existing antenna not to exceed 20 feet, whichever is greater.
(1)
It protrudes from the edge of the tower more than 20 feet, or
more than the width of the tower structure at the level of the
appurtenance, whichever is greater.
(2)
A.
Towers inside rights-of-way:
It increases the height of the tower by more than 10% or 10 feet,
whichever is greater.
(1)
(2) It protrudes from the edge of the tower more than six feet.
The installation of any new equipment cabinets on the ground if
there are no preexisting ground cabinets.
(3)
The installation of ground cabinets that are more than 10% larger
in height or overall volume than any other ground cabinets
associated with the structure.
(4)
B.
Base stations (regardless of location):
It increases the height of the structure by more than 10% or 10
feet, whichever is greater.
(1)
(2) It protrudes from the edge of the tower more than six feet.
C.
222. Editor's Note: See Ch. 235, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 280-19 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-19
170:760
SWIMMING POOL, HOUSEHOLD OR PRIVATE — A man-made area with
walls of man-made materials intended to enclose water at least 30 inches
deep for bathing or swimming and that is intended to serve the residents of
only one dwelling unit and their occasional guests. See § 280-30.
SWIMMING POOL, NONHOUSEHOLD — A man-made area with walls of
man-made materials intended to enclose water at least 30 inches deep for
bathing or swimming and that does not meet the definition of a "household
swimming pool."
TASTING ROOM — A required component of a craft beverage production
facility which offers to the general public an opportunity to consume craft
beverages and which is operated in conformance with all applicable federal,
state and local laws, regulations and ordinances.[Added 2-5-2018 by Ord.
No. 1364]
TAVERN — A place where alcoholic beverages are served as a primary or
substantial portion of the total trade and which does not meet the definition
of a "nightclub" or an "after-hours club." The sale of food may also occur.
See also the definition of "restaurant."
THEATER — A building or part of a building devoted to the showing of
motion pictures or theatrical or performing arts productions as a principal
use, but not including an outdoor drive-in theater or adult movie theater.
TIRE STORAGE, BULK — The storage of more than 150 used tires on a lot.
See "outdoor storage" in § 280-30.
TOWER — Any structure that exceeds 10 feet in height and is built for
the sole or primary purpose of supporting any FCC-licensed or authorized
antennas and their associated facilities, including structures that are
constructed for wireless communications services including, but not limited
to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed
wireless services (i.e., wi-fi) and fixed wireless services (i.e., point-to-point
The installation of any new equipment cabinets on the ground if
there are no preexisting ground cabinets.
(3)
The installation of ground cabinets that are more than 10% larger
in height or overall volume than any other ground cabinets
associated with the structure.
(4)
It involves the installation of more than the standard number of new
equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed four
cabinets.
D.
It entails any excavation or deployment outside the current site of the
tower, wireless support structure, or base station.
E.
It does not comply with the conditions associated with the prior
approval of the tower, wireless support structure, or base station unless
the noncompliance is due to an increase in height, increase in width,
addition of cabinets, or new excavation that does not exceed the
corresponding "substantial change" thresholds.
F.
§ 280-19 JUNKYARDS § 280-19
170:761
microwave transmission) such as microwave backhaul, and the associated
site. A building, water tower, electrical transmission tower, utility pole, light
pole, traffic signal pole, flag pole or other similar structure designed and
constructed for a sole or primary purpose other than supporting any FCClicensed
or authorized antennas and their associated facilities, as well as a
Ft. Worth attachment shall not be considered a tower.[Added 8-7-2017 by
Ord. No. 1354]
TOWER-BASED WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES (TOWERBASED
WCF) — Wireless communications facilities that include the
installation of a new tower to support the transmission equipment. A WCF
that requires the replacement of an existing structure (i.e., building, water
tower, utility pole, light pole, traffic signal pole, flag pole or other similar
structure) to support the weight of a WCF is not considered a new towerbased
WCF.[Added 8-7-2017 by Ord. No. 1354]
TOWNHOUSE — See "dwelling types."
TRADE/HOBBY SCHOOL or TRADE SCHOOL — A facility that is primarily
intended for education of a work-related skill or craft or a hobby, and does
not primarily provide state-required education to persons under age 16.
Examples include a dancing school, martial arts school, cosmetology school
or ceramics school.
TRADESPERSON — A person involved with building trades, such as but
not limited to plumbing, electrical work, building construction, building
remodeling, and roofing.
TRADITIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD DEVELOPMENT — A primarily
residential development that meets the requirements for such use in
§ 280-27.
TRANSMISSION EQUIPMENT — Equipment that facilitates transmission
for any FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communications service,
including, but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or
fiberoptic cable, and regular and backup power supply. The term includes
equipment associated with wireless communications services including,
but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well
as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as a
microwave backhaul.[Added 8-7-2017 by Ord. No. 1354]
TREATMENT CENTER —
A use (other than a prison or a hospital) providing housing for three or
more unrelated persons who need specialized housing, treatment and/
or counseling because of:
(1) Criminal rehabilitation, such as a criminal halfway house;
Current addiction to alcohol or a controlled substance that was
used in an illegal manner; and/or
(2)
A type of mental illness or other behavior that causes a person to
be a threat to the physical safety of others.
(3)
A.
§ 280-19 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-19
170:762
UNIT FOR CARE OF RELATIVE — A dwelling unit that:
UNREGISTERED VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle or trailer that does not
display a license plate with a current registration sticker and does not have
a valid state safety inspection sticker (except for antique vehicles exempted
from safety sticker requirements under state regulations). The term also
shall not include motor vehicles displaying a license and inspection stickers
that have each expired less than 90 days previously.
USE — The purpose, activity, occupation, business or operation for which
land or a structure is designed, arranged, intended, occupied or maintained.
Uses specifically include but are not limited to the following: activity within
a structure, activity outside of a structure, any structure, recreational
vehicle storage or parking of commercial vehicles on a lot.
USEABLE FLOOR AREA — The area of all floors of a building exclusive of
stairs, elevators, bathrooms, closets, storage areas, mechanical equipment
rooms, and common hallways.[Added 6-1-2009 by Ord. No. 1238]
VARIANCE — The granting of specific permission by the Zoning Hearing
Board to use, construct, expand or alter land or structures in such a way
that compliance is not required with a specific requirement of this chapter.
Any variance shall only be granted within the limitations of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code. See § 280-11.
WALL — See "fence."
WAREHOUSE — A building or group of buildings primarily used for the
indoor storage, transfer and distribution of products and materials, but not
including retail uses or a truck terminal, unless such uses are specifically
permitted in that zoning district.
WCF ON EXISTING STRUCTURE — Wireless communications facilities
located on existing structures such as, but not limited to, buildings, water
towers, electrical transmission towers, utility poles, light poles, traffic
signal poles, flag poles and other similar structures that do not require
the installation of a new tower. This term includes the replacement of an
existing structure with a similar structure that is required to support the
weight of the proposed WCF.[Added 8-7-2017 by Ord. No. 1354]
WETLANDS — An area of land and/or water meeting one or more definitions
of a "wetland" under federal and/or Pennsylvania law and/or regulations.
WIRELESS — Transmissions through the airwaves including, but not limited
to, infrared line of sight, cellular, personal communications service (PCS),
microwave, satellite, or radio signals.[Added 8-7-2017 by Ord. No. 1354]
B. See standards in § 280-29.
Is especially created for and limited to occupancy by a close relative of
the permanent residents of the principal dwelling unit;
A.
Is necessary to provide needed care and supervision to such relative;
and
B.
C. Meets the requirements for such use in § 280-30.
§ 280-19 JUNKYARDS § 280-19
170:763
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (WCF) — The set of equipment
and network components including antennas, transmitters, receivers, base
stations, cabling and accessory equipment, used to provide wireless data
and telecommunication services. The term shall not include the wireless
support structure.[Added 8-7-2017 by Ord. No. 1354]
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A freestanding structure, such as a
guyed or self-supporting monopole or tower, electrical transmission tower,
water tower or other structure not classified as a wireless support
structure, including but not limited to buildings, light poles, utility poles,
traffic signals and other similar structures that could support the placement
or installation of wireless telecommunications facilities if approved by the
Borough.[Added 8-7-2017 by Ord. No. 1354]
YARD — An area not covered by buildings and that is on the same lot as
the subject structure or use and which is measured inward from a lot line.
Regulations of specific districts prohibit principal and accessory structures
within specified required minimum yard setbacks.
YARD, FRONT or MINIMUM FRONT SETBACK — A yard measured from
along the front lot line (which is the existing street right-of-way line where
it abuts a street) and that extends the full width of the lot from side lot line
to side lot line.
YARD, REAR or MINIMUM REAR SETBACK —
YARD, SIDE or MINIMUM SIDE SETBACK —
The front yard shall be on a side that faces towards a public street,
whenever one public street abuts the lot.
A.
B. See § 280-56 concerning yards along corner lots.
No accessory or principal structure shall extend into the required
front yard, except as provided in this chapter. See special front yard
provisions, including regarding corner lots, through lots and front yard
exceptions, in § 280-56.
C.
D. Every lot shall include at least one front lot line.
A yard extending the full-width of the lot and which is always measured
from along the rear line and which establishes the minimum setback
for the subject structure, and which stretches between the side lot lines
parallel to the rear lot line.
A.
A principal building shall not extend into the required rear yard setback
for a principal building, and an accessory structure shall not extend into
the required rear yard for an accessory structure, except as provided in
this chapter.
B.
C. Every lot shall include a rear lot line.
A yard which establishes the minimum setback for the closest portion
of the subject structure, and which is measured from along the entire
A.
§ 280-19 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-19
170:764
ZONING MAP — The Official Zoning Map of Catasauqua Borough, Lehigh
County, Pennsylvania.
ZONING OFFICER — The person charged with the duty of enforcing the
provisions of this chapter, and any officially designated assistant.
ZONING ORDINANCE — The Catasauqua Borough Zoning Ordinance, as
amended.
length of the side lot line, and which extends from the front lot line to
the rear lot line.
A structure shall not extend into the applicable minimum side yard
setback, except as provided for in this chapter.
B.
C. See "corner lot" provision in § 280-56B.
Every lot shall include at least one side lot line, although such lot line
may be regulated as a front yard under § 280-56B.
D.
§ 280-19 JUNKYARDS § 280-19
170:765

ARTICLE III
Establishment and Regulation of Districts
§ 280-20. Designation of districts and purposes.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, Catasauqua Borough is hereby divided
into the following zoning districts, with the following abbreviations:
[Amended 6-1-2009 by Ord. No. 1238; 8-1-2016 by Ord. No.
1335]
Abbreviation Name of District
CN Conservation District
R-1 Low Density Residential District
R-2 Medium Density Residential District
R-3 High Density Residential District
DC Downtown Commercial District
GC General Commercial District
TC Town Center District
WOD Waterfront Overlay District
W Waterfront District
O Office District
IO Light Industrial/Office District
A Airport District
INS-1 Institutional-1 District
INS-2 Institutional-2 District
B. For the purposes of this chapter, the zoning districts named in
§ 280-20A shall be of the number, size, shape and location shown on the
Official Zoning Map. Any use of the abbreviations listed in § 280-20A
shall mean the district name that is listed beside the abbreviation.
C. Overlay districts. The Floodplain Area, as defined by Article V, shall
serve as an overlay district to the applicable underlying districts.
D. Purposes of each district. In addition to the overall purposes and
objectives of this chapter and the Comprehensive Plan, the purposes of
each zoning district are summarized below:
(1) R-1 Low Density Residential District: To provide for low density
residential neighborhoods that are primarily composed of singlefamily
detached dwellings; to protect these areas from
incompatible uses; to encourage owner-occupancy and
neighborhood stability.
(2) R-2 Medium Density Residential District: To provide for medium
density residential neighborhoods; to protect these areas from
§ 280-20 JUNKYARDS § 280-20
170:767
incompatible uses; to encourage "one home on one lot" (which may
be attached to another home) in order to promote home ownership
and neighborhood stability; to make sure that "infill" development
is consistent with neighboring development.
(3) R-3 High Density Residential District: To provide for high density
residential neighborhoods with a mix of housing types; to protect
these areas from incompatible uses.
(4) DC Downtown Commercial District: To promote pedestrian-friendly
commercial activities; to promote an appropriate mix of retail,
service, office, public, institutional and residential uses; to avoid
heavy auto-related commercial uses that are most likely to conflict
with nearby homes and the pedestrian-orientation, and which are
most likely to cause demolition of historic buildings.
(5) CG General Commercial District: To provide for a wide range of
commercial uses, including heavier commercial uses than are
allowed in the Downtown Commercial District.
(6) TC Town Center District: To provide for a wide range of commercial
uses, offices, services and light industrial uses; to encourage
coordinated exterior and interior traffic access, coordinated signs,
and shared parking.
(a) Waterfront Overlay District: To provide for mixed-use
development along the Lehigh River and the Lehigh Canal,
which serves to revitalize and enhance adjoining properties
while maintaining the essential neighborhood character of the
Borough. [Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 1189]
(7) O Office District: To provide for office uses as a transitional use
between residential and industrial/airport uses.
(8) IO Industrial/Office District: To provide for industrial uses; to
carefully control the types of industrial operations to avoid
nuisances (such as excessive noise) and hazards.
(9) A Airport District: To provide for a range of airport uses, related
uses and industrial uses, particularly in land areas that can be
accessed from the interior road system of the airport or from major
highways.
(10) INS-1 Institutional-1 District: To provide for schools, nursing
homes and similar institutional uses on a tract of five or more acres
in a campus-type setting, in accordance with Attachment 2.223
[Amended 6-1-2009 by Ord. No. 1238]
(11) INS-2 Institutional-2 District: To provide for the adaptive reuse of
former institutional buildings and grounds on tracts of less than
223. Editor's Note: Attachment 2 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 280-20 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-20
170:768
§ 280-21. Application of district regulations.
five acres for schools, community centers and other similar
institutional uses, dormitories for schools, nursing homes,
apartments, live-work units, offices, cafes, conference centers,
hotels, exercise club/fitness centers/gymnasiums, green areas,
pedestrian plazas and parks, public parking garages, or a
combination thereof, in accordance with Attachment 2.224 [Added
6-1-2009 by Ord. No. 1238]
(12)W Waterfront District: To provide for the adaptive reuse and/or
demolition of industrial buildings and reuse of industrial land
through development which is planned or coordinated in such a
manner as to make use of environmentally challenged land in a
mixed-use form of development consisting of retail, commercial
and residential opportunities, consistent with the goals of
downtown and community revitalization. It is intended that
development in this zoning district reflect the historical character
of the Borough and augment the municipal and public facilities to
be constructed by the Borough. To accomplish these goals, a
measure of flexibility is provided to an applicant proposing mixeduse
development with respect to dimensional standards, unified
development standards, design standards and procedures of the
Zoning Ordinance, as well as opportunities for bonuses, such as
density bonuses and building coverage bonuses, all as deemed
appropriate by Borough Council following review and comment by
the Planning Commission. [Added 8-1-2016 by Ord. No. 1335]
A. The regulations set by this chapter shall apply uniformly to each class of
uses or structures within each district, except as provided for in this
chapter.
B. No structure shall hereafter be erected, used, constructed,
reconstructed, demolished, razed, moved, placed, altered or occupied
and no land shall hereafter be used, developed or occupied unless it is
in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the use and
district in which it is located.
C. No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this chapter shall be
reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set
forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this chapter
shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this
chapter.
D. Boundary change. Any territory which may hereafter become part of
the Borough through annexation or a boundary adjustment shall be
classified as the R-1 Zoning District of Catasauqua Borough until or
unless such territory is otherwise classified by Borough Council.
224. Editor's Note: Attachment 2 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 280-20 JUNKYARDS § 280-22
170:769
§ 280-22. Zoning Map.
§ 280-23. District boundaries.
The following rules shall apply where uncertainty exists as to boundaries of
any district as shown on the Zoning Map:
§ 280-24. Setbacks across municipal boundaries.
A. A map entitled "Catasauqua Borough Zoning Map" accompanies this
chapter and is declared a part of this chapter.225 The Official Zoning
Map, which should bear the adoption date of this chapter and the words
"Official Zoning Map," shall be retained in the Borough Building.
B. Map changes. Changes to the boundaries and districts of the Official
Zoning Map shall only be made in conformity with the amendment
procedures specified in the Municipalities Planning Code. All changes
should be noted by date with a brief description of the nature of the
change, either on the map or within an appendix to this chapter.
C. Replacement map. If the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged,
destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of changes and
additions, or needs to have drafting errors or omissions corrected,
Borough Council may, by resolution, adopt a new copy of the Official
Zoning Map which shall supersede the prior Official Zoning Map.
Unless the prior Official Zoning Map has been lost or has been totally
destroyed, the prior map or any remaining parts shall be preserved
together with all available records pertaining to its previous adoption or
amendment.
A. District boundary lines are intended to follow or be parallel to the
center line of street rights-of-way, creeks, railroads and lot lines
(according to official county records) as they existed at the time of the
adoption of this chapter, unless such district boundary lines are fixed by
dimensions as shown on the Official Zoning Map.
B. Where a district boundary is not fixed by dimensions and where it
approximately follows lot lines, such boundary shall be construed to
follow such lot lines unless specifically shown otherwise.
C. The location of a district boundary that divides a lot shall be determined
by the use of the scale appearing on the Zoning Map unless indicated
otherwise by dimensions.
D. Where a municipal boundary divides a lot, the minimum lot area shall
be regulated by the municipality in which the principal use(s) are
located, unless otherwise provided by applicable case law. The land
area within each municipality shall be regulated by the use regulations
and other applicable regulations of each municipality.
225. Editor's Note: The current Catasauqua Borough Zoning Map is on file in the Borough
offices.
§ 280-22 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-24
170:770
§ 280-25. Table of Permitted Uses by District.
A. Intent. To continue the objective of compatible land uses across
municipal boundaries.
B. This chapter requires additional setbacks and the provision of buffer
yards when certain uses would abut an existing dwelling or a
residential zoning district. These same additional setback and buffer
yard provisions shall be provided by uses proposed within Catasauqua
Borough regardless of whether such abutting existing dwelling or
primarily residential zoning district is located in an abutting
municipality and/or in Catasauqua.
A. For the purposes of this § 280-25, the following abbreviations shall have
the following meanings as listed in Attachment 2 at the end of this
chapter. [Amended 6-1-2009 by Ord. No. 1238]
P = Permitted-by-right use (zoning decision by Zoning Officer).
SE = Special exception use (zoning decision by Zoning Hearing
Board).
N = Not permitted.
(§ 280-29) = See additional requirements in § 280-29.
(§ 280-30) = See additional requirements in § 280-30.
B. Unless otherwise provided by law or specifically stated in this chapter
(including § 280-5B), any land or structure shall only be used or
occupied for a use specifically listed in this chapter as allowed in the
zoning district where the land or structure is located. Any use shall only
be permitted if it complies with all other requirements of this chapter.
(1) This table is divided into two sections:
(a) Primarily residential districts; and
(b) Primarily nonresidential districts.
(2) See § 280-5B, which generally provides a process for approval of a
use that is not listed, based upon similarity to permitted uses and
other criteria. Except as provided in such § 280-5B, any other
principal use that is not specifically listed as "P," "C" (if conditional
uses would be used) or "SE" in the applicable district in this table is
prohibited in that district.
(3) For temporary uses, see § 280-3.
C. Permitted accessory uses in all districts. An accessory use of a dwelling
is only permitted if such use is customarily incidental to the residential
use and is specifically permitted by this chapter. The following are
permitted-by-right as accessory uses to a lawful principal use in all
districts, within the requirements of § 280-30 and all other
requirements of this chapter:
§ 280-24 JUNKYARDS § 280-25
170:771
§ 280-26. Dimensional requirements in each district.226
(1) Standard antennae, including antennae used by contractors to
communicate with their own vehicles. (See standard in § 280-30.)
(2) Fence or wall. (See standard for each in § 280-30.)
(3) Garage, household.
(4) Garage sale. (See standard in § 280-30.)
(5) Pets, keeping of. (See standard in § 280-30.)
(6) Parking or loading, off-street, only to serve a use that is permitted
in that district.
(7) Recreational facilities, limited to use by residents of a development,
and their occasional invited guests.
(8) Residential accessory structure (see definition in Article II). (See
standard in § 280-30.)
(9) Signs, as permitted by Article VII.
(10) Swimming pool, household. (See standard in § 280-30.)
(11) Such other accessory use or structure that the applicant proves to
the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer is clearly customary and
incidental to a permitted-by-right, special exception or conditional
principal use.
D. Permitted accessory uses to business and institutional uses. The
following are permitted-by-right accessory uses only to a lawful
principal commercial, industrial or institutional use, provided that all
requirements of this chapter are met:
(1) Storage of fuels for on-site use or to fuel company vehicles.
(2) The following accessory uses, provided that the use is clearly
limited to employees, patients, residents, students and families of
employees of the use and their occasional invited guests:
(a) Internal cafeteria without drive-through service;
(b) Day care center; or
(c) Recreational facilities.
(3) Bus shelters meeting § 280-30.
(4) Automatic transaction machine.
(5) Storage sheds meeting the requirements of § 280-26A.
§ 280-25 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-26
170:772
A. The following area, yard and building requirements shall apply for the
specified zoning district, unless a more restrictive requirement for a
specific use is required by §§ 280-29 or 280-30 or another section of this
chapter. All measurements shall be in feet unless otherwise stated. See
definitions of terms (such as lot width) in § 280-19.
B. Height. The following height provisions shall apply unless specifically
stated otherwise for a specific use:
(1) The maximum height for structures shall be three stories or 35 feet,
whichever is more restrictive, except as follows:
(a) Structures that are accessory to dwellings shall have a
maximum height of one story (with the top story limited to
nonhabitable storage areas) or 15 feet, whichever is more
restrictive.
(b) See also § 280-55, Height exceptions.
(c) Within the TC, DC or GC Districts, a principal building may
have a maximum height of five stories or 60 feet, whichever is
more restrictive.
C. Residential accessory structure setbacks.
(1) A three-foot-wide minimum side and rear yard setback shall apply
for a permitted detached structure that is accessory to a dwelling,
except:
(a) In no case shall a vehicle garage be setback less than five feet
from the cartway of an alley.
(b) Structures shall not obstruct minimum sight clearance at
intersections.
(c) No setback is required for a structure that is accessory to a
dwelling from a lot line along which two dwellings are attached
(such as a lot line shared by twin dwellings).
(2) A residential porch or deck that is open along sides not attached to
the principal building may extend into a required side or rear
building setback. See Note E in the Table of Dimensional
Requirements227 adopted under § 280-26A above concerning front
yard setbacks. However, if a deck or porch is covered by a roof or is
raised an average of more than five feet above the ground level,
then the deck or porch shall meet the minimum side yard and shall
be setback a minimum of 15 feet from a rear lot line. A setback is
not required where two buildings are attached to each other along
226. Editor's Note: The Table of Dimensional Requirements is included at the end of this
chapter.
227. Editor's Note: The Table of Dimensional Requirements is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 280-26 JUNKYARDS § 280-26
170:773
§ 280-27. Historic buildings and overlay districts.
a lot line. Space under an unenclosed porch may be used for
household storage.
(3) See § 280-30 for swimming pools. See § 280-30 for fences and
walls.
A. Purposes. In addition to serving the overall purposes of this chapter,
this section is intended to:
(1) Promote the retention of community character through
preservation of the local heritage by recognition and protection of
historic and architectural resources;
(2) Establish a clear process to review and approve demolition of
designated historic buildings;
(3) Encourage continued use, appropriate rehabilitation and adaptive
reuse of historic buildings;
(4) Implement Sections 603(b), 603(g), 604(1) and 605(2) of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,228 which address
protecting and facilitating the preservation of historic values
through zoning and using zoning to regulate uses and structures at
or near places having unique historic, architectural or patriotic
interest or value;
(5) Strengthen the local economy by promoting heritage tourism,
improving property values and increasing investment in older
buildings;
(6) Utilize the traditional neighborhood development provisions of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code; and
(7) Carry out recommendations of the Borough Comprehensive Plan,
including recommendations to preserve historic buildings and
community character.
B. Applicability.
(1) This § 280-27 shall apply to any principal building within a Historic
District as shown on the Zoning Map. This § 280-27 shall not apply
to a building or building addition that the Zoning Officer knows was
built after 1940. The applicant may provide evidence to the Zoning
Officer that a building was built after 1940.
(2) For a building regulated by this § 280-27, all of the provisions of the
applicable underlying zoning district shall also continue to apply, in
addition to the provisions of this § 280-27. In the event there is a
direct conflict between the provisions of § 280-27 and the
228. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10603, 10604 and 10605.
§ 280-26 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-27
170:774
underlying zoning district, the provision that is most restrictive
upon development, demolition and uses shall apply.
C. General provisions.
(1) Any partial or complete demolition of a building regulated by this
§ 280-27 that is visible from a public street shall only occur in
compliance with this § 280-27.
(2) The Historic Districts on the Zoning Map may be revised by
Borough Council as a zoning ordinance amendment.
(3) Definitions. In addition to the definitions provided in § 280-19, the
following terms shall have the following meanings for the purposes
of this § 280-27:
DEMOLITION — The dismantling, tearing down, removal or razing
of the exterior of a building, in whole or in part. This term shall
not include changes to the interior of a building, provided such
changes do not alter the structural integrity of the building.
DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT — The absence of routine
maintenance and repair which leads to structural weakness, decay
and deterioration in a building to a point that causes a need for
major repair or may cause a need for demolition.
MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR — Work that does not alter the
appearance or harm the stability of exterior features of a building.
STREETSCAPE — The overall appearance of a block along a public
street, including yards visible from a public street, the relationship
of building setbacks, the consistency of architectural styles or
features, the spacing and shapes of windows and doors and
rooflines and similar features that give the block its distinctive
visual character.
D. Approval of demolition of building regulated by § 280-27.
(1) A building regulated by this § 280-27 shall not be demolished, in
whole or in part, unless the applicant proves by credible evidence
to the satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board as a special
exception use that one or more of the following conditions exists:
(a) The existing building cannot feasibly and reasonably be
reused, and that such situation is not the result of intentional
neglect or demolition by neglect by the owner; or
(b) The denial of the demolition would result in unreasonable
economic hardship to the owner, and the hardship was not selfcreated;
or
(c) The demolition is necessary to allow a project to occur that will
have substantial, special and unusual public benefit that would
greatly outweigh the loss of the building regulated by § 280-27,
§ 280-27 JUNKYARDS § 280-27
170:775
and the project needs to occur at this location (for example,
a demolition may be needed for a necessary expansion of an
existing public building or to allow a street improvement that
is necessary to alleviate a public safety hazard); or
(d) The existing building has no historical or architectural
significance and the demolition will not adversely impact upon
the streetscape. To meet this condition, the applicant may
present information concerning the proposed design of any
replacement building or use to show that the proposed
building or use will result in a net improvement to the
streetscape.
(2) For approval of a demolition, the standards of this § 280-27 shall
apply in place of the special exception use standards of Article I. In
reviewing the application, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider
the following:
(a) The effect of the demolition on the historical significance,
streetscape and architectural integrity of neighboring historic
buildings and on the historic character of the surrounding
neighborhood.
(b) The feasibility of other alternatives to demolition.
(3) An application for partial or complete demolition of a building
regulated by this § 280-27 shall not be approved unless all of the
requirements of this § 280-27 have been met. A partial demolition
shall include, but not be limited to, removal of an attached porch
roof, removal of porch columns and removal of architectural
features. See definition of "demolition" above.
(4) A complete application for the demolition shall be submitted by the
applicant in writing. This application shall include the following:
(a) The name, address and daytime telephone number of the
owner of record and the applicant for the demolition.
(b) Recent exterior photographs of the building proposed for
demolition. If the applicant is alleging that the building cannot
be reused or rehabilitated, then interior photos and floor plans
shall be provided as needed to support the applicant's claim.
(c) A site plan drawn to scale showing existing buildings and the
proposed demolition.
(d) A written statement of the reasons for the demolition.
(e) The proposed use of the site, and a proposed timeline for
development of that proposed use.
(5) Procedures. The demolition application shall be submitted to the
Zoning Hearing Board for consideration as a special exception use.
§ 280-27 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-27
170:776
The applicant shall be informed of meeting dates where the
application is intended to be discussed and encouraged to be
present to discuss the proposed demolition.
(6) Evidence. The applicant shall provide sufficient credible evidence
to justify any claims that a building cannot feasibly be repaired or
reused. The following types of expert testimony and documentation
are encouraged to be provided: a property appraisal, income and
expense statements for the property, a written estimate of the costs
of rehabilitation by a qualified contractor, a written report from a
professional engineer regarding the structural soundness of the
building, testimony concerning efforts to market the property over
time, information regarding the applicant's purchase price of the
building, and similar relevant information.
(7) Self-created conditions. The conditions that justify the proposed
demolition of a building regulated by this § 280-27 shall not have
been self-created by the applicant. These conditions include, but
are not limited to:
(a) Lack of proper maintenance of the building, including but not
limited to structural elements, the roof, windows or
architectural elements; or
(b) Leaving parts of a building open to the elements or accessible
to vandalism.
(8) The Zoning Officer may require any unoccupied building shall be
properly sealed and secured to prevent decay from the elements
and vandalism.
(9) Emergency. The Zoning Officer may issue a permit for the
demolition without compliance with this § 280-27 if the Building
Inspector certifies in writing that the building represents a clear
and immediate hazard to public safety, and that no other
reasonable alternatives exist to demolition.
(10) Exceptions. Special exception use approval shall not be needed for
the following:
(a) Demolition of accessory buildings or structures.
(b) Interior renovations or removal of features (such as a rear
porch) that do not harm the structural stability of the building
and that are not visible from a public street (not including an
alley).
(c) Removal of features that were added after 1940, such as a
modern porch or aluminum siding or carport.
(d) Relocation of a building within the Borough, provided that the
relocation does not result in a partial or complete demolition
that is regulated by this section.
§ 280-27 JUNKYARDS § 280-27
170:777
E. Demolition by neglect (see definition above).
(1) Every property owner of a building regulated by this § 280-27 shall
repair and maintain the building to avoid demolition by neglect.
(2) Every property owner of a building regulated by this § 280-27 shall
properly repair and maintain the building to maintain the
structural integrity of the building and to protect the building and
attached features from damage from the elements. The attached
features that shall be protected, repaired and maintained include
the roof, cornice, columns, beams, posts and lintels.
(3) If a property owner fails to comply with an order from the Building
Inspector to repair a building regulated by this § 280-27 to correct
a code violation that threatens the structural integrity of a building,
such matter shall be considered a violation of this § 280-27E and
the property owner may also be cited for a violation of this chapter.
F. Guidelines. The following advisory guidelines should be considered in
the design of new construction, additions and exterior alterations in a
block with historic buildings. Some of these features may be required
by other sections of this chapter in specific cases.
(1) Vehicle parking and any garage doors should be placed to the rear
of buildings as opposed to between buildings and the street. Where
rear parking is not practical, then parking should be provided to
the side of a building. Where a driveway needs to enter from the
front, the garage should be setback further from the street than the
house, and the driveway should be as narrow as practical through
the front yard.
(2) New construction should have a front yard setback that is similar to
adjacent older buildings.
(3) Modern additions and features should be placed towards the rear
of the property.
(4) New construction should have rooflines that are similar to adjacent
older buildings. Flat roofs should be avoided. Where a pitched roof
is not practical, then the roof should at least appear to have angles
and a pitch when viewed from the street.
(5) On sides visible from a street, new construction should use building
materials that are similar to appearance older buildings, including
brick and stone. Modern building materials are available that have
a historic appearance, such as artificial stone.
(6) Where existing older buildings have a certain horizontal or vertical
orientation, that orientation should be continued in new
construction. Where existing older buildings have a certain spacing
of windows and doors, similar spacing (and similar sizes of
windows and doors) should be continued in new construction.
§ 280-27 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-27
170:778
Blank walls without door and window openings should be avoided
along a street.
G. Additional uses allowed within a building regulated by § 280-27.
(1) This § 280-27G allows certain additional uses if the use would be
within a rehabilitated principal building built before December 31,
1940, that is within a Historic District.
(2) The following additional use shall be allowed within a building
regulated by § 280-27 in any zoning district:
(a) The conversion of a building regulated by § 280-27 into a bedand-
breakfast inn. Such use shall meet the applicable
requirements of § 280-29.
(b) The conversion of a building regulated by § 280-27 into an
office, without having to meet the requirements for a home
occupation.
(3) To be eligible for these uses, the applicant shall prove the following
to the satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board that a registered
architect with substantial experience in the rehabilitation of
historic buildings provides a written certification that the exterior
of the building as visible from public streets will be historically
rehabilitated in conformance with the Secretary of the Interior's
Standards for Historic Rehabilitation, and accompanying
guidelines published by the National Park Service, and that any
exterior repairs, alterations and additions visible from a public
street will be in conformance with such standards and guidelines.
(4) Plans shall be submitted showing the design and materials of any
exterior changes to the building that are visible from a public
street.
(5) The building shall not be expanded by more than 20% in its floor
area for a use under this § 280-27. This limitation on building
expansion shall not apply if the proposed use would be allowed in
the zoning district without applying under this § 280-27.
§ 280-27 JUNKYARDS § 280-27
170:779

ARTICLE IV
Additional Requirements for Specific Uses
§ 280-28. Applicability.
§ 280-29. Additional requirements for specific principal uses.
A. This article establishes additional specific requirements for certain
specific uses, in addition to the sign, parking, environmental and other
general requirements of this chapter and the requirements of each
district. Wherever two requirements conflict, the stricter requirement
shall apply.
B. For uses allowed within a specific zoning district as special exception
uses, see also the procedures and standards in § 280-16.
A. Each of the following uses shall meet all of the following requirements
for that use:
(1) Adult use. (This is limited to the following: adult bookstore, adult
movie theater, massage parlor or adult live entertainment use.)
(a) Purposes. The regulations on adult uses are intended to serve
the following purposes, in addition to the overall objectives of
this chapter:
[1] To recognize the adverse secondary impacts of adult uses
that affect health, safety and general welfare concerns of
the municipality. These secondary impacts have been
documented in research conducted across the nation.
These secondary impacts typically include, but are not
limited to: increases in criminal activity, increases in
activities that increase the risk of transmission of sexually
transmitted diseases, increases in activities that increase
the risk of transmission of other communicable diseases,
increases in blight, decreases in the stability of residential
neighborhoods, and decreases in property values for
surrounding homes, and decreases in the marketability of
nearby commercial business space. The research
conducted across the nation concludes that adult uses
typically involve insufficient self-regulation to control
these secondary effects.
[2] To limit adult uses to locations where these secondary
impacts can be minimized, particularly as they affect
residential neighborhoods and downtown revitalization.
[3] To not attempt to suppress any activities protected by the
"free speech" protections of the U.S. Constitution, but
instead to control secondary effects.
§ 280-28 JUNKYARDS § 280-29
170:781
(b) No portion of a building occupied by an adult use shall be
located within any of the following distances:
[1] Four hundred lineal feet from any residential zoning
district boundary or lot line of any existing dwelling; and
[2] One thousand lineal feet from the lot line of any existing
primary or secondary school, place of worship, public
park, day care center or child nursery.
(c) No such use shall be located within 1,000 lineal feet of any
existing adult use.
(d) A fifty-foot buffer yard shall be provided, regardless of zoning
district, along the side and rear lot lines in accordance with
§ 280-56, but with plantings of an initial minimum height of six
feet.
(e) No pornographic material, displays or words shall be placed in
view of persons who are not inside of the establishment.
Definite precautions shall be made to prohibit minors from
entering the premises.
(f) No such use shall be used for any purpose that violates any
federal, state or municipal law.
(g) See § 280-50, Prohibited signs.
(h) The use shall not include the sale or display of "obscene"
materials, as defined by state law, as may be amended by
applicable court decisions.
(i) Adult uses shall be prohibited in all districts except where
specifically permitted by Article III.
(j) A minimum lot area of 25,000 square feet is required.
(k) For public health reasons, private or semiprivate viewing
booths of any kind are prohibited. This specifically includes,
but is not limited to, booths for viewing adult movies or nude
dancers.
(l) No use may include live actual or simulated sex acts nor any
sexual contact between entertainers nor between entertainers
and customers. This shall specifically prohibit, but not be
limited to, entertainers dancing on the laps of customers.
(m) Only "lawful" massages as defined by state court decisions
shall be performed in a massage parlor.
(n) All persons within any adult use shall wear nontransparent
garments that cover their genitals and the female areola,
except for entertainers within a permitted lawful adult live
entertainment use.
§ 280-29 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-29
170:782
(o) Any application for such use shall state the names and home
addresses of all individuals intended to have more than a 5%
ownership in such use or in a corporation owning such use, and
an on-site manager responsible to ensure compliance with this
chapter on a daily basis. Such information shall be updated at
the beginning of each year in writing to the Zoning Officer.
(p) The use shall not operate between the hours of 12:00 midnight
and 7:00 a.m.
(q) As specific conditions of approval under this chapter, the
applicant shall prove compliance with the following state laws,
as amended: the Pennsylvania Liquor Code, Act 219 of 1990
(which pertains to sale or consumption of alcohol between 2:00
a.m. and 8:00 a.m.); Act 207 of 1990 (which pertains to
obscenity); and Act 120 of 1996 (which pertains to adultoriented
establishments and which limits enclosed viewing
booths among other matters).
(2) Adult day care center.
(a) The use shall be fully licensed by the state, if required by the
state.
(b) The use shall include constant supervision during all hours of
operation.
(c) The use shall not meet the definition of a "treatment center."
(3) After hours club. As a condition of any approval under this chapter,
the applicant shall prove full compliance with State Act 219 of
1990, as amended (Section 7327 of Title 18 of the Pennsylvania
Statutes).
(4) Assisted living facility/personal care center. The same standards
shall apply as are listed for nursing homes in this section.
(5) Auto, boat or mobile/ manufactured home sales.
(a) No vehicle, boat or home on display shall occupy any part of
the existing or future street right-of-way or required customer
parking area. See buffer yard provisions in § 280-56.
(b) See light and glare standards in § 280-37.
(c) See parking requirements in Article VI.
(d) Any mobile/manufactured homes on a sales site shall meet the
required principal building setbacks from the perimeter lot
lines.
(6) Auto repair garage.
§ 280-29 JUNKYARDS § 280-29
170:783
(a) All paint work shall be performed within a building, with a
fume collection and ventilation system that directs fumes away
from any adjacent dwellings. Outdoor major repairs (such as
body work and grinding) and outdoor welding shall not occur
within 150 feet of a residential lot line.
(b) All reasonable efforts shall be made to prevent or minimize
noise, odor, vibration, light or electrical interference to
adjacent lots. See standards in Article V. See buffer yard
requirements in § 280-56.
(c) Outdoor storage of motor vehicles shall not be within any
required buffer yard or street right-of-way.
(d) Overnight outdoor storage of junk other than permitted junk
vehicles shall be prohibited within view of a public street or a
dwelling.
(e) Any junk vehicle (as defined by Article II) shall not be stored
for more than 30 days within view of a public street or a
dwelling. A maximum of four junk vehicles may be parked on a
lot outside of an enclosed building at any one time, except that
additional numbers of vehicles may be parked outside
overnight if they:
[1] Are screened from view from streets and other lots by
landscaping or buildings; and
[2] Are actively undergoing repair.
(f) Service bay doors shall not face directly towards an abutting
dwelling (not including a dwelling separated from the garage
by a street) if another reasonable alternative exits.
(g) Fuel pumps shall be at least 25 feet from the existing street
right-of-way and shall meet side yard principal building
setback requirements.
(h) The use may include a convenience store if the requirements
for such use are also met.
(i) See light and glare control in Article V.
(j) See canopy height and lighting provisions in § 280-37.
(7) Auto service station. The provisions for auto repair garage listed in
this section shall apply. The uses of auto service station and auto
repair garage may be combined, if the requirements for each use
are met.
(8) Bed-and-breakfast inn.
(a) Within a residential district (if permitted under Article III), a
maximum of five rental units shall be provided. A maximum
§ 280-29 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-29
170:784
number of rental units shall not apply in other districts where
the use is allowed. No more than three adults may occupy one
rental unit.
(b) One off-street parking space shall be provided for each rental
unit. If four or more new off-street parking spaces are
provided, they shall be located either to the rear of the
principal building or screened from the street and abutting
dwellings by landscaping.
(c) There shall not be any signs, show windows or any type of
display or advertising visible from outside the premises, except
for a single sign with a maximum sign area of six square feet on
each of two sides and with a maximum height of eight feet.
Such sign shall only be illuminated externally.
(d) The use shall have a residential appearance and character.
(e) The use shall be owned, operated and/or managed by
permanent residents of the lot.
(f) There shall not be separate cooking facilities in any guest
room. Food shall only be served to guests who are staying
overnight, unless a restaurant is also permitted.
(g) No guest shall stay for more than 14 days in any month.
(h) In a residential district, the use shall be restricted to buildings
that existed prior to January 1, 1940.
(i) Minimum lot area: 3,000 square feet, unless a more restrictive
lot area is established by the applicable zoning district.
(9) Boardinghouse (includes rooming house).
(a) Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum side yard building setback: 20 feet side.
(c) Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
(d) Maximum density: 3,000 square feet of lot area per bedroom;
shall serve a maximum total of 20 persons.
(e) Each bedroom shall be limited to two adults each.
(f) A buffer yard with screening meeting § 280-56 shall be
provided between any boardinghouse building and any
abutting dwelling.
(g) See also standards for "assisted living facility" which is a
separate use.
(h) Signs: shall be limited to two wall signs with a maximum of two
square feet each.
§ 280-29 JUNKYARDS § 280-29
170:785
(i) Rooms shall be rented for a minimum period of five
consecutive days.
(10) Car wash.
(a) Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards
on adjacent streets. On-lot traffic circulation channels and
parking areas shall be clearly marked.
(b) Adequate provisions shall be made for the proper and
convenient disposal of refuse. The applicant shall provide
evidence that adequate measures will be in place to prevent
pollutants from being washed into the groundwater or
waterways. Any chemicals that may be hazardous to aquatic
life shall be stored within an area that will completely contain
any leaks or spills.
(c) Water from the car wash operation shall not flow onto
sidewalks or streets in such a manner as could cause ice
hazards.
(d) Any car wash that is located within 250 feet of an existing
dwelling shall not operate between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m.
(11) Commercial communications antennae/tower as principal or
accessory use.
(a) An accessory commercial communications antenna that does
not involve a new tower shall be allowed in any district if it
meets the following requirements:
[1] In a district other than a commercial or industrial district,
the antenna shall extend a maximum of 20 feet beyond the
existing structure to which it is attached. The antenna
shall be attached to one of the following existing lawful
structures:
[a] An electric high voltage transmission tower;
[b] An existing lawful commercial communications tower;
[c] A fire station or steeple or bell tower of a place of
worship; or
[d] A water tower.
[2] In a commercial or industrial district, the antennae shall
extend a maximum of 40 feet beyond an existing building
or structure (other than a dwelling), provided the antenna
is setback a distance equal to its total height above the
ground from any lot line of a dwelling on another lot.
§ 280-29 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-29
170:786
(b) General requirements for tower-based wireless
communications facilities. [Amended 8-7-2017 by Ord. No.
1354]
[1] The following shall apply to all tower-based wireless
communications facilities (WCF) and shall be codified
within § 280-29A(11) as Subsection (b) et seq.:
[a] Standard of care. The tower-based WCF applicant
shall present documentation that the WCF shall be
designed, constructed, operated, maintained,
repaired, modified and removed in strict compliance
with all current applicable technical, safety and
safety-related codes including, but not limited to, the
most recent editions of the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) Code, National Electrical
Safety Code, National Electrical Code, as well as the
accepted and responsible workmanlike industry
practices of the National Association of Tower
Erectors, and the Electrical Industrial Association/
Telecommunications Industry Association.
Certification of the design from a Pennsylvania
registered professional engineer is required. Any
tower-based WCF shall at all times be kept and
maintained in good condition, order and repair by
qualified maintenance and construction personnel, so
that the same shall not endanger the life of any person
or any property in the Borough.
[b] Structural requirements.
[i] Any tower-based WCF structures shall be
designed to withstand the effects of wind
according to the standard designed by the
American National Standards Institute as
prepared by the engineering departments of the
Electronics Industry Association and
Telecommunications Industry Association (ANSI/
EIA/TIA 222-G Code, as amended).
[ii] A soil report complying with the standards of
Appendix I, Geotechnical Investigations, ANSI/
EIA/TIA 222-G, as amended, shall be submitted.
[iii] The facility shall be constructed to withstand a
wind velocity of 100 miles per hour, as well as all
proposed placements or co-location of nontower
WCFs.
[iv] A copy of the structural analysis, signed and
sealed by a registered structural engineer
§ 280-29 JUNKYARDS § 280-29
170:787
licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
shall be submitted to the Borough.
[c] Public safety communications. No tower-based WCF
shall interfere with public safety communications or
the reception of broadband, television, radio or other
communication services enjoyed by occupants of
nearby properties.
[d] Maintenance and inspection. The following
maintenance and inspection requirements shall apply:
[i] Any tower-based WCF shall be fully automated
and unattended on a daily basis and shall be
visited only for maintenance or emergency repair.
[ii] Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure
the upkeep of the facility in order to promote the
safety and security of the Borough's residents.
[iii] All maintenance activities shall utilize nothing
less than the best available technology for
preventing failures and accidents.
[iv] Guyed towers and other wireless support
structures shall be inspected every three years,
and self-supporting towers/monopoles shall be
inspected every five years. All towers shall be
inspected after severe wind (sustained tropical
storm or hurricane force winds) or ice storms or
other extreme loading conditions. Inspection
reports shall be prepared by a licensed
professional engineer and submitted to the
Borough Engineer for review.
[e] Radio frequency emissions. No tower-based WCF may,
by itself or in conjunction with other WCFs, generate
radio frequency emissions in excess of the standards
and regulations of the FCC, including, but not limited
to, the FCC Office of Engineering Technology Bulletin
65 entitled "Evaluating Compliance with FCC
Guidelines for Human Exposure to Radio Frequency
Electromagnetic Fields," as amended.
[f] Historic buildings or districts. No tower-based WCF
may be located on a building, structure, or site that is
listed on either the National or Pennsylvania Registers
of Historical Places (either inside or outside the public
rights-of-way) or the official historic structures and/or
historic districts list maintained by the Borough, or
has been designated by the Borough as being of
historic significance.
§ 280-29 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-29
170:788
[g] Identification. All tower-based WCFs shall post a
notice in a readily visible location identifying the name
and phone number of a party to contact in the event of
an emergency, subject to approval by the Borough.
The Borough shall be notified of the use or storage of
external power sources, such as batteries or fuel
tanks.
[h] Lighting and signage. No tower-based WCF shall
contain signs or be artificially lighted, except as
required by law, the FCC, the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA), or any other governmental
agency having jurisdiction over the same. If lighting is
required, the applicant shall provide a detailed plan
for sufficient lighting, demonstrating as unobtrusive
and inoffensive an effect as is permissible under state
and federal regulations. Automatic lighting is
prohibited and all lighting must be controlled
manually by an on-site switch. Emergency lighting for
any accessory facility/building in Subsection
A(11)(b)[1][g] above is permitted, subject to Borough
review and approval. The applicant shall promptly
report any outage or malfunction of FAA-mandated
lighting to the appropriate governmental authorities
and to the Borough.
[i] Appearance. Towers shall be galvanized and/or
painted with a rust-preventive paint of an appropriate
color to harmonize with the surroundings.
[j] Noise. Tower-based WCFs shall be operated and
maintained so as not to produce noise in excess of
applicable noise standards under state law and the
Borough Code, except in emergency situations
requiring the use of a backup generator, where such
noise standards may be exceeded on a temporary
basis only.
[k] Aviation safety. Tower-based WCFs shall comply with
all federal and state laws concerning aviation safety
and applicable airport zoning regulations.
[i] Documentation from the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) shall be submitted by the
applicant for any tower-based WCF exceeding 200
feet in height stating that the subject WCF is
approved by the FAA.
[ii] Any applicant for a proposed tower-based WCF
located within a radius of five aerial miles of any
airport shall notify said airport, in writing, of its
§ 280-29 JUNKYARDS § 280-29
170:789
intent to construct a WCF prior to construction.
The applicant shall provide proof of the
notification to the Borough.
[l] Notice. Upon receipt of an application for a towerbased
WCF, the applicant shall mail notice thereof to
the owner or owners of every property within 500
linear feet of the property or parcel of the proposed
facility. The applicant shall provide proof of the
notification(s) to the Borough.
[m] Retention of experts. The Borough may hire any
consultant(s) and/or expert(s) necessary to assist the
Borough in reviewing and evaluating the application
for approval of the tower-based WCF and, once
approved, in reviewing and evaluating any potential
violations of the terms and conditions of this
subsection. The applicant and/or owner of the WCF
shall reimburse the Borough for all costs of the
Borough's consultant(s) in providing expert evaluation
and consultation in connection with these activities.
[n] FCC license. The applicant shall submit to the
Borough a copy of its current FCC license, the name,
address, emergency number, and operator of the
facility.
[o] Insurance. Each person that owns or operates a towerbased
WCF shall provide the Borough with proof of
insurance. A certificate of insurance evidencing
general liability coverage in the minimum amount of
$1,000,000 per occurrence, $5,000,000 aggregate,
and property damage coverage in the minimum
amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence, $5,000,000
aggregate, along with an umbrella policy of
$5,000,000, covering the communications facility is
required. The Borough, its employees, engineer,
solicitor, planner, and any other relevant professionals
the Borough requires shall be named additional
insured and the certificate shall provide, as a
minimum, that the additional insured shall be notified
not less than 60 days in advance of the insurance not
being renewed or being cancelled for any reason.
[p] Timing of decision. Within 30 calendar days of the
date that an application for a tower-based WCF is filed
with the Borough, the Borough shall notify the
applicant in writing of any information that may be
required to complete such application. Where
conditional use approval is required, the Borough
shall render a decision within 45 days after the last
§ 280-29 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-29
170:790
hearing before the Borough. All other applications,
including land development, for tower-based WCFs
shall be acted upon within 150 days of the receipt
of a fully completed application for the approval of
such tower-based WCF and the Borough shall advise
the applicant in writing of its decision. If additional
information was requested by the Borough to
complete an application, the time required by the
applicant to provide the information shall not be
counted toward the one-hundred-fifty-day review
period.
[q] Nonconforming uses. Nonconforming tower-based
WCFs which are hereafter damaged or destroyed due
to any reason or cause may be repaired and restored
at their former location, but must otherwise comply
with the terms and conditions of this subsection.
[r] Indemnification. The applicant or each person that
owns or operates a tower-based WCF shall indemnify,
defend and hold harmless the Borough and its
authorities, Council, commissions (including the
individual members thereof), their elected and
appointed officers and officials, and their employees,
professional consultants and agents of and from any
suit, damage, claim, liability, judgment, cost, loss,
deficiency and any other costs and expenses incident
to the defense of any such claim, lawsuit, action or
proceeding (including reasonable attorney fees,
expert witness fees and consulting fees) which in
whole or in part arise out of or relate to the
construction, installation, operation, maintenance, or
removal of a tower-based WCF.
[s] Removal/financial security. In the event that use of a
tower-based WCF is planned to be discontinued, the
owner shall provide written notice to the Borough of
its intent to discontinue use and the date when the use
shall be discontinued. If it remains unused for a period
of six consecutive months, the Borough will provide
notice to the owner/operator to remove the tower.
Unused or abandoned tower-based WCFs or portions
of tower-based WCFs shall be removed as follows:
[i] All unused or abandoned tower-based WCFs and
accessory facilities shall be removed within six
months of the cessation of operations at the site
or from the time the municipality provides notice,
unless a time extension is approved by the
Borough.
§ 280-29 JUNKYARDS § 280-29
170:791
[ii] If the tower-based WCF and/or accessory facility
is not removed within six months of the cessation
of operations at a site, from the time the
municipality provides notice, or within any longer
period approved by the Borough, the tower-based
WCF and accessory facility and equipment may be
removed by the Borough and the cost of removal
assessed against the owner of the tower-based
WCF.
[iii] Prior to the issuance of a zoning permit, the
owner/operator of the tower-based WCF shall
post security, in a form acceptable to the Borough,
favoring the municipality, to assure the faithful
performance of the terms and conditions of this
subsection. Security shall be an amount to cover
tower and/or antenna removal and site cleanup.
The security shall be utilized by the Borough in
the event the owner or operator of the towerbased
WCF does not remove the facility as
outlined in Subsection A(11)(b)[1][s][i] and [ii]
above or to recover any and all compensatory
damages incurred by the Borough for violations of
this subsection, after reasonable notice and
opportunity to cure.
[iv] The Borough must approve all replacements of
portions of a tower-based WCF previously
removed.
[t] Permit fees. The Borough may assess appropriate and
reasonable permit fees directly related to the
Borough's actual costs in reviewing and processing
the application for approval of a tower-based WCF, as
well as related inspection, monitoring and related
costs. Said fees shall be set by resolution from time to
time.
[2] The following regulations shall apply to tower-based
wireless communications facilities (WCF) located outside
the rights-of-way.
[a] Development regulations.
[i] Allowable districts. Tower-based WCFs are
prohibited as follows:
[A] No tower-based WCFs shall be located closer
than 250 feet to an existing residential
dwelling or residential zoning district
boundary in which tower-based WCFs are
prohibited.
§ 280-29 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-29
170:792
[B] Tower-based WCFs are prohibited in all
zoning Districts, except as provided in
Subsection A(11)(b)[2][a][i][C] below.
[C] Tower-based WCFs are permitted by special
exception in the IO and A Districts.
[ii] Gap in coverage. An applicant for a tower-based
WCF must demonstrate that a significant gap in
wireless coverage exists with respect to all
wireless operators in the applicable area and that
the type of tower-based WCF being proposed is
the least intrusive means by which to fill the gap
in wireless coverage. The existence or
nonexistence of a gap in wireless coverage shall
be a factor in the Borough's decision on an
application for approval of tower-based WCF.
[iii] Height. Any tower-based WCF outside of the
rights-of-way shall be designed at the minimum
functional height and shall not exceed a maximum
total height of 200 feet. Height shall include all
subsequent additions or alterations.
[iv] Sole use on a lot. A tower-based WCF is permitted
as a sole use on a lot area and yards complying
with the requirements for the applicable zoning
district.
[v] Combined with another use. A tower-based WCF
may be permitted on a property with an existing
use or on a vacant parcel in combination with
another industrial, commercial, institutional or
municipal use, subject to the following conditions:
[A] The existing use on the property may be any
permitted use in the applicable district, and
need not be affiliated with the
communications facility.
[B] The tower-based WCF may occupy a leased
parcel within a lot meeting the minimum lot
size for the zoning district. The leased parcel
shall be, at a minimum, the area needed to
accommodate the tower-based WCF and guy
wires, the equipment building, security fence,
and buffer planting.
[C] Minimum lot area. The minimum lot shall
comply with the requirements for the
applicable district.
§ 280-29 JUNKYARDS § 280-29
170:793
[D] Minimum setbacks. The tower-based WCF
and accompanying equipment building shall
not be located in the minimum front, rear, or
side yard setbacks for the applicable zoning
district. Further, no tower-based WCF shall
be located within 100 feet or the distance of
the fall zone, whichever is greater, from any
property line or existing street right-of-way or
200 feet of any occupied building.
[E] Vehicular access to the tower-based WCF
shall not interfere with parking or circulation
on the site.
[vi] Applicant shall demonstrate, utilizing the most
current technological evidence available, that the
tower-based WCF must be constructed where it is
proposed in order to satisfy its function pursuant
to the communications industry's technological
requirements.
[b] Co-location. An application for a new tower-based
WCF shall not be approved unless the Borough finds
that the wireless communications equipment planned
for the proposed tower-based WCF cannot be
accommodated on an existing or approved structure
or building. Any comprehensive inventory of all
existing towers and other suitable structures within a
two-mile radius from the point of the proposed tower,
unless the applicant can show to the satisfaction of the
Borough that a different distance is more reasonable,
and shall demonstrate conclusively why an existing
tower or other suitable structure cannot be utilized.
[c] Design regulations.
[i] The tower-based WCF shall employ the most
current standards available in an effort to
appropriately blend into the surrounding
environment and minimize aesthetic impact.
[ii] Any height extensions to an existing tower-based
WCF shall require prior approval of the Borough.
The Borough reserves the right to deny such
requests based upon land use impact or any other
lawful considerations related to the character of
the Borough.
[iii] Any proposed tower-based WCF shall be designed
structurally, electrically, and in all respects to
accommodate both the WCF applicant's antennas
and comparable antenna for future users. At a
§ 280-29 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-29
170:794
minimum the structure and wind load should be
able to accommodate a ten-percent increase in
height or one additional array, not to exceed a
total height of more than 200 feet.
[d] Surrounding environs.
[i] The tower-based WCF shall comply with the
required yard requirements of the applicable
zoning district.
[ii] The tower-based WCF applicant shall ensure that
the existing vegetation, trees and shrubs located
within proximity to the tower-based WCF
structure shall be preserved to the maximum
extent possible.
[e] Fence/screen.
[i] A security fence satisfactory to the Borough
having a minimum height of 10 feet shall
completely surround any tower-based WCF, as
well as guy wires, or any building housing towerbased
WCF equipment. If a security fence is used,
a lock box shall be provided for emergency
access.
[ii] An evergreen screen shall be required to
surround the site of the proposed tower-based
WCF. The screen shall either be a hedge (planted
three feet on center maximum) or a row of
evergreen trees (planted 10 feet on center
maximum). The evergreen screen shall be a
minimum six feet of planting and shall grow to a
minimum 15 feet at maturity. The vegetation
utilized should be deer resistant.
[iii] The tower-based WCF applicant shall submit a
landscape plan for review and approval by the
Borough for all proposed screening.
[iv] Alternate forms of screening, other than
landscaping outlined above, may be permitted if
reviewed and approved by the Council.
[f] Accessory equipment.
[i] Ground-mounted equipment associated to, or
connected with, a tower-based WCF shall be
underground. In the event that an applicant can
demonstrate that the equipment cannot be
located underground to the satisfaction of the
§ 280-29 JUNKYARDS § 280-29
170:795
Borough Engineer, then the ground-mounted
equipment shall be screened from public view.
[ii] All utility buildings and accessory structures shall
be architecturally designed to blend into the
environment in which they are situated and shall
meet the minimum setback and height
requirements of the underlying zoning district.
[g] Additional antenna. As a condition of approval for all
tower-based WCFs, WCF applicant shall provide the
Borough with a written commitment that it will allow
other service providers to co-locate antenna on towerbased
WCFs where technically and economically
feasible. The owner of a tower-based WCF shall not
install any additional antenna without obtaining the
prior written approval of the Borough.
[h] Access road/lease area. Adequate emergency and
service access to tower-based WCF must be provided.
[i] Access shall be provided to the facility by means
of a public street or easement to/from a public
street unless waived in writing by the Council.
The easement shall be a minimum of 20 feet in
width and shall be improved to a width of at least
10 feet with a paved surface for its entire length.
Road construction shall at all times minimize
ground disturbance and the cutting of vegetation.
Road grades shall closely follow natural contours
to assure minimal visual disturbance and
minimize soil erosion.
[ii] A minimum of two off-street parking spaces shall
be provided for a tower-based WCF.
[iii] A turnaround area must be provided within the
fenced area to allow adequate access by all
service and emergency vehicles.
[i] Site plan required. In order to determine if the
requirements of this section are met, the applicant
shall present a site plan showing, at a minimum, the
following items:
[i] Locations of all existing and proposed uses on the
subject site including the proposed tower-based
WCF.
[ii] Elevations and drawings of any existing uses and
proposed tower-based WCFs, showing proposed
width, depth, height, architectural style and
§ 280-29 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-29
170:796
structural data for any towers, antenna, etc.,
proposed.
[iii] Site boundary, lease area boundary, zoning data,
setbacks/yards and adjacent uses.
[iv] Vehicular access, fencing, landscaping, utility
and/or access easements.
[j] Inspection. The Borough reserves the right to inspect
any tower-based WCF to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this subsection and any other provisions
found within the Borough Code or state or federal law.
The Borough and/or its agents shall have the authority
to enter the property upon which a tower-based WCF
is located at any time, upon reasonable notice to the
operator, to ensure such compliance.
[3] The following regulations shall apply to tower-based WCFs
located in the rights-of-way:
[a] Development regulations.
[i] No tower-based WCF shall be located within the
existing or future rights-of-way of any Boroughowned
arterial or local road as designated by the
Borough.
[ii] Tower-based WCFs are permitted in all other
rights-of-way.
[iii] The applicant shall provide proof of authorization
from the owner of the right(s)-of-way for the
location(s) of the proposed tower(s).
[iv] The application shall be accompanied by plans
and other materials as required by this chapter,
describing the use and locations proposed. Such
plans and other materials shall provide sufficient
basis for evaluating the applicant's requests.
[b] Gap in coverage. An applicant for a tower-based WCF
must demonstrate that a significant gap in wireless
coverage exists with respect to all wireless operators
in the applicable area and that the type of tower-based
WCF being proposed is the least intrusive means by
which to fill the gap in wireless coverage. The
existence or nonexistence of a gap in wireless
coverage shall be a factor in the Borough's decision on
an application for approval of a tower-based WCF.
[c] Height. Any tower-based WCF in the rights-of-way
shall be designed at the minimum functional height
§ 280-29 JUNKYARDS § 280-29
170:797
and shall not exceed a maximum total height of 50
feet, which height shall include all subsequent
additions or alterations. All tower-based WCF
applicants must submit documentation to the Borough
justifying the total height of the structure.
[d] Co-location. An application for a new tower-based
WCF in the rights-of-way shall not be approved unless
the Borough finds that the proposed wireless
communications equipment cannot be accommodated
on an existing or approved structure, such as a utility
pole or traffic light pole. Any application for approval
of a tower-based WCF shall include a comprehensive
inventory of all existing towers and other suitable
structures within a one-mile radius from the point of
the proposed tower, unless the applicant can show to
the satisfaction of the Borough that a different
distance is more reasonable, and shall demonstrate
conclusively why an existing tower or other suitable
structure cannot be utilized.
[e] Time, place and manner. The Borough shall determine
the time, place and manner of construction,
maintenance, repair and/or removal of all tower-based
WCFs in the rights-of-way based on public safety,
traffic management, physical burden on the rights-ofway,
and related considerations. For public utilities,
the time, place and manner requirements shall be
consistent with the police powers of the Borough and
the requirements of the Public Utility Code.
[f] Equipment location. Tower-based WCFs and accessory
equipment shall be located so as not to cause any
physical or visual obstruction to pedestrian or
vehicular traffic, or to otherwise create safety hazards
to pedestrians and/or motorists or to otherwise
inconvenience public use of the rights-of-way as
determined by the Borough. In addition:
[i] In no case shall ground-mounted equipment,
walls, or landscaping be located within 18 inches
of the face of the curb.
[ii] Ground-mounted equipment that cannot be
placed underground shall be screened, to the
fullest extent possible, through the use of
landscaping or other decorative features to the
satisfaction of the Borough.
§ 280-29 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-29
170:798
[iii] Required electrical meter cabinets shall be
screened to blend in with the surrounding area to
the satisfaction of the Borough.
[iv] Any graffiti on the tower or on any accessory
equipment shall be removed at the sole expense of
the owner within 10 business days of notice of the
existence of the graffiti.
[v] Any underground vaults related to tower-based
WCFs shall be reviewed and approved by the
Borough.
[g] Design regulations.
[i] The tower-based WCF shall employ the most
current standards available in an effort to
appropriately blend into the surrounding
environment and minimize aesthetic impact.
[ii] Any height extensions to an existing tower-based
WCF shall require prior approval of the Borough,
and shall not increase the overall height of the
tower-based WCF to more than 50 feet.
[iii] Any proposed tower-based WCF shall be designed
structurally, electrically, and in all respects to
accommodate both the WCF applicant's antennas
and comparable antenna for future users.
[h] Additional antenna. As a condition of approval for all
tower-based WCFs in the rights-of-way, WCF applicant
shall provide the Borough with a written commitment
that it will allow other service providers to co-locate
antenna on tower-based WCFs where technically and
economically feasible. The owner of a tower-based
WCF shall not install any additional antenna without
obtaining the prior written approval of the Borough.
[i] Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days
following written notice from the Borough, or such
longer period as the Borough determines is
reasonably necessary or such shorter period in the
case of an emergency, an owner of tower-based WCFs
in the rights-of-way shall, at its own expense,
temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change
or alter the position of any tower-based WCF when the
Borough, consistent with its police powers and
applicable Public Utility Commission regulations, shall
determine that such removal, relocation, change or
alteration is reasonably necessary under the following
circumstances:
§ 280-29 JUNKYARDS § 280-29
170:799
[i] The construction, repair, maintenance or
installation of any Borough or other public
improvement in the rights-of-way.
[ii] The operations of the Borough or other
governmental entity in the rights-of-way.
[iii] Vacation of a street or road or the release of a
utility easement; or
[iv] An emergency as determined by the Borough.
[j] Compensation for right-of-way use. In addition to
permit fees, every tower-based WCF in the right-ofway
is subject to the Borough's right to fix annually a
fair and reasonable compensation to be paid for use
and occupancy of the right-of-way. Such compensation
for right-of-way use shall be directly related to the
Borough's actual right-of-way management costs
including, but not limited to, the costs of the
administration and performance of all reviewing,
inspecting, permitting, supervising and other right-ofway
management activities by the Borough. The
owner of each tower-based WCF shall pay an annual
fee to the Borough to compensate the Borough for the
Borough's costs incurred in connection with the
activities described above. The annual right-of-way
management fee for tower-based WCFs shall be
determined by the Borough and authorized by
resolution of Borough Council and shall be based on
the Borough's actual right-of-way management costs
as applied to such tower-based WCF.
(c) General requirements for non-tower-based wireless
communications facilities. [Added 8-7-2017 by Ord. No.
1354229]
[1] General requirements for all non-tower-based wireless
communication facilities (WCF).
[a] Standard of care. Any non-tower-based WCF that is
considered a co-location, modification, or replacement
shall be designed, constructed, operated, maintained,
repaired, modified and removed in strict compliance
with all current applicable technical, safety and
safety-related codes including, but not limited to, the
most recent editions of the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) Code, National Electrical
Safety Code, National Electrical Code, as well as the
229. Editor's Note: Pursuant to this ordinance, Subsection A(11)(c) through (f) were
redesignated as Subsection A(11)(d) through (g), respectively.
§ 280-29 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-29
170:800
accepted and responsible workmanlike industry
practices of the National Association of Tower
Erectors, and the Electrical Industrial Association/
Telecommunications Industry Association.
Certification of the design from a Pennsylvania
registered professional engineer is required. Any nontower-
based WCF shall at all times be kept and
maintained in good condition, order and repair by
qualified maintenance and construction personnel, so
that the same shall not endanger the life of any person
or any property in the Borough. The Borough shall
be notified of the use or storage of external power
sources, such as batteries or fuel tanks.
[b] Structural requirements.
[i] Any non-tower-based WCF that is considered a colocation,
modification, or replacement shall be
designed to withstand the effects of wind
according to the standard designed by the
American National Standards Institute as
prepared by the engineering departments of the
Electronics Industry Association and
Telecommunications Industry Association (ANSI/
EIA/TIA 222-G Code, as amended).
[ii] The wireless support structure to which the nontower-
based WCF is attached shall be able to
withstand the additional structural load of the colocation,
modification, or replacement.
[iii] A copy of the structural analysis, signed and
sealed by a registered structural engineer
licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
shall be submitted to the Borough and reviewed
as a portion of the permitting process for colocations,
modifications, or replacements.
[c] Public safety communications. No non-tower-based
WCF shall interfere with public safety
communications or the reception of broadband,
television, radio or other communication services
enjoyed by occupants of nearby properties.
[d] Radio frequency emissions. No non-tower-based WCF
may, by itself or in conjunction with other WCFs,
generate radio frequency emissions in excess of the
standards and regulations of the FCC, including, but
not limited to, the FCC Office of Engineering
Technology Bulletin 65 entitled "Evaluating
Compliance with FCC Guidelines for Human Exposure
§ 280-29 JUNKYARDS § 280-29
170:801
to Radio Frequency Electromagnetic Fields," as
amended.
[e] Historic buildings or districts. No non-tower-based
WCF may be located on a building, structure, or site
that is listed on either the National or Pennsylvania
Registers of Historical Places (either inside or outside
the public rights-of-way) or the official historic
structures and/or historic districts list maintained by
the Borough, or has been designated by the Borough
as being of historic significance.
[f] Aviation safety. Non-tower-based WCFs shall comply
with all federal and state laws concerning aviation
safety and applicable airport zoning regulations.
[i] Documentation from the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) shall be submitted by the
applicant for any non-tower-based WCF
exceeding 200 feet in height stating that the
subject WCF is approved by the FAA.
[ii] Any applicant for a proposed tower-based WCF
located within a radius of five aerial miles of any
airport shall notify said airport, in writing, of its
intent to construct a WCF prior to construction.
The applicant shall provide proof of the
notification to the Borough.
[2] Non-tower-based WCF development regulations - no
substantial change. If the eligible facilities request for a
non-tower-based WCF or base station is a co-location,
modification, or a replacement that does not substantially
change the existing wireless support structure, then the
requirements herein will be applicable.
[a] Permitted in all zoning districts. Non-tower-based
WCFs are permitted in all zoning districts.
[i] Building permit required. Co-locations,
modifications, or replacements of non-towerbased
WCFs or transmission equipment on
existing wireless support structures or base
stations are subject to the internal zoning or land
use approvals for the previously approved
wireless support structure or non-tower-based
WCF, and subject only to the building permit
review and approval process of the Borough.
[ii] No building permit required. Replacement of nontower-
based WCFs or transmission equipment on
existing, Borough-approved, wireless support
§ 280-29 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-29
170:802
structure or base stations, without an increase in
wind or structural load, may be performed by the
applicant without obtaining a building permit.
[b] Removal/financial security. In the event that use of a
non-tower-based WCF is discontinued, the owner shall
provide written notice to the Borough of its intent to
discontinue use and the date when the use shall be
discontinued. If it remains unused for a period of six
consecutive months, the Borough will provide notice
to the owner/operator to remove the tower. Unused or
abandoned non-tower-based WCFs or portions of nontower-
based WCFs shall be removed as follows:
[i] All unused or abandoned non-tower-based WCFs
and accessory facilities shall be removed within
six months of the cessation of operations at the
site or from the time the municipality provides
notice, unless a time extension is approved by the
Borough.
[ii] If the non-tower-based WCF and/or accessory
facility is not removed within six months of the
cessation of operations at a site, from the time the
municipality provides notice, or within any longer
period approved by the Borough, the non-towerbased
WCF and accessory facility and equipment
may be removed by the Borough and the cost of
removal assessed against the owner of the nontower-
based WCF.
[c] Timing of decision. Within 30 calendar days of the
date that an application for a co-location, modification,
or replacement of a non-tower-based WCF is filed with
the Borough, the Borough shall notify the applicant in
writing of any information that may be required to
complete such application. If additional information is
requested by the Borough to complete an application,
the time period for review may be tolled by mutual
agreement. Within 90 calendar days of receipt of the
application, accounting for tolling, the Borough must
make a final decision regarding the application and
shall advise the applicant in writing of such decision.
[i] A determination of incompleteness must
specifically delineate all missing information and
specify the code provision, ordinance, application
instructions or otherwise publicly stated
procedures that require the information to be
submitted.
§ 280-29 JUNKYARDS § 280-29
170:803
[ii] Following an applicant's resubmission in response
to a determination of incompleteness, the
Borough may reach a subsequent determination
of incompleteness based solely on the applicant's
failure to supply the specific information that was
requested within the first 30 days.
[iii] The ninety-day review period begins running
again when the applicant makes its supplemental
resubmission; however, the review period may be
tolled, once again, if the Borough notifies the
applicant within 10 days that the supplemental
submission did not provide the specific
information identified in the original notice
delineating missing information.
[3] Non-tower-based WCF development regulations -
substantial change. If the eligible facilities request for a
non-tower-based WCF or base station is a co-location,
modification, or a replacement that substantially changes
the existing wireless support structure, then the
requirements contained herein will be applicable.
[a] Permitted in all zoning districts. Non-tower-based
WCFs are permitted in all zoning districts subject to
the initial zoning or land use approvals for the
previously approved wireless support structures or
non-tower-based WCF. These WCFs are subject to the
building permit review and approval process of the
Borough.
[b] Maintenance. The following maintenance
requirements shall apply:
[i] Any non-tower-based WCF shall be fully
automated and unattended on a daily basis and
shall be visited only for maintenance or
emergency repair.
[ii] Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure
the upkeep of the facility in order to promote the
safety and security of the Borough's residents.
[iii] All maintenance activities shall utilize nothing
less than the best available technology for
preventing failures and accidents.
[c] Retention of experts. The Borough may hire any
consultant(s) and/or expert(s) necessary to assist the
Borough in reviewing and evaluating the application
for approval of the non-tower-based WCF and, once
approved, in reviewing and evaluating any potential
§ 280-29 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-29
170:804
violations of the terms and conditions of this
subsection. The applicant and/or owner of the nontower-
based WCF shall reimburse the Borough for
all costs of the Borough's consultant(s) in providing
expert evaluation and consultation in connection with
these activities.
[d] Timing of decision. Within 30 calendar days of the
date that an application for a co-location, modification,
or replacement of a non-tower-based WCF is filed with
the Borough, the Borough shall notify the applicant in
writing of any information that may be required to
complete such application. If additional information is
requested by the Borough to complete an application,
the time period for review may be tolled by mutual
agreement. Within 90 calendar days of receipt of the
application, accounting for tolling, the Borough must
make a final decision regarding the application and
shall advise the applicant in writing of such decision.
[i] A determination of incompleteness must
specifically delineate all missing information and
specify the code provision, ordinance, application
instructions or otherwise publicly stated
procedures that require the information to be
submitted.
[ii] Following an applicant's resubmission in response
to a determination of incompleteness, the
Borough may reach a subsequent determination
of incompleteness based solely on the applicant's
failure to supply the specific information that was
requested within the first 30 days.
[iii] The ninety-day review period begins running
again when the applicant makes its supplemental
resubmission; however, the review period may be
tolled, once again, if the Borough notifies the
applicant within 10 days that the supplemental
submission did not provide the specific
information identified in the original notice
delineating missing information.
[e] Indemnification. The applicant or each person that
owns or operates a non-tower-based WCF shall
indemnify, defend and hold harmless the Borough and
its authorities, Council, commissions (including the
individual members thereof), their elected and
appointed officers and officials, and their employees,
professional consultants and agents of and from any
suit, damage, claim, liability, judgment, cost, loss,
§ 280-29 JUNKYARDS § 280-29
170:805
deficiency and any other costs and expenses incident
to the defense of any such claim, lawsuit, action or
proceeding (including reasonable attorney fees,
expert witness fees and consulting fees) which in
whole or in part arise out of or relate to the
construction, installation, operation, maintenance, or
removal of a non-tower-based WCF.
[f] Removal/financial security. In the event that use of a
non-tower-based WCF is planned to be discontinued,
the owner shall provide written notice to the Borough
of its intent to discontinue use and the date when the
use shall be discontinued. Unused or abandoned nontower-
based WCFs or portions of non-tower-based
WCFs shall be removed as follows:
[i] All unused or abandoned non-tower-based WCFs
and accessory facilities shall be removed within
six months of the cessation of operations at the
site or from the time the municipality provides
notice, unless a time extension is approved by the
Borough.
[ii] If the non-tower-based WCF and/or accessory
facility is not removed within six months of the
cessation of operations at a site, from the time the
municipality provides notice, or within any longer
period approved by the Borough, the non-towerbased
WCF and accessory facility and equipment
may be removed by the Borough and the cost of
removal assessed against the owner of the nontower-
based WCF.
[iii] Prior to the issuance of a zoning permit, the
owner/operator of the non-tower-based WCF shall
post security, in a form acceptable to the Borough,
favoring the municipality, to assure the faithful
performance of the terms and conditions of this
section. Security shall be an amount to cover
tower and/or antenna removal and site cleanup.
The security shall be utilized by the Borough in
the event the owner or operator of the non-towerbased
WCF does not remove the facility as
outlined in Subsections A(11)(b)[3][f][i] and [ii]
above or to recover any and all compensatory
damages incurred by the Borough for violations of
this subsection, after reasonable notice and
opportunity to cure.
§ 280-29 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-29
170:806
[iv] The Borough must approve all replacements of
portions of a non-tower-based WCF previously
removed.
[4] Non-tower-based WCF outside the rights-of-way and
substantial change. If the eligible facilities request for a
non-tower-based WCF or base station is a co-location,
modification, or a replacement that substantially changes
the existing wireless support structure and is located
outside the rights-of-way, then the requirements contained
herein will be applicable.
[a] Development regulations. Non-tower-based WCFs
shall be co-located on existing wireless support
structures/base stations, subject to the following
conditions:
[i] Such non-tower-based WCFs do not exceed the
maximum permitted height of the existing
wireless support structure.
[ii] If the non-tower-based WCF applicant proposes to
locate the communications equipment in a
separate building, the building shall comply with
the minimum requirements for the applicable
zoning district.
[iii] An eight-foot-high security fence shall surround
any separate communications equipment
building. Vehicular access to the communications
equipment building shall not interfere with the
parking or vehicular circulations on the site for
the principal use.
[b] Design regulations.
[i] Non-tower-based WCFs shall be treated to match
the supporting structure in order to minimize
aesthetic impact.
[ii] Non-tower-based WCFs which are mounted to a
building or similar structure may not exceed a
height of 15 feet above the ground.
[iii] All non-tower-based WCF applicants must submit
documentation to the Borough justifying the total
height of the non-tower-based WCF structure.
Such documentation shall be analyzed in the
context of such justification on an individual basis.
[iv] Antenna, and their respective accompanying
support structures, shall be no greater in
§ 280-29 JUNKYARDS § 280-29
170:807
diameter than any cross-sectional dimension than
is reasonably necessary for their proper
functioning.
[c] Inspection. The Borough reserves the right to inspect
any non-tower-based WCF to ensure compliance with
the provisions of this subsection and any other
provisions found within the Borough Code or state or
federal law. The Borough and/or its agents shall have
the authority to enter the property upon which a nontower-
based WCF is located at any time, upon
reasonable notice to the operator, to ensure such
compliance.
[5] Non-tower-based WCF in the rights-of-way and substantial
changes. If the eligible facilities request for a non-towerbased
WCF or base station is a co-location, modification or
a replacement that substantially changes the existing
wireless support structure and is located in the rights-ofway,
then the requirements contained herein will be
applicable.
[a] Co-location. Non-tower-based WCFs in the rights-ofway
shall be located on existing poles/base stations,
such as existing utility poles or light poles or other
wireless support structures.
[b] Design requirements.
[i] Non-tower-based WCF installation located above
the surface grade in the public right-of-way
including, but not limited to, those on streetlights
and joint utility poles, shall consist of equipment
components that are no more than six feet in
height and that are compatible in scale and
proportion to the structures upon which they are
mounted. All equipment shall be the smallest and
least visibly intrusive equipment feasible.
[ii] Antenna and all support equipment shall be
treated to match the supporting structure. Nontower-
based WCFs and accompanying equipment
shall be painted, or otherwise coated, to be
visually compatible with the support structure
upon which they are mounted.
[c] Equipment location. Non-tower-based WCFs and
accessory equipment shall be located so as not to
cause any physical or visual obstruction to pedestrian
or vehicular traffic, or to otherwise create safety
hazards to pedestrians and/or motorists or to
§ 280-29 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-29
170:808
otherwise inconvenience public use of the rights-ofway
as determined by the Borough. In addition:
[i] In no case shall ground-mounted equipment,
walls, or landscaping be located within 18 inches
of the face of the curb.
[ii] Ground-mounted equipment shall be located
underground. In the event an applicant can
demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Borough
Engineer, that ground-mounted equipment cannot
be placed underground, then all such equipment
shall be screened, to the fullest extent possible,
through the use of landscaping or other
decorative features to the satisfaction of the
Borough.
[iii] Required electrical meter cabinets shall be
screened to blend in with the surrounding area to
the satisfaction of the Borough.
[iv] Any graffiti on the non-tower-based WCF or on
any accessory equipment shall be removed at the
sole expense of the owner within 10 business days
of notice of the existence of the graffiti.
[v] Any underground vaults related to non-towerbased
WCFs shall be reviewed and approved by
the Borough.
[d] Time, place and manner. The Borough shall determine
the time, place and manner of construction,
maintenance, repair and/or removal of all non-towerbased
WCFs in the rights-of-way based on public
safety, traffic management, physical burden on the
rights-of-way, and related considerations. For public
utilities, the time, place and manner requirements
shall be consistent with the police powers of the
Borough and the requirements of the Public Utility
Code.
[e] Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days
following written notice from the Borough, or such
longer period as the Borough determines is
reasonably necessary or such shorter period in the
case of an emergency, an owner of non-tower-based
WCFs in the rights-of-way shall, at its own expense,
temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change
or alter the position of any non-tower-based WCF
when the Borough, consistent with its police powers
and applicable Public Utility Commission regulations,
shall determine that such removal, relocation, change
§ 280-29 JUNKYARDS § 280-29
170:809
or alteration is reasonably necessary under the
following circumstances:
[i] The construction, repair, maintenance or
installation of any Borough or other public
improvement in the rights-of-way;
[ii] The operations of the Borough or other
governmental entity in the rights-of-way;
[iii] Vacation of a street or road or the release of a
utility easement; or
[iv] An emergency as determined by the Borough.
[f] Compensation for right-of-way use. In addition to
permit fees, every non-tower-based WCF in the rightof-
way is subject to the Borough's right to fix annually
a fair and reasonable compensation to be paid for use
and occupancy of the right-of-way. Such compensation
for right-of-way use shall be directly related to the
Borough's actual right-of-way management costs
including, but not limited to, the costs of the
administration and performance of all reviewing,
inspecting, permitting, supervising and other right-ofway
management activities by the Borough. The
owner of each non-tower-based WCF shall pay an
annual fee to the Borough to compensate the Borough
for the Borough's costs incurred in connection with
the activities described above. The annual right-ofway
management fee for non-tower-based WCFs shall
be determined by the Borough and authorized by
resolution of Borough Council and shall be based on
the Borough's actual right-of-way management costs
as applied to such tower-based WCF.
(d) Purposes. These provisions for commercial communications
antenna/towers are primarily designed to serve the following
purposes, in addition to the overall objectives of this chapter:
[1] To protect property values.
[2] To minimize the visual impact of antenna/towers,
particularly considering the importance of the scenic
beauty of the area in attracting visitors for outdoor
recreation.
[3] To minimize the number and heights of towers in a manner
that still provides for adequate telecommunications
services and competition.
§ 280-29 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-29
170:810
(e) A tower/antenna that primarily serves emergency
communications by a Borough-recognized police, fire or
ambulance organization, and is on the same lot as an
emergency services station, shall be permitted by right.
(f) Any antenna and tower that is no longer in active use shall be
completely removed within six months after the discontinuance
of use. The operator shall notify the Zoning Officer in writing
after the antenna or tower use is no longer in active use. Any
lease shall require such removal by the owner of the antenna/
tower. Any lease should provide that the lease shall expire once
the antenna/tower is removed.
(g) All utility buildings serving a communications antenna shall
have a maximum height of 12 feet. Where a utility building is
adjacent to a residential lot(s), it shall meet principal building
setbacks along those lot lines.
(12) Conversion of an existing building (including an existing dwelling)
into dwelling units.
(a) See Article III, which regulates where conversions are
permitted. Applicable state fire safety requirements shall be
met.
(b) The following regulations shall apply to the conversion of an
existing one-family dwelling into a greater number of dwelling
units:
[1] The building shall maintain the appearance of a one-family
dwelling with a single front entrance. Additional entrances
may be placed on the side or rear of the structure. The
dwelling units may internally share the single front
entrance.
[2] The conversion shall not be permitted if it would require
the placement of an exterior stairway on the front of the
building, or would require the placement of more than
three off-street parking spaces in the required front yard.
(c) A previously residential building shall maintain a clearly
residential appearance, except as may be necessary for
restoration of a historic building.
(d) Dumpster screening: see § 280-59.
(e) Each unit shall meet the definition of a dwelling unit and shall
meet the minimum floor area requirements of § 280-54C.
(13) Day care center, child.
(a) See also "day care: family day care home or group day care" as
an accessory use in § 280-30.
§ 280-29 JUNKYARDS § 280-29
170:811
(b) The use shall comply with any applicable state and federal
regulations, including having an appropriate State Department
of Public Welfare (or its successor agency) registration
certificate or license.
(c) Convenient parking spaces within the requirements of Article
VI shall be provided for persons delivering and waiting for
children.
(d) In residential districts, where permitted as a principal use, a
day care center shall have a minimum lot area of 6,000 square
feet and a minimum setback of 10 feet from an abutting
residential lot line.
(e) The use shall include secure fencing around outdoor play
areas.
(f) Outdoor play areas of a day care center involving the care of 25
or more children at any one time shall be setback a minimum of
25 feet from the exterior walls of an abutting existing dwelling.
(g) A day care center may occur in a building that also includes
lawful dwelling units. However, a day care center shall not be
conducted in a dwelling that is physically attached to another
dwelling that does not have a common owner.
(h) In residential districts, any permitted day care center shall
maintain an exterior appearance that resembles existing
dwellings in the neighborhood.
(i) See also the standards for a place of worship, which allows a
day care center as an adjunct use.
(14) Group homes. Group homes are permitted within a lawful dwelling
unit, provided the following additional requirements are met:
(a) See definition in § 280-19.
(b) A group home shall not include any use meeting the definition
of a "treatment center."
(c) A group home shall include the housing of a maximum of five
unrelated persons, except:
[1] If a more restrictive requirement is established by another
Borough code, such as a housing code;
[2] The number of bona fide paid professional staff shall not
count towards such maximum; and
[3] As may otherwise be approved by the Zoning Hearing
Board under § 280-11D.
§ 280-29 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-29
170:812
(d) The applicant shall provide a written statement describing how
the facility will have adequate trained staff supervision for the
number and type of residents. The Zoning Officer may require
twenty-four-hour on-site staffing if necessary for the number
and type of residents.
(e) The applicant shall provide evidence of any applicable federal,
state or county licensing or certification to the Zoning Officer.
If such licensing or certification is changed, suspended or
revoked, the operator shall provide written notice to the
Zoning Officer within seven days.
(f) The group home shall register in writing its location, general
type of treatment/care, maximum number of residents and
sponsoring agency with the Zoning Officer. If there are any
changes in such matters, the operator shall provide written
notice to the Zoning Officer within seven days. The Zoning
Officer may require a new approval if there are significant
changes in the nature of the group home.
(g) Any on-site medical or counseling services shall be limited to a
maximum of three nonresidents per day. Any on-site staff
meetings shall be limited to a maximum of five persons at one
time.
(h) A minimum of one off-street parking space shall be provided
per on-site employee, plus one space for every two residents of
a type reasonably expected to be able to drive a vehicle.
(i) If a group home is in a residential district, an appearance shall
be maintained that is closely similar to nearby dwellings, and
no sign shall identify the use.
(j) The persons living on-site shall function as a common
household unit.
(15) Hotel or motel.
(a) See definitions in Article II, which distinguish a hotel/motel
from a boardinghouse.
(b) New buildings shall be setback a minimum of 25 feet from the
lot line of a dwelling, unless a wider setback is required by
another section.
(16) Junkyard (includes automobile salvage yard).
(a) Storage of garbage or biodegradable material is prohibited,
other than what is customarily generated on-site and routinely
awaiting pickup.
(b) Outdoor storage of junk shall be at least:
§ 280-29 JUNKYARDS § 280-29
170:813
[1] One hundred feet from any lot line of a primarily
residential use; and
[2] Fifty feet from any other lot line and the existing right-ofway
of any public street.
(c) The site shall contain a minimum of two exterior points of
access, each of which is not less than 20 feet in width. One of
these accesses may be limited to emergency vehicles. Cleared
twelve-foot-wide aisles shall be provided throughout the entire
use to allow access by emergency vehicles. Adequate off-street
parking areas shall be provided for customers.
(d) Outdoor storage shall be completely enclosed (except at
approved driveway entrances) by a forty-foot-wide buffer yard
which complies with § 280-56, unless such storage is not
visible from an exterior lot line or street. The minimum initial
height of the evergreen planting shall be four feet, which shall
be designed to result in a solid eight-foot-high plant screen
within four years. Secure chain link or similar fencing with a
minimum height of eight feet shall be provided and wellmaintained
around all outdoor storage areas. Such fencing
shall be provided inside of the evergreen screening.
(e) Burning or incineration is prohibited.
(f) See the noise or dust regulations of Article V.
(g) All gasoline, antifreeze and oil shall be drained from all
vehicles and properly disposed of. All batteries shall be
removed from vehicles and stored in a suitable area on an
impervious and properly drained surface.
(h) Lot area: one acre minimum; 10 acres maximum.
(i) Tires: see the "outdoor storage and display" standards in
§ 280-30.
(j) The use shall also comply with Chapter 170, Junkyards, of the
Code of the Borough of Catasauqua.
(17)Kennel.
(a) Minimum lot area: one acre.
(b) All buildings in which animals are housed and all runs shall be
located at least 200 feet from any lot line of a primarily
residential use. This setback shall not apply if the kennel is
separated from a residential use by an expressway.
(c) Buildings shall be adequately soundproofed so that sounds
generated within the buildings cannot routinely be heard
within any principal building on another lot.
§ 280-29 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-29
170:814
(d) No animal shall be permitted to use outdoor runs from 8:00
p.m. to 8:00 a.m. that are within 250 feet of an existing
dwelling. Runs for dogs shall be separated from each other by
visual barriers a minimum of four feet in height, to minimize
dog barking.
(e) Structures in which animals are kept shall provide adequate
shelter from the elements, including being heated during cold
weather.
(f) All animal wastes shall be removed and properly disposed of at
least once a day.
(g) The operator of the kennel shall exercise all necessary control
over the animals and shall not allow a nuisance condition to
exist in terms of excessive noise, odor or health hazards.
(h) The kennel shall be operated in full compliance with the State
Animal Welfare Act and applicable state kennel regulations.
The kennel shall be open to regular inspection by the Zoning
Officer and any designated Health Inspector.
(18) Membership club.
(a) See definition in Article II.
(b) Any active outdoor play areas shall be setback at least 30 feet
from any abutting residential lot line.
(19) Mineral extraction.
(a) Application requirements. A copy of all site plan information
that will be required by the state DEP shall also be submitted
to the Borough as part of the zoning application.
(b) A detailed and appropriate land reclamation and reuse plan of
the area to be excavated shall be submitted to the Zoning
Officer.
(c) After areas are used for mineral extraction, those areas shall
be reclaimed in phases to a nonhazardous and environmentally
sound state permitting some productive or beneficial future
use.
(d) A seventy-five-foot-wide yard covered by natural vegetative
ground cover (except at approved driveway crossings) shall be
required along all exterior lot lines that are within 250 feet of
an area of excavation. This yard shall include an earth berm
with a minimum average height of six feet and an average of
one shade tree for each 50 feet of distance along the lot lines.
Such shade trees shall be planted outside of any berm and any
fence.
§ 280-29 JUNKYARDS § 280-29
170:815
(e) The following minimum setbacks shall apply for the excavated
area of a mineral extraction use from property that is not
owned by the owner or operator of the mineral extraction use:
[1] One hundred feet from the existing right-of-way of public
streets and from all exterior lot lines of the property;
[2] One hundred fifty feet from a commercial or industrial
building, unless released by the owner thereof;
[3] Two hundred fifty feet from a lot line of a dwelling, other
than an abandoned dwelling;
[4] One hundred fifty feet from the lot line of a publicly owned
recreation area that existed at time of the application for
the use or expansion.
(f) The excavated area of a mineral extraction use shall be setback
150 feet from the average waterline of a perennial stream or
the edge of a natural wetland of more than two acres.
(g) Truck access to the use shall be located to reasonably minimize
hazards on public streets and dust and noise nuisances to
residences.
(h) Fencing. The Zoning Hearing Board may require secure
fencing in locations where needed to protect public safety. As
an alternative, the Zoning Hearing Board may approve the use
of thorny vegetation to discourage public access. Also, warning
signs shall be placed at intervals of not less than 100 feet
around the outer edge of the use.
(i) Noise and performance standards: see Article V.
(j) County Conservation District. A soil erosion and sedimentation
plan shall be prepared by the applicant and found to be
acceptable to the County Conservation District.
(k) Hours of operation. The Zoning Hearing Board, as a condition
of special exception approval, may reasonably limit the hours
of operation of the use and of related trucking and blasting
operations to protect the character of adjacent residential
areas.
(l) The activities and residual effects shall not create conditions
that are significantly hazardous to the health and safety of
neighboring residents.
(20) Mobile/manufactured home. The following provisions shall apply
for a dwelling on an individual lot or within a mobile/manufactured
home park approved after the adoption of this chapter:
§ 280-29 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-29
170:816
(a) Construction. Any mobile/manufactured home placed on any
lot after the adoption of this chapter shall be constructed in
accordance with 1976 or later Safety and Construction
Standards of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development. (Note: These federal standards supersede any
building code for the actual construction of the home itself.)
(b) Each site shall be graded to provide a stable and well-drained
area.
(c) Each home shall have hitch and wheels removed.
(d) Anchoring. A mobile/manufactured home on an individual lot
or mobile/manufactured home park shall include a system that
secures the home to the ground to prevent shifting,
overturning or uneven settling of the home, with a secure base
for the tie-downs.
(e) Foundation treatment. The space between the bottom of the
home and the ground and/or home pad shall be enclosed using
a durable material that has the appearance of a foundation of a
site-built home, such as material with a concrete-type or stucco
facing. This subsection e. shall not apply within a
manufactured/mobile home park. Metal skirting shall only be
permitted within a manufactured/mobile home park.
Provisions shall be provided as necessary for access to utility
connections.
(f) The front door of the home shall face onto a public street,
except within a mobile home park.
(g) See also the regulations of § 280-26.
(h) A mobile/manufactured home shall not be permitted within a
state-certified or National Register Historic District.
(i) See provisions in § 280-26 regarding dwelling width in certain
districts.
(21) Mobile/manufactured home park.
(a) Plans shall need approval by the Borough under the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.230
(b) The minimum tract area shall be one contiguous acre, which
shall be under single ownership.
(c) Density. The maximum average overall density shall be four
dwelling units per acre. To calculate this density land in
common open space or proposed streets within the park may
be included. Land within the one-hundred-year floodway or
230. Editor's Note: See Ch. 235, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 280-29 JUNKYARDS § 280-29
170:817
that has natural slopes of 15% or greater shall not be included
when calculating density.
(d) Landscaped perimeter. Each mobile/manufactured home park
shall include a twenty-five-foot wide landscaped area including
substantial attractive evergreen and deciduous trees around
the perimeter of the site, except where such landscaping would
obstruct safe sight distances for traffic. A planting plan for
such area shall be approved by the Zoning Hearing Board as
part of any required special exception approval. Such
landscaped area shall not be required between adjacent mobile
home park developments. This landscaped area shall be 35 feet
wide abutting existing single-family detached dwellings. The
same area of land may count towards both the landscaped area
and the building setback requirements.
(e) A dwelling, including any attached accessory building, shall be
setback a minimum of 25 feet from another other dwelling
within the mobile home park, except that unenclosed porches,
awnings and decks may be 15 feet from the walls of another
dwelling.
(f) The minimum separation between homes and edge of interior
street cartway or parking court cartway shall be 25 feet.
(g) The minimum principal and accessory building setbacks from
exterior/boundary lot lines shall be 40 feet.
(h) Each home shall comply with the above requirements for
mobile/manufactured homes in this § 280-29.
(i) Accessory structures. A detached accessory structure or
garage shall be separated by a minimum of 15 feet from any
dwelling units which the accessory structure is not accessory
to.
(j) Common open space for a mobile home park. A minimum of
10% of the total lot area of the entire mobile home park shall
be set aside as common open space for the residents.
(k) Streets.
[1] Access to individual mobile home spaces shall be from
interior parking courts, access drives or private streets
and shall not be from public streets exterior to the
development.
[2] Streets within the mobile home park that provide access to
reach 20 or more dwellings shall have a minimum paved
cartway of 24 feet, and other local private streets or
parking courts serving less than 20 homes shall have a
minimum paved cartway of 20 feet.
§ 280-29 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-29
170:818
[3] Curbs and sidewalks are not required on the private
streets, but all private streets shall meet all other Borough
cartway construction standards.
(22) Nursing home.
(a) Licensing: see definition in Article II.
(b) A minimum of 20% of the lot shall be suitable and developed
for passive recreation. This area shall include outdoor sitting
areas and pedestrian walks.
(23) Outdoor storage and display. The provisions listed under § 280-30
are hereby included by reference.
(24) Picnic grove, private.
(a) Minimum lot area: one acre, unless a larger lot area is required
by another section of this chapter.
(b) All buildings, pavilions and active recreation areas shall be
setback a minimum of 50 feet from any lot line of an existing
principal dwelling, unless a larger setback is required by
another section of this chapter.
(c) The use shall not be open to customers/patrons between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(25) Place of worship.
(a) Minimum lot area: 25,000 square feet in a residential district.
In other districts, the standard minimum lot area shall apply.
(b) Weekly religious education rooms and meeting rooms are
permitted accessory uses provided that such uses are of such a
character and intensity that they would be clearly customary
and incidental to the place of worship. A primary or secondary
school and/or a child or adult day care center are permitted on
the same lot as a place of worship provided the requirements
for such uses are also met. Other uses shall only be permitted if
all of the requirements for such uses are also met, including
being permitted in the applicable district.
(c) Two dwelling units may be accessory to a place of worship on
the same lot provided that they are only used to house religious
leaders and their families.
(26) Recreation, outdoor.
(a) Any outdoor activity area shall be located no closer to any lot
line than the required front yard depth and shall be screened
and, if necessary, sound insulation shall be provided to protect
the neighborhood from any possible noise.
§ 280-29 JUNKYARDS § 280-29
170:819
(b) A twenty-foot-wide buffer yard in accordance with § 280-56
shall be required.
(c) Any swimming pool shall meet the requirements for such use,
as stated in this article.
(d) Lighting, noise and glare control: see Article V.
(27) Recycling collection center.
(a) This use shall not be bound by the requirements of a solid
waste disposal facility.
(b) All materials shall be kept in appropriate containers, with
appropriate sanitary measures and frequent enough emptying
to prevent the attraction of insects or rodents and to avoid fire
hazards.
(c) Adequate provision shall be made for movement of trucks if
needed and for off-street parking.
(d) A twenty-foot-wide buffer yard with screening as described in
§ 280-56 shall be provided between this use and any abutting
residential lot line.
(e) This use may be a principal or accessory use, including being
an accessory use to a commercial use, an industrial use, a
public or private primary or secondary school, a place of
worship or a Borough-owned use, subject to the limitations of
this section.
(f) Materials to be collected shall be of the same character as the
following materials: paper, fabric, cardboard, plastic, metal,
aluminum and glass. No garbage shall be stored as part of the
use, except for that generated on-site and that accidentally
collected with the recyclables. Only materials clearly being
actively collected for recycling may be stored on site.
(g) The use shall only include the following operations: collection,
sorting, baling, loading, weighing, routine cleaning and closely
similar work. No burning or landfilling shall occur. No
mechanical operations shall routinely occur at the site other
than operations such as baling of cardboard.
(h) The use shall not include the collection or processing of pieces
of metal that have a weight greater than 50 pounds, except
within an industrial district.
(i) The use shall include the storage of a maximum of 50 tons of
materials on the site if the use is within a residential district
and within 500 feet of an existing dwelling.
§ 280-29 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-29
170:820
(28) Residential conversions. See "conversions of an existing building"
within this section.
(29) Restaurant.
(a) Screening of dumpster and waste containers: see § 280-59.
(b) See "drive-through" service in § 280-30.
(c) Drive-through service shall only be provided where specifically
permitted in the applicable district regulations.
(30) School, public or private, primary or secondary.
(a) Minimum lot area: two acres in a residential district. In any
other district, the use shall meet the standard minimum lot
area for that district.
(b) No building, children's play equipment, basketball courts or
illuminated recreation facilities shall be within 25 feet of a
residential lot line, unless a more restrictive setback is
established by another section of this chapter.
(c) The use shall not include a dormitory unless specifically
permitted in the district.
(31) Self-storage development.
(a) All storage units shall be of fire-resistant construction.
(b) Outdoor storage shall be limited to recreational vehicles, boats
and trailers. No junk vehicles shall be stored within view of a
public street or a dwelling.
(c) Trash, radioactive or highly toxic substances, garbage, refuse,
explosives or flammable materials, hazardous substances,
animal carcasses or skins, or similar items shall not be stored.
(d) Nothing shall be stored in interior traffic aisles, required offstreet
parking areas, loading areas or accessways.
(e) The use shall not include a commercial auto repair garage
unless that use is permitted in the district and the use meets
those requirements.
(f) Adequate lighting shall be provided for security, but it shall be
directed away or shielded from any adjacent residential uses.
(g) See § 280-56 concerning buffer yards. In addition, any garage
doors or outdoor storage areas within 200 feet of a street rightof-
way shall be screened from that street by a buffer yard
meeting § 280-56.
(h) Minimum separation between buildings: 20 feet, which shall
allow passage by emergency vehicles.
§ 280-29 JUNKYARDS § 280-29
170:821
(32) Swimming pool, nonhousehold.
(a) The water surface shall be set back at least 50 feet from any
existing dwelling.
(b) Minimum lot area: 30,000 square feet.
(c) Any water surface within 100 feet of an existing dwelling shall
be separated from the dwelling by a buffer yard meeting
§ 280-56.
(d) The water surface shall be surrounded by a secure, wellmaintained
fence at least six feet in height.
(e) Drainage. A proper method shall be provided for drainage of
the water from the pool that will not flood other property.
(33) Target range.
(a) All target ranges shall have a barrier behind the target area
which is of sufficient height and thickness to adequately
protect the public safety. This barrier shall be made of earth for
an outdoor firearms range.
(b) The design of the outdoor firearms target range shall be
compared by the applicant with any applicable published
guidelines of the National Rifle Association.
(c) An outdoor firearms target range and any firing stations shall
be located a minimum of 250 feet from any residential lot line,
unless all firing would occur within a completely enclosed
sound-resistant building. Clay pigeon shooting shall be
directed away from homes and streets.
(d) An outdoor firearms target range shall be properly posted.
(e) The applicant shall provide evidence that the noise limits of
Article V will be met.
(f) An indoor firearms target range shall be adequately ventilated
and/or air conditioned to allow the building to remain
completely enclosed.
(34) Townhouses/rowhouses and apartments.
(a) Maximum number of townhouses attached in any manner:
eight.
(b) Paved area setback. All off-street parking spaces, except
spaces on driveways immediately in front of a carport or
garage entrance, shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from
any dwelling.
§ 280-29 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-29
170:822
(c) Garages. Townhouses shall be designed so that garages and/or
carports are not an overly prominent part of the view from
public streets. For this reason, parking courts, common garage
or carport structures or garages at the rear of dwellings are
encouraged instead of individual garages opening onto the
front of the building, especially for narrow townhouse units.
(d) Mailboxes. Any mailboxes provided within the street right-ofway
should be clustered together in an orderly and attractive
arrangement or structure. Individual freestanding mailboxes of
noncoordinated types at the curbside are specifically
discouraged.
(e) Access. Vehicular access points onto all arterial and collector
streets shall be minimized to the lowest reasonable number. No
townhouse dwelling within a tract of five or more dwelling
units shall have its own driveway entering onto an arterial or
collector street.
(35) Treatment centers.
(a) See definition in § 280-19.
(b) The applicant shall provide a written description of all types of
persons intended to occupy the use during the life the permit.
Any future additions to this list shall require an additional
special exception approval.
(c) The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Hearing Board that the use will involve adequate on-site
supervision and security measures to protect public safety.
(d) The Zoning Hearing Board may place conditions upon the use
to protect public safety, such as conditions on the types of
residents and security measures.
(e) If the use involves five or more residents, a suitable on-lot
outdoor recreation area shall be provided that is supervised by
the center's staff.
(36) Veterinarian office (includes animal hospital).
(a) Minimum lot area: 15,000 square feet.
(b) Any structure in which animals are treated or housed shall be a
minimum of 50 feet from any residential lot line. Buildings
shall be adequately soundproofed so that sounds generated
within the buildings cannot routinely be perceived within any
adjacent dwellings.
(c) Outdoor animal runs may be provided for small animals for use
between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., provided the runs are at least
150 feet from any existing dwelling and provided that the runs
§ 280-29 JUNKYARDS § 280-29
170:823
for dogs are separated from each other by visual barriers a
minimum of four feet in height, to minimize dog barking.
(d) Although animals may be kept as an accessory use, a
commercial kennel shall only be allowed if a kennel is
permitted in that district and if the applicable requirements
are met.
(37) All uses in the INS-2 District. [Added 6-1-2009 by Ord. No.
1238]
(a) The minimum lot area shall be 20,000 square feet.
(b) All such use(s) shall have a twenty-five-foot setback from all
property lines, except along a residential zoning district where
the setback shall be 50 feet, unless an existing building is
already nonconforming with respect to setbacks.
(c) At least 5% of the gross tract area shall have green area in the
form of a pedestrian plaza, square, park, tot lot, playground,
and other approved green area. The required green area shall
be similar in character to the examples depicted in "280
Attachment 4."231 No portion of the required setback area shall
be counted toward the minimum green area requirement.
(d) Pedestrian crosswalks at least six feet in width shall be
provided and maintained across all street intersections.
(e) Street trees and streetlights shall be installed and maintained
at an alternating interval of 45 feet on center, along a street
abutting a front yard, and arterial and collector streets.
(38) Additional adaptive reuse requirements. [Added 6-1-2009 by
Ord. No. 1238]
(a) At least 2/3 of the original/existing exterior walls of the
building and any portion of the roof integral thereto, and at
least 2/3 of the original/existing footprint of the building shall
be conserved and protected for adaptive reuse projects, in
order to preserve the historic integrity of the building and the
neighborhood.
(b) The Zoning Hearing Board may authorize up to a twentypercent
reduction in the otherwise required parking
requirements if 100% of the original/existing building is
conserved and protected through adaptive reuse.
(c) The adaptive reuse of a building may involve conversion from
residential to nonresidential use, provided that all proposed
nonresidential uses are already permitted in the zoning
district.
231. Editor's Note: Attachment 4 is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 280-29 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-29
170:824
(d) The adaptive reuse of a building shall comply with all
applicable dimensional requirements of the district.
(39) Planned multifamily residential community. A planned, residential
community meeting the following, specific requirements: [Added
3-4-2013 by Ord. No. 1286]
(a) Consists of one or more of the following dwelling types:
apartments, mid-rise apartments, twin dwelling units and
townhouses.
(b) Provides three or more recreational facilities for use by the
residents thereof, including without limitation, walking paths,
indoor or outdoor pools, exercise rooms, tennis ourts, band
shell, playground area and the like. Note that one or more
direct connections to Borough and other public, recreational
facilities may count as one recreational facility. The size of each
recreational facility shall be commensurate with the size and
density of the community. The requirements of this subsection
are in addition to and not in lieu of the park and recreation
dedication requirements of the Borough’s Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance.232
(c) Provides for a separate clubhouse facility. Note that the
inclusion of exercise facilities in a clubhouse may count as one
recreational facility with respect to each such facility
contained therein.
(d) Utilizes Borough public water and Borough sanitary sewer.
(e) Provides on-site parking in accordance with Article VI, except
that an apartment use or a mid-rise apartment use shall
provide 1.5 parking spaces per dwelling unit.
(f) Provides parking spaces for visitors in the amount of one space
for every four dwelling units.
(40) Craft beverage production facility. [Added 6-6-2016 by Ord. No.
1332; amended 2-5-2018 by Ord. No. 1364233]
(a) A craft beverage production facility, as defined, is a special
exception use and as such shall meet all of the requirements
for special exception use approval under § 280-16 of this
chapter as well as all other applicable requirements of this
chapter including, without limitation, the specific
requirements of the district(s) in which the use is located
unless otherwise modified herein.
232. Editor’s Note: See Ch. 235, Subdivision and Land Development.
233. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed form Subsection A(40), craft beverage
restaurant, added 6-6-2016 by Ord. No. 1332, and renumbered former Subsection A(41) as
Subsection A(40).
§ 280-29 JUNKYARDS § 280-29
170:825
(b) In addition to the above, a craft beverage production facility
shall meet the following specific requirements:
[1] Demonstration of compliance with all requirements of
applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances, rules
and regulations.
[2] Receipt of all necessary licenses from, and approvals by,
regulatory agencies.
[3] Craft beverages produced by entities other than the owner
of the craft beverage production facility and sold at the
premises shall be consumed on the premises.
[4] The annual sale at the premises of craft beverages
manufactured by entities other than the owner shall not
exceed 50% of the total sales of craft beverages at the
premises. The calculation of total sales shall include only
the retail sales made at the premises and shall not include
the wholesale distribution of the craft beverages
manufactured by the owner.
[5] The owner shall provide to the Borough a quarterly report
(based upon a calendar year) containing the following
information:
[a] Total gallons and types of craft beverages
manufactured on the premises;
[b] Total gallons and types of craft beverages produced by
manufacturers other than the owner and sold for
consumption on the premises;
[c] Total gallons and types of craft beverages produced by
the owner and sold at the premises for consumption or
retail sales (exclusive of wholesale distribution);
[d] Total gallons and types of craft beverages sold on the
premises for consumption or retail sales; and
[e] Total gallons and types of craft beverages
manufactured and distributed wholesale from the
premises.
[6] Hours of operation of the tasting room and retail sales
shall occur only during the following hours:
[a] Monday through Saturday, 10:00 a.m. to 12:00
midnight; and
[b] Sunday, 12:00 noon to 9:00 p.m.
[7] Hours of operation involving deliveries to and from the
premises, including wholesale distribution, shall occur
§ 280-29 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-29
170:826
§ 280-30. Additional requirements for accessory uses.
only during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Monday
through Saturday.
[8] Off-street parking shall be provided in the amount of one
space for every 200 square feet of total floor area and one
loading space.
[9] Total floor area of the craft beverage production facility
(calculated in accordance with the requirements of this
Zoning Ordinance) and inclusive of all areas designated for
the outdoor consumption of craft beverages at any time
during the calendar year shall not exceed 4,000 square
feet.
[10] During hours of operation, food shall be provided for
consumption on the premises by patrons. A food truck
service may satisfy the requirement of this subsection in
whole or in part, provided that the owner/operator of the
food truck obtains a transient merchant license from the
Borough. Food trucks, trailers or other vehicles providing
food service to the premises shall be parked on site and
shall not encroach upon the public right-of-way.
[11] The owner shall provide an ongoing form of public or
community service or educational program available to the
general public.
A. General. Accessory buildings, structures or uses that are clearly
customary and incidental to a permitted-by-right, special exception or
conditional use are permitted by right, except as is provided for in this
chapter. A business shall only be conducted as an accessory to a
dwelling if specifically permitted by this chapter.
B. Accessory setbacks. The accessory setback requirements of the
applicable district shall apply to every accessory building, structure or
use unless a standard that is clearly meant to be more restrictive or less
restrictive is specifically stated in this article for a particular accessory
use. Accessory structure setback requirements shall not apply to
permitted surface parking lots, fences or permitted accessory signs.
C. Front yard setback. No accessory structure, use or building shall be
permitted in a required front yard in any district, unless specifically
permitted by this chapter.
D. Special standards. Each accessory use shall comply with all of the
following standards listed for that use:
(1) Antenna, standard (includes amateur radio antenna).
§ 280-29 JUNKYARDS § 280-30
170:827
(a) Height. No standard antenna, including its supporting
structure, shall have a total height above the average
surrounding ground level of greater than 70 feet.
(b) Anchoring. An antenna shall be properly anchored to resist
high winds.
(2) Bus shelters.
(a) A bus shelter that complies with this section shall be allowed to
provide refuge for mass transit riders from adverse weather
conditions.
(b) Only the following signs shall be permitted:
[1] One two-sided sign with a maximum sign area of 30 square
feet (which may be illuminated); and
[2] Nonilluminated signs identifying the name of the transit
provider, route schedules and maps.
(c) A bus shelter with advertising signs shall only be allowed
within commercial and industrial districts. The location of a
bus shelter shall be approved in advance by the transit
provider and Borough Council. The applicant shall prove to the
Zoning Officer that the location will not interfere with
pedestrian traffic along the sidewalk and with safe sight
distances at intersections. The Borough may also require a
written agreement for use of the public right-of-way.
(d) The applicant shall prove to the Zoning Officer that there is a
legally binding commitment by a responsible entity to properly
maintain the bus shelter and to remove the shelter if it is not
needed in the future or if it falls into disrepair.
(e) Such shelters shall be durably constructed, with a roof. For
security and safety purposes, the majority of the side walls of
the shelter shall be constructed of a clear shatter-resistant
material.
(f) Any light bulbs/lighting elements shall not be directly visible
from outside of the shelters. The lighting may be diffused by an
allowed sign. Glare shall not be created.
(g) A bus shelter shall not be located directly abutting a singlefamily
detached dwelling or a twin dwelling.
(h) A bus shelter shall only be allowed within a commercial district
or an immediately abutting sidewalk.
(3) Day care, child, as accessory to a dwelling (includes family day care
home or a group day care home).
§ 280-30 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-30
170:828
(a) See § 280-25 and the definitions in § 280-19 concerning the
number of children who can be cared for in different zoning
districts in a family day care home or a group day care home.
(b) In any case, seven to 12 more children (other than children
who are related to the primary caregiver) shall only be cared
for at one time within a single-family detached dwelling with a
minimum lot area of 12,000 square feet and a ten-foot
minimum setback from all existing dwellings on another lot(s).
Four to six children, in addition to children who are related to
the primary caregiver, shall only be cared for at one time
within a dwelling that is not attached to another dwelling. The
care of fewer numbers of children may occur within any lawful
dwelling unit.
(c) The dwelling shall retain a residential appearance with no
change to the exterior of the dwelling to accommodate the use,
other than cosmetic improvements.
(d) The use shall be actively operated by a permanent resident of
the dwelling.
(e) If four or more children who are not related to a permanent
resident of the dwelling are cared for, then a minimum of 200
square feet of safe exterior play area shall be available.
(f) See also "day care center" as a principal use in § 280-29, and
"day care as accessory to a place of worship" in § 280-25B.
(g) The use shall comply with any applicable state and federal
regulations, including having an appropriate State Department
of Public Welfare (or its successor agency) registration
certificate or license if required by such agency.
(h) The use shall include a secure fence around any outdoor areas
abutting streets that are routinely used for outdoor play.
(4) Drive-through facilities.
(a) The proposed traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause
traffic hazards on adjacent streets.
(b) On-lot traffic circulation shall be clearly marked.
(c) A drive-through use shall be designed with space for an
adequate number of waiting vehicles while avoiding conflicts
with traffic onto, around and off of the site. Any drive-through
facilities shall be designed to minimize conflicts with
pedestrian traffic.
(5) Fences and walls.
§ 280-30 JUNKYARDS § 280-30
170:829
(a) Fences and walls are permitted by right in all districts. Any
fence or wall shall be durably constructed and wellmaintained.
Fences that have deteriorated shall be replaced or
removed.
(b) No fence, wall or hedge shall obstruct the sight requirements
of § 280-56C.
(c) Fences:
[1] Front yard. Any fence located in the required front yard of
a lot in a residential district shall:
[a] Be an open-type of fence (such as picket, metal post or
split rail) with a minimum ratio of 1:1 of open to
structural areas;
[b] Not exceed four feet in height; and
[c] In a Historic District, such fence shall not be
constructed from chain link metal. Fences are
encouraged to be constructed using weather-resistant
wood, vinyl materials that resemble wood, or vinyl
materials that resemble historic-style metal post
fences.
[2] On a corner lot, the maximum height of any fence shall be
four feet within a yard that faces a street (not including a
lot along an alley).
[3] Brick may be used for posts or as a base for a fence,
provided the maximum fence height is not exceeded.
[4] On a corner lot, a fence shall meet the same requirements
along both streets as would apply within a front yard.
However, a fence in the second front yard may have a
height of six feet and is not required to be an open-type
fence if it is located to the rear of the principal building. A
fence shall not be required to comply with minimum
setbacks for accessory structures.
[5] Height. Fences that are not within a residential district
shall have a maximum height of six feet in a minimum front
yard setback and eight feet in other locations. A fence in a
residential district, other than a required front yard, shall
have a maximum height of six feet.
[a] However, a maximum of height of 12 feet shall be
permitted where the applicant proves to the Zoning
Officer that such taller height is necessary to protect
public safety around a specific hazard, such as around
an electric substation.
§ 280-30 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-30
170:830
[b] Structural posts of a fence may extend above the
height of the fence.
[6] Setbacks. No fence shall be built within an existing street
right-of-way. A fence is not required to be set back from a
lot line, but a small setback is recommended to provide for
future maintenance of the fence.
[7] Fence materials. Barbed wire shall not be used as part of
fences around dwellings. No fence shall be constructed out
of fabric, junk, junk vehicles, appliances, tanks or barrels.
[8] Facing of fence. If one side of a fence includes posts or
supports, those posts or supports shall be placed on the
interior of the fence, as opposed to facing onto a street or
another lot.
(d) Walls.
[1] Engineered retaining walls necessary to hold back slopes
are exempted from setback regulations and the
regulations of this section, and are permitted by right as
needed in all districts.
[2] Walls in the minimum front yard or the side or rear
accessory building setback in a residential district shall
have a maximum height of three feet. On a corner lot, the
maximum height of any wall shall be three feet within a
yard that faces a street. Any other wall that is within a
required yard shall have a maximum height of six feet. This
height limit shall not apply to a wall serving as a backing
for a permitted sign if permitted by § 280-45.
[3] Walls that are attached to a building shall be regulated as
a part of that building.
(6) Garage sale.
(a) See definition in § 280-19. A garage sale shall not include
wholesale sales, nor sale of new merchandise of a type
typically found in retail stores.
(b) If accessory to a dwelling, no garage sales as an accessory to a
dwelling shall be held on a lot during more than four days total
in any 12 consecutive months.
(c) The use shall be clearly accessory to the principal use.
(d) See also Chapter 160, Garage Sales, in the Code of the
Borough of Catasauqua.
(e) See sign provisions for garage sales in § 280-44.
(7) Home occupations.
§ 280-30 JUNKYARDS § 280-30
170:831
(a) All home occupations shall meet the following requirements:
[1] The use shall be conducted primarily by a permanent
resident of the dwelling, and involve a maximum of one
person working on-site at any one time who does not
reside within the dwelling. A maximum of one nonresident
employee shall visit the property on a daily basis or
operate a vehicle based at the property.
[2] The use shall be conducted indoors. No outdoor storage or
display related to the home occupation shall be permitted.
No changes shall occur to the exterior of a building that
would reduce its residential appearance as viewed from a
street.
[3] The use shall occupy an area that is not greater than 25%
of the total floor area of the principal dwelling unit. The
use shall clearly be secondary to the residential use.
[4] One off-street parking space shall be required per
nonresident employee. In addition, for a general home
occupation, the Zoning Hearing Board shall require
additional off-street parking if the Board determines it is
necessary for customer parking.
[5] The use shall not require delivery or pickup by tractortrailer
trucks.
[6] The regulations of § 280-30D(10)(d) regarding parking of
trucks shall apply to a home occupation. No excavating
equipment shall be parked overnight on a residential lot or
an adjacent street as part of a home occupation.
[7] No equipment or machinery shall be permitted that
produces noise, noxious odor, vibration, glare, electrical or
electronic interference detectable on another property.
The use shall not involve the storage or use of hazardous,
flammable or explosive substances, other than types and
amounts typically found on a residential property. The use
shall not involve the storage or use of toxic or highly
hazardous substances.
[8] A home occupation shall not be conducted in a manner
that is perceptible to other residents between the hours of
9:00 p.m. and 7:30 a.m.
[9] Any tutoring or instruction shall be limited to a maximum
of three students at a time.
[10] A barber or beauty shop shall not include any nonresident
employees.
§ 280-30 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-30
170:832
[11] The main office of a medical doctor, chiropractor or dentist
shall not be permitted as a home occupation.
[12] The only allowed sign shall be one home occupation sign
meeting § 280-44. Such sign shall not be illuminated and
shall be attached to a building.
[13] The Zoning Hearing Board shall deny a general home
occupation application, or limit its intensity through
conditions, if the Board determines the use would be too
intense for the proposed location. In making such
determination, the Board shall review the likely amounts
of traffic, the amount of deliveries that will be needed, the
types of operations involved and related nuisances, the
amount of off-street and on-street parking that is available,
the density of the neighborhood, whether the use would be
adjacent to another dwelling, and the setbacks from other
dwellings.
[14] The use shall not involve manufacturing, other than of
custom crafts and sewing. The use shall not involve
commercial repair of motor vehicles.
[15] The use may include sales using telephone, mail order or
electronic methods. On-site retail sales shall only be
permitted within a general home occupation, and if
specifically approved as part of a special exception
approval. Such retail sales shall be limited to sales that are
clearly accessory to an approved barber shop or similar
on-site service.
[16] If more than one home occupation is accessory to a
dwelling, the total aggregate impact of the home
occupations shall be considered in determining
compliance with this chapter.
[17] A zoning permit shall be required for any home
occupation.
[18] If a tenant is seeking special exception approval, written
consent for the application shall be provided from the
owner of the property.
[19] If a home occupation is discontinued for a period of over
one year, then a new approval shall be required before the
home occupation may be reestablished.
(b) In addition to the requirements listed in Subsection D(7)(a)
above, the following additional requirements shall apply to a
light home occupation:
§ 280-30 JUNKYARDS § 280-30
170:833
[1] The use shall not involve routine visits to the home
occupation by customers or more than one nonresident
employee at a time.
[2] The use shall only involve the following activities:
[a] Work routinely conducted within an office;
[b] Custom sewing and fabric and basket crafts;
[c] Cooking and baking for off-site sales and use;
[d] Creation of visual arts (such as painting or wood
carving);
[e] Repairs to and assembly of computers and computer
peripherals; and
[f] A construction tradesperson, provided that a
maximum of one nonresident shall routinely operate
from the lot.
[3] On-site retail sales shall be prohibited.
(8) Outdoor storage and display: commercial or industrial as a
principal or accessory use.
(a) Location. Outdoor storage or display shall not occupy any part
of any of the following: the existing or future street right-ofway,
buffer yard, sidewalk or other area intended or designed
for pedestrian use or required parking area.
(b) No such storage or display shall occur on areas with a slope in
excess of 25% or within the one-hundred-year floodway.
(c) Screening: see § 280-56.
(d) Any storage of more than 50 used tires shall only be permitted
as part of a Borough-approved junkyard. Any storage of used
tires shall involve stacks with a maximum height of 15 feet, and
that cover a maximum of 400 square feet. Each stack shall be
separated from other stacks from all lot lines by a minimum of
75 feet.
(9) Pets, keeping of.
(a) This is a permitted-by-right accessory use in all districts.
(b) No use shall involve the keeping of animals or fowl in such a
manner or of such types of animals that it creates a serious
nuisance (including noise or odor), a health hazard or a public
safety hazard. The owner of the animals shall be responsible
for collecting and properly disposing of all fecal matter from
pets. No dangerous animals shall be kept outdoors in a
§ 280-30 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-30
170:834
residential district, except within a secure, completely
enclosed cage or fenced area of sufficient height or on a leash
under full control of the owner.
(c) See Chapter 105, Animals, of the Code of the Borough of
Catasauqua, which regulates the number of animals. In any
case, if more than 10 dogs over five months in age are kept on a
lot, it shall be regulated by this chapter as a kennel.
(d) The keeping of up to two total pigeons, chickens, ducks, geese
and/or similar sized animals shall be permitted on lot with a
minimum lot area of 10,000 square feet.
(e) Animals shall only be permitted provided they do not create
unsanitary conditions or noxious odors for neighbors.
(f) A minimum lot area of two acres shall be required for the
keeping of a horse or similar sized animal, with one additional
acre required for each additional such animal.
(g) Only those pets that are domesticated and are compatible with
a residential character shall be permitted as "keeping of pets."
Examples of permitted pets include dogs, cats, rabbits, gerbils
and lizards, but do not include bears, goats, wolves, wolf-dog
hybrids, cows, venomous snakes that could be toxic to humans,
hogs or sheep.
(h) It shall be unlawful on a residential property to maintain any
"exotic wildlife" as defined by the Pennsylvania Game and
Wildlife Code, whether or not an exotic wildlife possession
permit has been issued.
(10) Residential accessory structure or use (see definition in Article II).
(a) Accessory structures and uses (other than fences) shall not be
located within the required accessory use setback as stated in
§ 280-26A, unless specifically exempted by this chapter.
Accessory structures shall not be located within a front yard,
nor within 10 feet of any street right-of-way line (such as on a
corner lot).
(b) Accessory buildings in a residential district shall meet the
following requirements:
[1] Maximum total floor area of all accessory buildings: 1,000
square feet.
[2] Maximum of two accessory buildings per lot.
(c) Height: see § 280-26B.
(d) Parking of trucks and buses. The overnight parking of
commercial trucks and buses on a primarily residential lot in a
§ 280-30 JUNKYARDS § 280-30
170:835
residential district is prohibited, except that the following shall
be permitted if such vehicle(s) is used by residents of the
dwelling to travel to and from work:
[1] The parking of a maximum of two vehicles, each of up to
14,000 pounds aggregate gross vehicle weight.
(e) Repairs. No maintenance or repair of either of the following
shall occur on a principally residential lot:
[1] Trucks with an aggregate gross vehicle weight of over
14,000 pounds aggregate gross vehicle weight; or
[2] Vehicles not owned or leased by a resident of the lot or his/
her relative.
(f) See setback exceptions in § 280-56B.
(g) A maximum of one motor vehicle that does not display a
current state registration and license plate may be stored on a
residential lot outside of an enclosed building. However, such
unregistered motor vehicle shall not be stored for more than
30 days in any calendar year. See also Chapter 255, Vehicles,
Abandoned, of the Code of the Borough of Catasauqua.
(11) Swimming pool, household (referred hereafter as "pool").
(a) Enclosure of pools. A new or existing swimming pool shall
include a secure fence with a minimum four feet height or
other enclosure meeting the requirements of the applicable
Building Code.
(b) Location. Any pool deck or shelter that is elevated above the
average surrounding ground level and the water surface of any
pool shall be setback a minimum of 10 feet from any lot line.
Patios around pools that are level with the average
surrounding ground level are not required to be setback from
lot lines. A pool is not permitted within a required front yard. A
pool shall comply with limitations of any water or sewer
easement.
(c) Drainage. A proper method shall be provided for drainage of
the water from the pool that will not flood other property. Such
method may be subject to approval of the Zoning Officer.
(d) The Borough does not assume responsibility for guaranteeing
to the public that all new and existing pools fully comply with
these provisions.
(12) Unit for care of relative.
(a) The use shall meet the definition in § 280-19.
§ 280-30 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-30
170:836
(b) The accessory unit shall be occupied by a maximum of two
persons, who shall be close relatives of the permanent
residents of the principal dwelling unit. At least one resident of
the accessory unit shall need such accommodations because of
an illness, old age or disability.
(c) The applicant shall prove to the Zoning Hearing Board that the
accessory unit has been designed and constructed so that it
can be easily reconverted into part of the principal dwelling
unit after the relative no longer resides within the unit. A
written plan shall be submitted showing how the separate unit
will be changed to no longer be a separate unit. The accessory
unit may be converted into an additional bedroom(s),
permitted home occupation area or similar use. A lawful
detached garage may be converted into a unit for care of
relative, and then be reconverted to a garage or permitted
home occupation area.
(d) The applicant shall establish a legally binding mechanism that
will prohibit the use of the accessory unit as a separate
dwelling unit after the relative no longer resides within the
unit. Such mechanism shall also be binding upon future
owners.
(e) The owner of the property shall be required to annually renew
the permit for the use. Such renewal shall be conditioned upon
the owner proving that a relative of the occupants of the
principal dwelling unit continues to reside within the accessory
unit.
(f) Such accessory unit shall not decrease the one-family
residential appearance of a one-family dwelling, as viewed
from exterior property lines.
(g) Additional parking for the accessory unit may be waived by the
Zoning Hearing Board as part of the special exception approval
if the applicant proves that the resident(s) of the accessory unit
will not routinely operate a vehicle.
(13) Outdoor cafe. [Added 6-1-2009 by Ord. No. 1238]
(a) The area devoted to the outdoor cafe shall not be permitted
within 30 feet abutting a lot zoned for residential use at the
perimeter of a district.
(b) The outdoor cafe area shall be separated from the street (and
from the minimum forty-eight-inch wide usable walkway area
or sidewalk) by a type of street furnishing that will provide a
partial enclosure to the area and help to define the area. The
separation of spaces shall be accomplished by:
§ 280-30 JUNKYARDS § 280-30
170:837
[1] Fence made of wood, precast concrete, stone, brick , or
other masonry, which shall be 36 to 42 inches in height.
[2] Planter boxes made of wood, precast concrete, stone,
brick, or other masonry, which shall be 36 to 42 inches in
height. Such planter boxes shall be at least 12 inches wide
and have drain holes in the bottom. Planter boxes shall
contain dwarf evergreen shrubs, or a combination of
flowers and vines, which shall be installed prior to opening
the outdoor cafe area, and shall be continuously
maintained. Any plantings that die shall be replaced
immediately thereafter.
[3] A type of temporary barricade such as a wooden partition
wall, or wooden partition fence, that shall be 36 to 42
inches in height, and built to be stable, vertical and plumb
during hours of use.
[4] Such fence, planter boxes, temporary barricade or other
enclosure shall contain or enclose the outdoor cafe area on
one to three sides, but shall not enclose it on four sides.
(c) The minimum height of umbrellas which project into the
required minimum pedestrian walkway shall be 80 inches.
(d) Tables which are placed on the sidewalk directly abutting or
adjacent to an outdoor cafe shall not exceed 13 square feet in
area.
(e) It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct or
maintain an outdoor cafe without first applying for and
securing a permit therefor as hereinafter provided.
(f) Any person who shall desire to open an outdoor cafe in the
Borough shall make application therefor (the applicant) in
writing. Such application shall be accompanied by such
application fee as required by a schedule of fees established by
and amended from time to time by resolution of Borough
Council. Such application shall be made upon forms provided
by the Borough and shall set forth and include the following:
[1] The name and address of the applicant.
[2] A plan specifying the precise location of the outdoor
portion of the outdoor cafe, including a calculation of the
proposed occupant load.
[3] The written consent of the property owner, if different than
the applicant.
[4] An agreement of indemnity as outlined below.
[5] The indoor seating capacity of the outdoor cafe.
§ 280-30 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-30
170:838
[6] The type of outdoor cafe proposed by the applicant.
(g) No action shall be taken on any application for a permit under
this subsection until the application has been completed in its
entirety and the application fee, as required by a schedule of
fees established and amended from time to time by resolution
of Borough Council, has been paid in full. The schedule of fees
shall be kept on file at Borough Hall.
(h) The applicant/property owner shall well and truly save,
indemnify, defend and keep harmless the Borough, its officers,
employees and agents from and against any and all actions,
suits, demands, payments, costs and charges for and by reason
of the existence of the outdoor cafe and all damages to persons
or property resulting from or in any manner caused by the
presence, location, use, operation, installation, maintenance,
replacement or removal of such outdoor cafe or by the acts or
omissions of the employees or agents of the applicant in
connection with such outdoor cafe.
(i) There shall be no advertising displayed on umbrellas or tables
which are located on the sidewalk directly abutting or adjacent
to the outdoor cafe.
(j) There shall be no temporary signs or banners permitted
outside of the outdoor cafe.
(k) The owner of the outdoor cafe is responsible for keeping the
pedestrian walkway in front of the premises clean and free of
trash and debris.
(l) Owners of an outdoor cafe must provide trash receptacles
acceptable to the Borough which are located at the exterior of
the premises.
(m) The owner shall maintain the outdoor cafe in accordance with
the Borough ordinances and state and federal laws, as well as
rules and regulations promulgated and adopted by the
Borough which pertain to this use of outdoor cafes.
(n) The owner shall remove the outdoor cafe within 30 days after
written notice if the Borough or the Zoning Officer determines
that the outdoor cafe is detrimental to the health, safety and
general welfare of the Borough or its citizens because one or
more of the following conditions has occurred:
[1] Due to pedestrian traffic changes, the outdoor cafe
narrows the sidewalk to the extent that pedestrian traffic
is impeded.
[2] The outdoor cafe interferes with the maintenance or
installation of an underground utility structure.
§ 280-30 JUNKYARDS § 280-30
170:839
[3] The outdoor cafe is no longer being used as such.
[4] The outdoor cafe has been temporarily or permanently
closed for violation of any Borough, state or federal law
and/or regulation.
[5] The outdoor cafe is operated in violation of any ordinance,
rule or regulation of the Borough.
(o) In the event that the owner fails to remove the outdoor cafe
within 30 days after written notice, the Borough may proceed
to remove and restore the area and charge the owner for the
cost thereof. Should the outdoor cafe be removed by the
Borough, the owner shall be entitled to a return of the
equipment, furnishings or appurtenances so removed only
after the payment of all costs due to the Borough and by
requesting the return in writing. The responsibility for removal
under the provisions of this subsection shall be the sole
responsibility of the owner without any obligation or cost
assessed against the Borough.
(p) No exterior music shall be played on public sidewalks.
(q) The outdoor cafe shall not be permitted after 10:30 p.m.
§ 280-30 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-30
170:840
ARTICLE V
Environmental Protection
§ 280-31. Erosion control.
The landowner, person and/or entity performing any earth disturbance shall
utilize sufficient measures to prevent soil erosion and sedimentation of
creeks.
§ 280-32. Nuisances and hazards to public safety.
§ 280-33. Wetlands.
The Zoning Officer may require an applicant to prove that a suspect area
proposed for alteration does or does not meet the state or federal definition
of a "wetland."
A. The disturbed land area and the duration of exposure shall be kept to a
practical minimum.
B. Except for agricultural activities, any earth disturbance over 5,000
square feet of land area shall require the submission of an adequate
erosion and sedimentation control plan to the County Conservation
District.
C. See state erosion control regulations. (Note: As of 2003, in 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 102.)
A. No land owner, tenant nor lessee shall use or allow to be used any land
or structures in a way that results or threatens to result in any of the
following conditions:
(1) Transmission of communicable disease, including conditions that
may encourage the breeding of insects or rodents.
(2) A physical hazard to the public, or a physical hazard that could be
an attractive nuisance that would be accessible by children.
(3) Pollution to groundwaters or surface waters, other than as
authorized by a state or federal permit.
(4) Risks to public health and safety, such as but not limited to
explosion, fire or biological hazards.
(5) Interference with the reasonable use and enjoyment of property by
a neighboring landowner of ordinary sensitivities.
B. Additional information. If the Zoning Officer has reason to believe that
the proposed use may have difficulty complying with the standards of
this article, then the Zoning Officer may require an applicant to provide
written descriptions of proposed machinery, hazardous substances,
operations and safeguards.
§ 280-31 JUNKYARDS § 280-34
170:841
§ 280-34. Flood-prone areas and floodplains.
See Chapter 145, Floodplain Management, of the Code of the Borough of
Catasauqua.
§ 280-35. Noise.
A. No principal or accessory use, or operations or activities on its lot, shall
generate a sound level exceeding the limits established in the table
below, when measured at the specified locations:
Sound Level Limits by Receiving Land Use/District
Land Use or Zoning
District Receiving
the Noise Hours/Days
Maximum Sound
Level
At a lot line of a
residential use in a
residential district
1) 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. other than
Sundays, Christmas
Day, Thanksgiving Day,
New Year's Day, Labor
Day and Memorial Day
1) 60 dBA
2) 9:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m. plus all day
Sundays, Christmas
Day, Thanksgiving Day,
New Year's Day, Easter
Sunday, Labor Day and
Memorial Day
2) 52 dBA
At any other lot line All times and days 70 dBA
NOTE: dBA means "A" weighted decibel.
B. The maximum permissible sound level limits set forth in the above table
shall not apply to any of the following noise sources:
(1) Sound needed to alert people about an emergency.
(2) Repair or installation of utilities or construction of structures,
sidewalks or streets between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.,
except for clearly emergency repairs which are not restricted by
time.
(3) Household power tools and lawnmowers between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
(4) Animals, livestock and agricultural activities, but not exempting a
kennel.
(5) Public celebrations specifically authorized by the Borough Council
or a county, state or federal government agency or body.
§ 280-34 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-35
170:842
§ 280-36. Odors and dust.
No use shall generate odors or dust that are offensive to persons of average
sensitivities beyond the boundaries of the subject lot.
§ 280-37. Control of light and glare.
This § 280-37 shall only regulate exterior lighting that spills across lot lines
or onto public streets.
(6) Unamplified human voices.
(7) Vehicles operating on a public street, railroads and aircraft.
A. Purposes: To control outdoor lighting for safety, security, nighttime
privacy and nighttime enjoyment of residential property; to minimize
excessive outdoor lighting and control glare that can pose a danger to
motorists; to make sure lighting is properly shielded and directed.
B. Street lighting exempted. This § 280-37 shall not apply to street lighting
that is owned, financed or maintained by the Borough or the state, to
temporary emergency lighting, or to an individual porch light of a
dwelling.
C. Definitions. For the purposes of this § 280-37, the following definitions
shall apply:
DIRECTLY VISIBLE — Allowing a direct line of sight to the light source
or lamp.
FOOTCANDLE — The amount of light striking a vertical or horizontal
plane, measured in lumens per square foot. One footcandle equals one
lumen per square foot.
FULL CUTOFF LIGHT FIXTURE — A light fixture for which no light
output is emitted above 90° horizontal at any lateral angle around the
fixture.
FULLY SHIELDED LIGHT FIXTURE — A light fixture with all light
emitted from the fixture being projected below the horizontal.
D. Height of lights. No luminaire, spotlight or other light source that is
within 150 feet of a lot line of an existing primarily residential use lot
shall be placed at a height exceeding 25 feet above the average
surrounding ground level. This limitation shall not apply to lights
needed for air safety nor lights intended solely to illuminate an
architectural feature of a building, nor lighting of outdoor public
recreation facilities.
E. Diffused. All light sources, including signs, shall be properly diffused as
needed with a translucent or similar cover to prevent exposed bulbs
from being directly visible from streets, public sidewalks, dwellings or
adjacent lots.
§ 280-35 JUNKYARDS § 280-37
170:843
F. Shielding. All light sources, including signs, shall be installed and
maintained so that they are shielded around the light source and
carefully directed, aimed and placed to prevent the lighting from
creating a nuisance to persons in adjacent dwellings, and to prevent the
lighting from shining into the eyes of passing motorists.
G. Flickering. Flashing, flickering or strobe lighting are prohibited, except
for temporary nonadvertising seasonal lights between October 25 and
January 10.
H. Spillover. Exterior lighting on a lot shall not cause a spillover of light
onto a residential lot after 10:00 p.m. that exceeds 0.1 horizontal
footcandle at a residential lot line. Exterior lighting on a lot shall not
cause a spillover of light onto a street that exceeds five footcandles.
I. Gasoline sales canopies. Any canopy over gasoline pumps shall have a
maximum distance between the ground level and the underside of the
canopy of 20 feet. If the ground level is sloped, or the canopy is sloped
to deflect noise and soot away from neighboring properties, then a
portion of the canopy may have a greater height, provided that the
maximum height is 20 feet at the portion of the canopy that is closest an
adjacent street. All light fixtures under the canopy shall be recessed
into the canopy or screened by an extension around the bottom of the
canopy so that lighting elements are not visible from another lot or
street.
J. Hours of sign lighting. If an internally lit sign is within a residential
district or across the street from a residential district, the lighting shall
be turned off between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. if the use is
not open to the public during those hours. If such use is open to the
public between 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., the lighting of the sign shall
be turned off a maximum of 30 minutes after the use closes to the
public.
§ 280-37 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-37
170:844
ARTICLE VI
Off-Street Parking and Loading
§ 280-38. Required number of parking spaces. [Amended 6-1-2009
by Ord. No. 1238]
A. Overall requirements.
(1) Number of spaces. Each use that is newly developed, enlarged,
significantly changed in type or increased in number of
establishments shall provide and maintain off-street parking spaces
in accordance with the Table of Off-Street Parking Requirements
and the regulations of this article.
(2) Uses not listed. Uses not specifically listed in the Table of Off-Street
Parking Requirements shall comply with the requirements for the
most similar use listed in the Table of Off-Street Parking
Requirements, unless the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the
Zoning Officer that an alternative standard should be used for that
use.
(3) Multiple uses. Where a proposed lot contains or includes more than
one type of use, the number of parking spaces required shall be the
sum of the parking requirements for each separate use.
(4) Parking landscaping: see §§ 280-56 and 280-57 of this article.
Table of Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use
Number of Off-
Street Parking
Spaces Required
Plus 1 Off-Street
Parking Space for
Each
Residential Uses
Dwelling unit, other
than types listed
separately in this
table
2 per dwelling unit;
if desired, one space
may be in a garage
and one space in a
driveway
Home occupation Sec § 280-29.
Housing
permanently
restricted to
persons 62 years
and older, the
physically
handicapped and
their spouses
1 per dwelling/
rental unit, except
0.5 per dwelling/
rental unit if
evidence is
presented that the
non-physicallyhandicapped
persons will clearly
primarily be over 70
years old
Nonresident
employee
§ 280-38 JUNKYARDS § 280-38
170:845
Table of Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use
Number of Off-
Street Parking
Spaces Required
Plus 1 Off-Street
Parking Space for
Each
Boardinghouse 1 per rental unit or
bed for adult,
whichever is greater
Nonresident
employee
Group home See § 280-29
Adaptive Reuse 1.25 per dwelling
unit
Institutional Uses
Municipal use 0
Place of worship or
church
1 per 5 seats in
room of largest
capacity
Employee
Hospital 1 per 3 beds 1.2 employees
Nursing home 1 per 5 beds 1.2 employees
Assisted living
facility/personal
care center
1 per 4 beds 1.2 employees
Day care center 1 per 10 children,
with spaces
designed for safe
and convenient
dropoff and pickup
1.2 employees
School, primary or
secondary, and any
other school
1 per 4 students
aged 16 or older
Employee
Utility facility 1 per vehicle
routinely needed to
service facility
College, university
or trade school
1 per 1.5 students
not living on
campus who attend
class at peak times
(plus required
spaces for oncampus
housing)
Employee
§ 280-38 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-38
170:846
Table of Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use
Number of Off-
Street Parking
Spaces Required
Plus 1 Off-Street
Parking Space for
Each
Library, community
center, cultural
center or museum
1 per 5 seats (or 1
per 250 square feet
of floor area
accessible to
patrons and/or
users if seats are
not typically
provided)
Employee
Treatment center 1 per 2 residents
aged 16 years or
older plus 1 per
nonresident
intended to be
treated on-site at
peak times
Nonresident
employee
Swimming pool,
nonhousehold
1 per 50 square feet
of water surface,
other than wading
pools
Employee
Mixed uses in the
INS-2 District
2.5 spaces per
1,000 square feet of
usable floor area in
excess of 100,000
square feet
1.5 spaces per
1,000 square feet of
usable floor area
between 50,001
square feet and
100,000 square feet
1.25 spaces per
1,000 square feet of
usable floor area of
50,000 square feet
or less
If only one use in the
INS-2 District
Use requirement for
most similar use
§ 280-38 JUNKYARDS § 280-38
170:847
Table of Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use
Number of Off-
Street Parking
Spaces Required
Plus 1 Off-Street
Parking Space for
Each
Commercial Uses All commercial uses, as applicable, shall
provide additional parking or storage
needed for maximum number of vehicles
stored, displayed or based at the lot at any
point in time. These additional spaces are
not required to meet the stall size and
parking aisle width requirements of this
article.
Auto service station
or repair garage
5 per repair/service
bay and 1/4 per fuel
nozzle with such
spaces separated
from accessways to
pumps
Employee; plus any
parking needed for a
convenience store
under "retail sales"
Auto, boat,
recreational vehicle
or manufactured
home sales
1 per 15 vehicles,
boats, RVs or homes
displayed
Employee
Bed-and-breakfast
use
1 per rental unit
plus the 2 per
dwelling unit
Nonresident
employee
Bowling alley 2 per lane plus 2
per pool table
1.2 employees
Car wash Adequate waiting
and drying areas
1.2 employees
Financial institution
(includes bank)
1 per 200 square
feet of floor area
accessible to
customers, plus
"office" parking for
any administrative
offices
1.2 employees
Funeral home 1 per 5 seats in
rooms intended to
be in use at one
time for visitors,
counting both
permanent and
temporary seating
Employee
Miniature golf 1 per hole 1.2 employees
§ 280-38 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-38
170:848
Table of Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use
Number of Off-
Street Parking
Spaces Required
Plus 1 Off-Street
Parking Space for
Each
Haircutting/
hairstyling
1 per customer seat
used for haircutting,
hair styling,
manicuring or
similar work
1.2 employees
Hotel or motel 1 per rental unit
plus 1 per 4 seats in
any meeting room
(plus any required
by any restaurant)
1.2 employees
Laundromat 1 per 3 washing
machines
On-site employee
Offices or clinics,
medical/dental
5 per physician or
physician's assistant
or 3 per dentist or
chiropractor
1.2 employees
Offices, other than
above
1 per 300 square
feet of total floor
area
Personal service
use, other than
haircutting/
hairstyling
(minimum of two
per establishment)
1 per 200 square
feet of floor area
accessible to
customers
1.2 employees
Indoor recreation
(other than bowling
alley), membership
club or exercise
club
1 per 4 persons of
maximum capacity
of all facilities
1.2 employees
Outdoor recreation
(other than uses
specifically listed in
this table)
1 per 4 persons of
capacity (50% may
be on grass
overflow areas with
major driveways in
gravel)
1.2 employees
Restaurant 1 per 4 seats, or 3
spaces for a use
without customer
seats
1.2 employees
§ 280-38 JUNKYARDS § 280-38
170:849
Table of Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use
Number of Off-
Street Parking
Spaces Required
Plus 1 Off-Street
Parking Space for
Each
Retail sales (other
than types
separately listed)
1 per 200 square
feet of floor area of
rooms accessible to
customers
Retail sales of only
furniture, lumber,
carpeting, bedding
or floor covering
1 per 400 square
feet of floor area of
rooms accessible to
customers
Shopping center 1 per 200 square
feet of gross
leasable floor area
for stores within the
main building on
the lot, plus
required parking as
established in this
table for individual
uses that are not
within the main
building on the lot
Tavern 1 per 30 square feet
of total floor area
1.2 employees
Theater or
auditorium
1 per 4 seats, 1/2 of
which may be met
by convenient
parking shared with
other business uses
on the same lot that
are typically not
routinely open
beyond 9:00 p.m.
1.2 employees
Trade/hobby school 1 per 2 students on
site during peak use
1.2 employees
Veterinarian office 4 per veterinarian 1.2 employees
Mixed uses in the
INS-2 District
2.5 spaces per
1,000 square feet of
total floor area in
excess of 100,000
square feet
§ 280-38 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-38
170:850
§ 280-39. General regulations for off-street parking.
Table of Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use
Number of Off-
Street Parking
Spaces Required
Plus 1 Off-Street
Parking Space for
Each
1.5 spaces per
1,000 square feet of
usable floor area
between 50,001
square feet and
100,000 square feet
1.25 spaces per
1,000 square feet of
usable floor area of
50,000 square feet
or less
If only one use in the
INS-2 District
Use requirement for
most similar use
Industrial Uses In addition to parking or storage needed
for maximum number of vehicles stored,
displayed or based at the lot at any point
in time, which spaces are not required to
meet the stall size and aisle width
requirements of this article.
All industrial uses
(including
warehousing,
distribution and
manufacturing)
1 per 1.2
employees, based
upon the maximum
number of
employees on-site at
peak period of times
Self-storage
development
1 per 25 storage
units, plus spaces
for any outdoor
storage of vehicles
1.2 employee
A. General. Parking spaces, aisles and driveways shall be laid out to result
in safe and orderly use, and to fully take into account all of the
following: vehicular access onto and off the site, vehicular movement
within the site, loading areas, pedestrian patterns and any drivethrough
facilities. No parking area shall cause a safety hazard or
impediment to traffic off the lot.
B. Existing parking. Any parking spaces serving such preexisting
structures or uses at the time of adoption of this article shall not in the
future be reduced in number below the number required by this article.
§ 280-38 JUNKYARDS § 280-39
170:851
C. Change in use or expansion. A structure or use in existence at the
effective date of this article that expands or results in a change of use of
an existing principal building shall be required to provide all of the
required parking for the entire size and type of the resulting use, except
as follows: [Amended 6-1-2009 by Ord. No. 1238]
(1) If an existing lawful business or institutional use includes less
parking than would be required, and the applicant proves to the
Zoning Officer that there is insufficient area on the lot to meet the
required amount of parking, then that deficit of parking shall be
grandfathered for new business or institutional uses. For example,
if an existing store included three parking spaces and was required
to provide seven spaces, there is a deficit of four spaces. Therefore,
if that store is converted to an office that would need 10 spaces, the
office would need to provide a total of six spaces (10 minus the
preexisting deficit of four).
(2) If a business or institutional use expands by an aggregate total
maximum of 10% in the applicable measurement (such as building
floor area) beyond what existed at the time of adoption of this
article, and the applicant proves to the Zoning Officer that there is
insufficient area on the lot to meet the required amount of parking,
then no additional parking is required. For example, if an existing
building included 3,000 square feet, and a single minor addition of
300 square feet was proposed, then additional parking would not
be required.
D. Continuing obligation of parking and loading spaces. All required
numbers of parking spaces and off-street loading spaces shall be
available as long as the use or building which the spaces serve still
exist, and such spaces shall not be reduced in number below the
minimum required by this article. No required parking area or off-street
loading spaces shall be used for any other use (such as storage or
display of materials) that interferes with the area's availability for
parking. [Amended 6-1-2009 by Ord. No. 1238]
E. Location of parking. Required off-street parking spaces shall be on the
same lot or abutting lot with the principal use served, unless special
exception approval is granted. The only standard that must be met to
obtain the special exception approval is for the applicant to prove to the
satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board that a method of providing the
spaces is guaranteed to be available during all of the years the use is in
operation within 300 feet walking distance from the entrance of the
principal use being served. This distance may be increased to 400 feet
for employee parking. A written and signed lease shall be provided. The
Zoning Hearing Board may require that the use be approved for period
of time consistent with the lease of the parking, and that a renewal of
the permit shall only be approved if the parking lease is renewed.
[Amended 6-1-2009 by Ord. No. 1238]
F. Flexibility in parking. [Amended 6-1-2009 by Ord. No. 1238]
§ 280-39 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-39
170:852
§ 280-40. Design standards for off-street parking.
(1) As a special exception, an applicant may prove to the satisfaction of
the Zoning Hearing Board that the minimum amount of off-street
parking should be modified for a specific application because of one
or more of the following characteristics:
(a) The applicant proves that parking will be shared with another
use that will reduce the total amount of parking needed
because the uses have different peak times of parking need,
and that there is a legally guaranteed method to make sure
that the parking will continue to be available during all of the
years that the use is in operation; or
(b) The applicant proves that the parking demand for a particular
use is unusually low because of some unusual and peculiar
characteristic of the use.
(2) The document titled "Shared Parking, Second Edition," by the
Urban Land Institute, 2005, or the most recent edition thereof,
shall be utilized when computing shared parking spaces.
A. General requirements.
(1) Backing onto a street. No parking area shall be designed to require
or encourage parked vehicles to back into a public street in order
to leave a parking space, except for a single-family dwelling with its
access onto a local street or parking court. Parking spaces may
back onto an alley.
(2) Every required parking space shall be designed so that each motor
vehicle may proceed to and from the parking space provided for it
without requiring the moving of any other vehicle, except for
spaces serving a single-family, twin or townhouse dwelling.
(3) Parking areas shall not be within a required buffer yard or street
right-of-way.
(4) Separation from street. Except for parking spaces immediately in
front of individual dwellings, all areas for off-street parking, offstreet
loading and unloading and the storage or movement of motor
vehicles shall be physically separated from the street by a
continuous grass or landscaped planting strip, except for necessary
and approved vehicle entrances and exits to the lot.
(5) Stacking and obstructions. Each lot shall provide adequate area
upon the lot to prevent backup of vehicles on a public street while
awaiting entry to the lot, or while waiting for service at a drivethrough
facility.
B. Size and marking of parking spaces.
§ 280-39 JUNKYARDS § 280-40
170:853
(1) Each parking space shall be a rectangle with a minimum width of
nine feet and a minimum length of 18 feet, except the minimum
length shall be 22 feet for parallel parking.
(2) For handicapped spaces, see § 280-40G below.
(3) All spaces shall be marked to indicate their location, except those
of a single-family dwelling.
C. Aisles.
(1) Each aisle providing for one-way traffic to access parking stalls
shall have the following minimum width:
Angle of Parking
(degrees)
Minimum Aisle Width
(feet)
Parallel or 30° 12
45° 14
60° 18
90° 20
(2) Each aisle providing access to stalls for two-way traffic shall be a
minimum of 24 feet in width, except a width of 20 feet may be
allowed for parking areas with spaces that are parallel or involve
an angle of parking of 45° or less.
D. Driveways.
(1) Width of Driveway
Width of Driveway at Entrance
onto a Public Street, at the Edge
of the Cartway1 1-Way Use 2-Way Use
Minimum 12 feet1 25 feet1
Maximum 20 feet1 30 feet1
NOTE:
1 Unless a different standard is required by PennDOT for an
entrance to a state road, or the applicant proves to the satisfaction
of the Zoning Officer that a wider width is needed for tractortrailer
trucks.
(2) Drainage. Adequate provisions shall be made to maintain
uninterrupted parallel drainage along a public street at the point of
driveway entry. The Borough may require an applicant to install an
appropriate type and size of pipe at a driveway crossing.
E. Paving, grading and drainage.
§ 280-40 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-40
170:854
(1) Parking and loading facilities and including driveways shall be
graded and adequately drained to prevent erosion or excessive
water flow across streets or adjoining properties.
(2) Except for landscaped areas, all portions of required parking,
loading facilities and driveways shall be surfaced with asphalt,
concrete, paving block or other materials preapproved by the
Borough (such as acceptable porous paving material).
F. Lighting of parking areas: see "light and glare control" in Article V.
G. Handicapped parking.
(1) Number of spaces. Any lot including four or more off-street parking
spaces shall include a minimum of one handicapped space. The
following number of handicapped spaces shall be provided, unless
a revised regulation is officially established under the federal
Americans with Disabilities Act:
Total Number of
Parking Spaces on the
Lot
Required Minimum Number/
Percent
of Handicapped Parking Spaces
4 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 2% of required number of spaces
1,001 or more 20 plus 1% of required number of
spaces over 1,000
(2) Location. Handicapped parking spaces shall be located where they
would result in the shortest reasonable accessible distance to a
handicapped accessible building entrance. Curb cuts shall be
provided as needed to provide access from the handicapped
spaces.
(3) Minimum size. Each required handicapped parking space shall be
eight feet by 18 feet. In addition, each space shall be adjacent to a
five-foot-wide access aisle. Such access aisle may be shared by two
handicapped spaces by being placed between them. However, one
out of every eight required handicapped parking spaces shall have
an adjacent access aisle of eight feet width instead of five feet.
§ 280-40 JUNKYARDS § 280-40
170:855
§ 280-41. Off-street loading.
(4) Slope. Handicapped parking spaces shall be located in areas of less
than 6% slope in any direction.
(5) Marking. All required handicapped spaces shall be well-marked by
clearly visible signs or pavement markings. Blue paint is
recommended.
(6) Paving. Handicapped parking spaces and adjacent areas needed to
access them with a wheelchair shall be covered with a smooth
surface that is usable with a wheelchair.
A. Each use shall provide off-street loading facilities, which meet the
requirements of this section, sufficient to accommodate the maximum
demand generated by the use and the maximum size vehicle that will
service the use, in a manner that will not routinely obstruct traffic on a
public street. If a reasonable alternative does not exist, traffic may be
obstructed for occasional loading and unloading along an alley.
B. At the time of review under this article, the applicant shall provide
evidence to the Zoning Officer showing that the use will have sufficient
numbers and sizes of loading facilities. The Planning Commission and/
or Borough Council may provide advice to the Zoning Officer on this
matter as part of any plan review by such boards. For the purposes of
this section, the words "loading" and "unloading" are used
interchangeably.
C. Each space and the needed maneuvering room shall not intrude into
approved buffer areas and landscaped areas.
D. Fire lanes. Fire lanes shall be provided where required by state or
federal regulations or other local ordinances. The specific locations of
these lanes are subject to review by Borough fire officials.
§ 280-40 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-41
170:856
ARTICLE VII
Signs
§ 280-42. Purpose and applicability.
§ 280-43. Nonconforming signs.
§ 280-44. Miscellaneous signs not requiring permits.
A. Purposes. This article is intended to promote and maintain overall
community aesthetic quality; establish reasonable time, place and
manner of regulations for the exercise of free speech, without
regulating content; promote traffic safety by avoiding distractions and
sight distance obstructions; and protect property values and ensure
compatibility with the character of neighboring uses.
B. Permit required. A zoning permit shall be required for all signs except
for signs meeting the requirements of § 280-44 and nonilluminated
window signs constructed of paper, posterboard or similar materials
and that are not of a permanent nature. Only types, sizes and heights of
signs that are specifically permitted by this article within the applicable
district shall be allowed.
C. Changes on signs. Any lawfully existing sign (including nonconforming
signs) may be painted or repaired or changed in logo or message
without a new permit under this article provided that the changes do
not increase the sign area or otherwise result in noncompliance or an
increased nonconformity with this article.
A. Signs legally existing at the time of enactment of this article and which
do not conform to the requirements of the chapter shall be considered
nonconforming signs. A nonconforming sign shall not be expanded or
extended in any manner that would make it more nonconforming.
B. After a permit has been issued, an existing lawful nonconforming sign
may be replaced with a new sign, provided the new sign is not more
nonconforming in any manner than the previous sign.
A. The following signs shall be permitted by right within all zoning
districts within the following regulations, and shall not be required to
have a permit under this article:
§ 280-42 JUNKYARDS § 280-44
170:857
Type and
Definition of
Signs Not
Requiring
Permits
Maximum
Number
of Signs
per Lot
Maximum
Sign Area
per Sign1
Other than a
Nonresidential
Lot
(square
feet)
Maximum
Sign Area
per Sign1 on
a
Nonresidential
Lot2
(square
feet)
Other
Requirements
Christmas tree
sign
(advertises the
seasonal sale
of Christmas
trees)
2 8 20 Shall only be
posted during
seasons when
such products
are actively
offered for
sale.
Charitable
event sign
(advertises a
special event
held a
maximum of 9
days in any
calendar year
that primarily
is held to
benefit an
established
tax-exempt
nonprofit
organization)
2 4 30 Shall be
placed a
maximum of
14 days prior
to event and
removed a
maximum of
4 days after
event.
§ 280-44 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-44
170:858
Type and
Definition of
Signs Not
Requiring
Permits
Maximum
Number
of Signs
per Lot
Maximum
Sign Area
per Sign1
Other than a
Nonresidential
Lot
(square
feet)
Maximum
Sign Area
per Sign1 on
a
Nonresidential
Lot2
(square
feet)
Other
Requirements
Contractor's
sign
(advertises a
building
tradesperson,
engineer or
architect who
is actively
conducting
significant
work on a
particular lot
that is not
such person's
place of
business)
1 per
company
working
on the site
8 20 Shall only be
permitted
while such
work is
actively and
clearly
underway
and a
maximum of
4 days
afterward.
Such signs
shall not be
placed on the
lot for more
than one year.
Shall not be
illuminated.
§ 280-44 JUNKYARDS § 280-44
170:859
Type and
Definition of
Signs Not
Requiring
Permits
Maximum
Number
of Signs
per Lot
Maximum
Sign Area
per Sign1
Other than a
Nonresidential
Lot
(square
feet)
Maximum
Sign Area
per Sign1 on
a
Nonresidential
Lot2
(square
feet)
Other
Requirements
Directional
sign (provides
information
indicating
traffic
direction,
entry or exit,
loading or
service area,
directions to
apartment
numbers or
parking courts
in a
development,
fire lanes,
parking or
closely similar
information
regarding the
same lot as
the sign is on,
and that does
not include
advertising)
No
maximum
2, in addition
to signs
painted on
pavement
2, in addition
to signs
painted on
pavement
Directional
signs within a
residential
development
shall not be
illuminated.
§ 280-44 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-44
170:860
Type and
Definition of
Signs Not
Requiring
Permits
Maximum
Number
of Signs
per Lot
Maximum
Sign Area
per Sign1
Other than a
Nonresidential
Lot
(square
feet)
Maximum
Sign Area
per Sign1 on
a
Nonresidential
Lot2
(square
feet)
Other
Requirements
Flag (a banner
or pennant
made of fabric
or materials
with a similar
appearance
that is hung
from a pole in
such a way to
flow in the
wind and that
includes the
word "Open"
or some type
of advertising
message)
1 Not
permitted
20 Governmental
flags and
flags without
an
advertising
message are
not regulated
by this
article. Also,
a corporate
flag may be
displayed on
a flag pole.
Garage sale
sign
(advertises an
occasional
garage sale/
porch sale or
auction)
2 per
event
4 per sign 4 per sign Shall be
placed a
maximum of
24 hours
before
permitted
garage sale
or auction
begins, and
be removed
maximum of
24 hours
after event
ends.
§ 280-44 JUNKYARDS § 280-44
170:861
Type and
Definition of
Signs Not
Requiring
Permits
Maximum
Number
of Signs
per Lot
Maximum
Sign Area
per Sign1
Other than a
Nonresidential
Lot
(square
feet)
Maximum
Sign Area
per Sign1 on
a
Nonresidential
Lot2
(square
feet)
Other
Requirements
Home
occupation
sign
(advertises a
permitted
home
occupation)
1 2 2 Shall not be
illuminated if
within a
residential
district. May
be
freestanding,
attached flat
on a building
wall or within
a window.
Maximum
total height of
6 feet.
Identification
sign (only
identifies the
name and/or
occupation of
the resident
and/or the
name, street
address and/
or use of a lot,
but that does
not include
other
advertising)
1 1 4 Maximum
height of 6
feet if
freestanding.
Open house
sign
(advertises the
temporary and
periodic open
house of a
property for
sale or rent)
2 per
event
4 4 Shall be
placed
maximum of
3 days before
open house
begins, and
be removed
maximum of
24 hours
after open
house ends.
§ 280-44 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-44
170:862
Type and
Definition of
Signs Not
Requiring
Permits
Maximum
Number
of Signs
per Lot
Maximum
Sign Area
per Sign1
Other than a
Nonresidential
Lot
(square
feet)
Maximum
Sign Area
per Sign1 on
a
Nonresidential
Lot2
(square
feet)
Other
Requirements
Political sign
(advertises a
person or
party seeking
political office
or a political
cause or
opinion on a
referendum or
matter of
political
concern)
Maximum
of 2 signs
per
candidate
or issue
6 per sign Maximum
total of 60
Shall be
placed a
maximum of
45 days prior
to any
election or
scheduled
vote or
referendum
to which the
sign may
relate, and
removed a
maximum of
7 days after
such election,
vote or
referendum.
Persons
posting
political signs
shall maintain
a written list
of locations of
such signs,
unless
posting signs
on their own
property.
Political signs
shall not be
placed on
property
without the
prior consent
of the owner.
If a political
sign does not
meet these
§ 280-44 JUNKYARDS § 280-44
170:863
Type and
Definition of
Signs Not
Requiring
Permits
Maximum
Number
of Signs
per Lot
Maximum
Sign Area
per Sign1
Other than a
Nonresidential
Lot
(square
feet)
Maximum
Sign Area
per Sign1 on
a
Nonresidential
Lot2
(square
feet)
Other
Requirements
requirements,
then it shall
be regulated
as an offpremises
sign.
Public
services sign
(advertises the
availability of
restrooms,
telephone or
other similar
public
convenience)
No
maximum
2 2
Real estate
sign
(advertises the
availability of
property on
which the sign
is located for
sale, rent or
lease)
1 per
street that
the lot
abuts
6 20 Shall only be
placed on the
property
while it is
actively for
sale, lease or
rent, and
shall be
removed a
maximum of
7 days after
settlement or
start of lease.
§ 280-44 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-44
170:864
Type and
Definition of
Signs Not
Requiring
Permits
Maximum
Number
of Signs
per Lot
Maximum
Sign Area
per Sign1
Other than a
Nonresidential
Lot
(square
feet)
Maximum
Sign Area
per Sign1 on
a
Nonresidential
Lot2
(square
feet)
Other
Requirements
Service
organization/
place of
worship sign
(an offpremises
sign
stating name
of a
recognized
incorporated
service
organization
or place of
worship and
that states the
place and
times of
meetings or
services and/
or an arrow
directing
persons to
such location)
1 2 2 Maximum of
four such
signs within
the Borough
for each such
organization
or place of
worship.
Special sale
signs
(temporary
banners, flags
and other
signs that
advertise a
special sales
event or grand
opening at a
lawful
principal
commercial
business)
2 per lot Not
permitted
Total of 40
square feet
for all such
banners,
flags and
other
temporary
signs
Shall be
displayed a
maximum of
7 days per
event, with a
maximum of
2 events per
lot per year.
Such signs
shall not
flash, be
internally
illuminated,
or obstruct
safe sight
distances.
§ 280-44 JUNKYARDS § 280-44
170:865
Type and
Definition of
Signs Not
Requiring
Permits
Maximum
Number
of Signs
per Lot
Maximum
Sign Area
per Sign1
Other than a
Nonresidential
Lot
(square
feet)
Maximum
Sign Area
per Sign1 on
a
Nonresidential
Lot2
(square
feet)
Other
Requirements
Time and
temperature
sign (with a
sole purpose
to announce
the current
time and
temperature
and any
nonprofit
public service
messages)
1 Not
permitted
30
Trespassing
sign
(indicating
that a road is
private, that
trespassing is
prohibited on
a lot, or
controlling
certain
activities such
as hunting and
fishing on the
lot)
No
maximum
2 2
NOTES:
1 Maximum sign areas are for each of two sides of each permitted sign,
measured in square feet.
2 A "nonresidential lot" shall be considered a lot occupied by a lawful
principal commercial, industrial or institutional use.
B. In addition, the following types of signs are not regulated by this article:
(1) Historic sign: A sign that memorializes an important historic place,
event or person and that is specifically authorized by the Borough
or a county, state or federal agency.
§ 280-44 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-44
170:866
§ 280-45. Freestanding, wall and window signs.
(2) Holiday decorations: Decorations that commemorate a holiday
recognized by the Borough, county, state or federal government
and that does not include advertising.
(3) Not-readable sign: A sign that is not readable from any public
street or any exterior lot line.
(4) Official sign: A sign erected by the state, county, Borough or other
legally constituted governmental body, or specifically authorized by
Borough ordinance or resolution, and which exists for public
purposes.
(5) Required sign: A sign that only includes information required to be
posted outdoors by a government agency or the Borough.
(6) Right-of-way sign: A sign posted within the existing right-of-way of
a public street and officially authorized by the Borough or
PennDOT.
A. The following signs are permitted within the specified zoning districts,
in compliance within the following regulations. In addition, exempt
signs and temporary signs are permitted in all districts by other
provisions of this article. See definitions of the types of signs in
§ 280-52.
§ 280-44 JUNKYARDS § 280-45
170:867
Zoning
District or
Type of Use
Maximum
Total
Height of
Freestanding
Signs
Maximum
Area of
Wall Signs
- Limited
to a
Maximum
of 2
Building
Sides
Maximum
Area of
Window
Signs
Maximum
Area and
Number of
Freestanding
Signs4
Residential or
CN Districts,
with these
signs limited to
allowed
principal
nonresidential
uses.
Other types of
signs are
addressed in
§ 280-44,
including home
occupation
signs.
New signs in
these districts
shall not be
internally
illuminated.
6 feet 20 square
feet on each
side of two
sides of a
principal
building
May be used
in place of a
wall sign
with the
same
restrictions
One sign on
each street
the lot abuts,
each with a
maximum
sign area of
20 square
feet
DC District1 15 feet 50 square
feet on each
of 2 sides of
a principal
building1
Temporary
nonilluminated
window
signs are
not
regulated.
Other
window
signs are
regulated
under wall
signs.
One sign per
street that
the lot abuts,
each with a
maximum
area of 15
square feet2,
3
§ 280-45 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-45
170:868
Zoning
District or
Type of Use
Maximum
Total
Height of
Freestanding
Signs
Maximum
Area of
Wall Signs
- Limited
to a
Maximum
of 2
Building
Sides
Maximum
Area of
Window
Signs
Maximum
Area and
Number of
Freestanding
Signs4
All districts
other than
Residential or
DC Districts
15 feet 10% of the
vertical area
of the
building
side on
which the
signs are
attached, up
to a
maximum
total of 200
square feet
Temporary
nonilluminated
window
signs are
not
regulated.
Other
window
signs are
regulated as
wall signs.
One sign per
street that
the lot abuts,
each with a
maximum
area of 24
square feet2,
3
NOTES:
1 In the DC and TC Districts, the following additional signs shall be
allowed:
1. A maximum of one projecting sign shall be permitted per lot,
provided:
a) Such sign has a minimum clearance over the sidewalk of nine
feet (unless a differing standard is established by the Building
Code);
b) The sign face is constructed from materials with an appearance
similar to wood, in addition to any metal fasteners;
c) Such sign has a maximum sign area on each of two sides of eight
square feet;
d) Such sign is securely attached to the building;
e) The sign may project a maximum of four feet from the wall of
the building. If the building is setback less than four feet from
the right-of-way, then the sign may project into the right-of-way,
provided the four-foot projection is still met; and
f) If the sign projects over the public right-of-way, the Borough
may require a hold harmless agreement that protects the
Borough from liability.
2. A maximum of one sidewalk sign (or "sandwich board sign") shall
be permitted per lot, provided:
§ 280-45 JUNKYARDS § 280-45
170:869
NOTES:
a) Such sign has a maximum sign area of eight square feet on
each of two sides and a maximum width of three feet, and has a
maximum height of four feet;
b) Such sign is taken indoors during all hours when the business is
not open to the public;
c) Such sign is not in a location that would interfere with
pedestrian traffic, emergency access or parking spaces and
retains a four-foot-wide minimum clear path for pedestrians, and
such sign is kept as close to the building as is feasible;
d) Such sign is attractive, well-maintained and durably
constructed; and
e) Such sign may be placed within the right-of-way if there is no
location available that would be outside of the right-of-way.
2 If the permitted freestanding sign area is not used, such sign area
may be added to the permitted wall sign area. An auto service station
may also include an additional 24 square feet of sign area to display
fuel prices.
3 If a lot includes three or more distinct business establishments or
has more than 100 feet of frontage along a street, then along a single
street, the maximum freestanding sign area may be increased to 50
square feet.
4 See sign bonus in § 280-45E below. See setbacks for freestanding
signs in § 280-47A.
B. Height of wall signs. The maximum height of wall signs shall be equal to
the top of the roof along the wall to which they are attached. If a
nonstructural extension is added to a roof, the maximum height of the
wall sign shall be the top of the structural roof.
C. Portable signs (including "signs on mobile stands") and other temporary
signs.
(1) Purpose. These standards recognize portable signs as a particular
type of sign that has the characteristics of a temporary sign but
that has been inappropriately used as a permanent sign. This
section is based on the policy that if a use desires to regularly
display a sign for regularly changing messages, that it erect a
permanent sign within all of the requirements of this article.
(2) Definition of a "portable sign": a freestanding sign that is attached
to a chassis or legs that allows it to be towed or carried from one
location to another and that is not permanently attached to the
ground.
(3) Portable signs are prohibited in all districts, except as a temporary
charitable event sign complying with § 280-44.
§ 280-45 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-45
170:870
§ 280-46. Abandoned or outdated signs.
§ 280-47. Location of signs.
The following shall regulate the location of signs:
D. Signs on freestanding walls. A freestanding sign may be attached to a
decorative masonry or stone wall with a maximum height of five feet
and a maximum length of 10 feet, without being regulated by the wall
setback regulations of this chapter and with the wall itself not counting
towards the maximum sign area. Sight distance requirements shall still
be met.
E. Sign area bonus. In a commercial district, the maximum sign area for a
freestanding sign may be increased by 25% beyond the size that would
otherwise be allowed if the sign is not internally illuminated, and if the
base of the sign is surrounded by landscaping.
A. Signs advertising a use no longer in existence shall be removed within
90 days of the cessation of such use. If the owner of a property does not
remove such sign within 30 days after receiving a written notice from
the Zoning Officer, the sign may be removed by the Borough at the
expense of the property owner.
B. These time limits shall not apply to a sign intended to be reused with a
new sign face serving a building that is clearly temporarily vacant and
being offered to new tenants or for purchase.
A. Setbacks. A sign shall not intrude into or project over an existing street
right-of-way, unless specifically authorized by a permit from the
Borough or PennDOT. Projecting signs meeting the requirements for
such signs and official signs shall be allowed within the right-of-way.
The Borough Police Department, Zoning Officer or his/her designee or
any other person shall have the authority to remove and dispose of
unauthorized signs within the street right-of-way or that are attached to
a utility pole or tree. Borough Council may approve a temporary banner
over a street cartway to advertise a charitable or Borough-sponsored
event.
B. Sight clearance. No sign shall be so located that it interferes with the
sight clearance requirements of § 280-56C.
C. Off-premises. No signs except permitted off-premises, official, political
or public service signs shall be erected on a property to which it does
not relate.
D. Permission of owner. No sign shall be posted on any property or sign
pole or public utility pole, unless permission has been received from the
owner.
§ 280-45 JUNKYARDS § 280-48
170:871
§ 280-48. Illumination of signs.
See "light and glare control" in Article V (including § 280-37H) and
provisions in § 280-45A within residential districts.
§ 280-49. Vehicles functioning as signs.
Any vehicle or trailer displaying a sign area greater than 20 square feet
that is being used in such a manner that the carrying of sign(s) no longer
is incidental to the primary purpose of the vehicle or trailer but becomes
a primary purpose in itself shall be considered a freestanding sign and
shall be subject to all of the requirements for freestanding signs. This shall
include, but not be limited to, a vehicle that is parked in the front yard of a
business within clear view of a street and that is not moved to another lot at
least once a week.
§ 280-50. Prohibited signs.
A. Any moving object used to attract attention to a commercial use shall be
prohibited. Any banner or flag that does not meet the requirements of
this article shall be prohibited.
B. Flashing, blinking, twinkling, animated or moving signs of any type
shall be prohibited. A sign may electronically change from one message
to another message provided the message does not flash. In addition,
flashing lights visible from a street shall not be used to attract attention
to a business. This restriction specifically includes window signs, but
does not prohibit seasonal Christmas lighting or displays that comply
with § 280-44.
C. Signs which emit smoke, visible vapors or particles, sound or odor shall
be prohibited.
D. Signs are prohibited which contain information that states that a lot
may be used for any purpose not permitted under the applicable
provisions of this chapter.
E. Signs shall be prohibited that are of such character, form, shape or
color that they imitate or resemble any official traffic sign, signal or
device or that have any characteristics which are likely to confuse or
distract the operator of a motor vehicle on a public street (such as
prominent use of the words "Danger").
F. Signs or displays visible from a lot line that include words or images
that are obscene or pornographic shall be prohibited.
G. Balloons of greater than 40 cubic feet that are tethered to the ground or
a structure for periods of 12 hours shall be prohibited.
H. Floodlights and outdoor lasers used for advertising purposes shall be
prohibited.
§ 280-48 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-51
170:872
§ 280-51. Construction of signs.
Every sign (except allowed temporary signs) shall be constructed of durable
materials. Every sign shall be kept in good condition and repair. The Zoning
Officer shall by written notice require a property owner or lessee to repair
or remove a damaged, dilapidated or unsafe sign within a specified period of
time. If such order is not complied with, the Borough may repair or remove
such sign at the expense of such owner or lessee.
§ 280-52. Measurement and major types of signs.
A. Sign definitions. The following definitions shall be used in determining
whether signs meet the measurement and type requirements of this
article:
BUILDING FACE — The vertical area of a particular side of a building,
but not including the area of any slanted roof.
FREESTANDING SIGN — See Article II.
HEIGHT OF SIGN — The vertical distance measured from the average
ground level surrounding a sign to the highest point of the sign and
its supporting structure. Religious symbols shall not be restricted by
the sign heights of this article when extending above the roofline or
attached to a tower or spire of a place of worship.
ILLUMINATED SIGN, INTERNALLY — A sign illuminated by light from
within the sign rather than a source adjacent to or outside of the sign. A
sign within a display case with lights only shining onto the front of the
sign shall be considered to be externally illuminated.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — See Article II.
SIGN — See Article II.
WALL SIGN — A sign primarily supported by or painted on a wall of a
building and which does not project more than two feet from such wall.
A wall sign may project up to three feet if it is attached to an awning.
WINDOW SIGN — A sign which is readily visible and can be at least
partially read from an exterior lot line and which is attached to a
window or transparent door or that can be read through a window or
transparent door.
B. Measurement of sign area.
(1) Sign area shall include all lettering, wording and accompanying
designs and symbols, together with related background areas on
which they are displayed. One freestanding sign may include
several signs that are all attached to one structure, with the total
sign area being the area of a common geometric form that could
encompass all signs.
(2) The sign area shall not include any structurally supporting
framework, bracing, or supports if such area does not include any
§ 280-51 JUNKYARDS § 280-52
170:873
§ 280-53. Off-premises signs (including billboards).
display, lettering or sign and if such area is clearly incidental to the
sign area itself.
(3) Where the sign consists of individual letters or symbols attached to
or painted directly on a building or window, other than an
illuminated background that is a part of the sign, the sign area shall
be the smallest rectangle that includes all of the letters and
symbols.
(4) The maximum sign area shall be for each of two sides of a sign,
provided that only one side of a sign is readable from any location.
(5) Unless otherwise specified, all square footages in regards to signs
are maximum sizes.
A. Purposes. Off-premises signs are controlled by this article for the
following purposes: to ensure that a physical environment is maintained
that is attractive to desirable types of development; to prevent visual
pollution in the Borough and protect property values, especially in
consideration of the fact that most commercial areas of the Borough are
within close proximity to existing residences; to prevent glare on
adjacent property and streets; to avoid the creation of additional visual
distractions to motorists, especially along busy arterial streets that
involve complex turning movements and numerous traffic hazards; to
recognize the numerous alternative forms of free speech available in
the Borough, including existing nonconforming off-premises signs and
on-premises signs; to carry out the purposes listed in § 280-42.
B. Nonconforming off-premises signs. This section is not intended to
require the removal of an existing lawfully placed off-premises sign that
is in structurally sound condition.
C. PennDOT sign. Signs erected and maintained by PennDOT are
permitted by right in all districts.
D. Permitted off-premises signs. Except for signs allowed by § 280-44, an
off-premises sign is only permitted if it meets the following
requirements:
(1) District. An off-premises sign is only permitted in the A District.
(2) Location. An off-premises sign shall be set back a minimum of 25
feet from all lot lines and street rights-of-way.
(3) Maximum sign area: 300 square feet.
(4) Spacing. Any off-premises sign shall be separated by a minimum of
1,000 feet from any other off-premises sign, including signs on
either side of a street and including existing signs in other
municipalities. No lot shall include more than one off-premises
sign.
§ 280-52 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-53
170:874
(5) Maximum height: 35 feet above the elevation of the adjacent street
or highway, measured at the street or highway center line.
(6) Attached. No off-premises sign or sign face shall be attached in any
way to any other off-premises sign, except that a sign may have two
sign faces of 300 square feet each if they are placed approximately
back-to-back.
(7) Control of lighting and glare: see standards in § 280-37.
(8) Residences. No off-premises sign greater than 30 square feet in
sign area shall be located within 200 feet from a lot line of an
existing dwelling.
(9) Condition. The sign shall be maintained in a good and safe
condition. The area around the sign shall be kept free of debris.
§ 280-53 JUNKYARDS § 280-53
170:875

ARTICLE VIII
General Regulations
§ 280-54. Frontage onto improved streets; number of uses or
buildings; minimum size of dwellings.
A. Frontage required onto improved street.
(1) Each proposed new lot, principal nonresidential building and
apartment building shall directly abuts one of the following:
(a) A public street, not including an "alley";
(b) A street that will be dedicated to the Borough as part of the
subdivision plan which created such lot; or
(c) A private street which meets all of the requirements of a public
street.
(2) In the case of townhouses, or apartments, each dwelling unit may
be served with vehicle access onto a private parking court which
then has access onto a street meeting Borough standards, provided
there is an acceptable system to ensure that the parking court will
be properly maintained.
B. Number of principal uses and principal buildings per lot.
(1) A lot in a commercial or industrial district may include more than
one permitted principal use per lot and/or more than one permitted
principal building per lot, provided that every requirement is met
for each use and each building. If differing dimensional
requirements apply for different uses on the lot, then the most
restrictive requirement shall apply.
(a) For example, if Use 1 requires a one-acre lot area and Use 2 on
the same lot requires a two-acre lot area, then the lot shall
have a minimum lot area of two acres.
(b) The applicant shall submit a site plan that demonstrates that
each structure would meet the requirements of this article.
(c) The lot may include a condominium form of ownership of
individual buildings, with a legally binding property owners
association, if the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the
Zoning Officer, based upon review by the Borough Solicitor,
that there will be appropriate legal mechanisms in place and
compliance with applicable state law.
(2) A lot within a residential district shall not include more than one
principal use and shall not include more than one principal building
unless specifically permitted by this article.
§ 280-54 JUNKYARDS § 280-54
170:877
§ 280-55. Height exceptions.
The maximum structure height specified for each district shall not apply
to antenna that meet the requirements of this article, water towers, clock
or bell towers, steeples of places of worship, electrical transmission lines,
elevator shafts, windmills, skylights, chimneys, mechanical equipment or
other appurtenances usually required to be and customarily placed above
the roof level and not intended for human occupancy. See also definition of
"height" in § 280-19.
§ 280-56. Special lot and yard requirements, sight distance and
buffer yards.
(a) A manufactured/mobile home park, condominium residential
development or apartment development may include more
than one principal building per lot, provided all other
requirements of this chapter are met.
(b) A condominium form of ownership of individual dwelling units,
with a legally binding owners' association, may be established
if the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer,
based upon review by the Borough Solicitor, that there will be
appropriate legal mechanisms in place and compliance with
applicable state law.
C. Minimum size of dwellings. Each dwelling unit shall include a minimum
of 500 square feet of enclosed habitable, indoor, heated floor area, and
which shall be primarily above the level of the ground. This minimum
floor area shall be increased to 800 square feet if there are three or
more bedrooms.
A. In general.
(1) No lot, structure or use shall be created or developed in such a way
that it would result in another lot, building or use not being able to
meet the requirements of this article. This includes, but is not
limited to, setback areas, nonimpervious areas and off-street
parking areas.
(2) Emergency access. All principal buildings shall have adequate
provisions for access by emergency vehicles and fire ladders in
order to reach all sides of a building.
B. Exceptions to minimum lot areas, lot widths and yards.
(1) Corner lots. For a corner lot, the yard depth abutting each public
street shall be equal to the minimum depth of the front yard, unless
a larger width is provided for a side yard.
(2) Projections into required yards.
§ 280-54 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-56
170:878
(a) Cornices, eaves, sills or other similar architectural features,
exterior stairways, fire escapes or other required means of
egress, rain leads, chimneys, ground-mounted doors for
basement access, window awnings, chaise for heating pipes or
other similar structures that do not include space usable by
persons may extend or project into a required yard not more
than three feet, except as may be required within a drainage or
utility easement.
(b) Steps, stoops, fire escapes, handicapped ramps, and landings
necessary to provide entrance to a building may be located
within a required setback area. Stoops, fire escapes and
handicapped ramps serving an existing building may extend
into a street right-of-way where necessary, if granted written
approval by the Zoning Officer.
(c) See also exceptions for decks and accessory buildings in the
notes of § 280-26A.
(3) Front yard setback exception. In any district within a block
containing a lot proposed for construction or expansion of a
building, where 50% or more of the improved lots on such block
frontage currently have front yards of less depth than is currently
required for that district, and where the clear majority of such lots
are already developed, the average of such existing front setbacks
shall establish the minimum front yard depth for the remainder of
the frontage.
C. Sight clearance at intersections.
(1) Clear sight triangles shall be provided within which no obstruction
to vision shall be permitted between a height of two to 10 feet
above the center-line grade of each street intersection. Such clear
sight triangles shall be established from the point intersection of
the center lines of the intersecting streets for a distance of 75 feet
where both streets are local streets, 100 feet where one or both
streets are collector streets, and 150 feet where one or both streets
are major streets.
(2) In § 280-19, see the definition of "alley," which is distinguished from
a "street."
(3) Where a street intersects with an alley, a clear sight triangle shall
be established with one leg of the triangle 15 feet long along the
edge of the right-of-way of the street and one leg of the triangle 10
feet long along the center line of the alley, with the two legs
connected by a third longer leg.
(4) Where two alleys intersect, a clear sight triangle shall be
established with each leg of the triangle 10 feet long along the
center line of each alley, and with the two legs connected by a third
longer leg.
§ 280-56 JUNKYARDS § 280-56
170:879
(5) Within these clear sight triangles, no new sight obstruction shall be
allowed that obstructs the views of motorists of oncoming vehicle
and pedestrian traffic at a height between three and 10 feet in
elevation. To the maximum extent feasible, this clear sight triangle
shall also be cleared of existing obstructions, such as by trimming
vegetation.
D. Buffer yards. Buffer yards and screening complying with the following
standards shall be required under the following situations. These buffer
yard standards shall supersede the buffer planting requirements of the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.234
(1) Buffer yard width, when required. Buffer yards shall have a
minimum width of 20 feet, except 10 feet in the DC District and 30
feet in the O, IO and A Districts. Buffer yards shall be required in
the following situations, and where otherwise required by this
chapter:
Buffer Yard to be Provided by
the Following
When the Use Providing the
Screening and Buffer Is
Along side and rear lot lines of
any new:
Abutting or across an alley from
an existing dwelling within a
residential district, and visible
from such dwelling
(1) Principal commercial or
industrial use;
(2) Area of 10 or more new
off-street parking spaces;
(3) An outdoor industrial
storage area; or
(4) An area routinely used for
the overnight parking of
two or more tractor-trailer
trucks.
Along the street right-of-way
line or a lot line of any new:
Abutting and visible from a
public street
(1) Outdoor industrial storage
area; or
(2) Area routinely used for the
overnight parking of or
more tractor-trailer trucks.
(2) Location of buffer yards.
(a) The buffer yard shall be measured from the district boundary
line, street right-of-way line or lot line, whichever is applicable.
234. Editor's Note: See Ch. 235, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 280-56 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-56
170:880
(b) Plants needed for the visual screen shall not be placed within
an existing street right-of-way. However, deciduous trees may
be permitted by the Borough to be placed within a street rightof-
way.
(c) The buffer yard may include areas within a required front, side
or rear yard, or a paved area setback area provided the larger
yard requirement shall apply in case of overlap.
(3) Characteristics of buffer yards.
(a) The buffer yard shall be a landscaped area free of structures,
dumpsters, commercial or industrial storage or display,
manufacturing or processing activity, materials, loading and
unloading areas or vehicle parking or display. Buffer yards
shall primarily include evergreen plants, in addition to any
required shade trees.
(b) As a special exception use, the applicant may prove to the
satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board that an alternative
method of screening will satisfactorily avoid conflicts between
uses and provide an attractive appearance. For example, the
Board may approve a decorative brick wall to be placed
between a loading area and an abutting street.
(4) Plant screen.
(a) Each buffer yard shall include a planting screen of trees or
shrubs extending the length of the lot line.
(b) Each planting screen shall meet the following requirements:
[1] Plant materials needed to form the visual screen shall have
a minimum height when planted of three feet. An initial
height of two feet may be used where a parking area is
intended to be visible from a street for security purposes.
In addition, an average of one deciduous shade tree, with a
minimum trunk diameter of two inches measured six
inches above the ground level, shall be placed for each 50
feet of length of the buffer yard. The shade trees may be
clustered or spaced unevenly. Where street trees are
approved and provided in the right-of-way, or healthy
existing trees will be preserved, those trees may serve in
place of this shade tree requirement.
[2] Plants needed to form the visual screen shall be of such
species, spacing and size as can reasonably be expected to
produce within five years a mostly solid year-round visual
screen at least six feet in height.
[3] The plant screen shall be placed so that at maturity the
plants will not obstruct a street or sidewalk.
§ 280-56 JUNKYARDS § 280-56
170:881
§ 280-57. Landscaping.
[4] The plant visual screen shall be interrupted only at:
[a] Approved points of approximately perpendicular
vehicle or pedestrian ingress and egress to the lot;
[b] Locations necessary to comply with safe sight distance
requirements; and
[c] Locations needed to meet other specific state,
Borough and utility requirements.
[5] American arborvitae and similar weak-stem plants shall
not be used to meet the buffer yard requirements. If more
than 20 evergreen plants are proposed, no more than 50%
shall be of one species.
[6] Where space allows, evergreen trees should be planted at
diagonal offsets so that there is room for future growth of
the trees.
(5) Parking lot screening. If six or more new off-street parking spaces
are provided within 30 feet from the right-of-way of North Front
Street, a six-foot-wide planting area shall be provided between the
parking and the street right-of-way. To provide security and
oversight of the parking area from a street, species of plants should
be used that can be trimmed to a height of less than four feet. This
provision shall not apply if a more intense buffer is required under
§ 280-56D(1) above (such as for truck parking).
(6) Buffer yard plans: see § 280-57E.
(7) Fences.
(a) Any fence in a buffer yard shall be placed on the inside of any
required plant screening.
(b) As a condition of any variance or special exception approval,
the Zoning Hearing Board may require the installation of a
fence in addition to a buffer yard. As a condition of any land
development approval, Borough Council may require the
installation of a fence in addition to a buffer yard.
A. Any part of a commercial, industrial, institutional or apartment lot
which is not used for structures, loading areas, parking spaces and
aisles, sidewalks and designated storage areas shall be provided with
an all-season, well-maintained vegetative groundcover, and shall be
landscaped with trees and shrubs. Landscaped areas shall be kept free
of debris, rubbish and noxious weeds.
B. See also the buffer yard provisions in § 280-56.
§ 280-56 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-57
170:882
C. Parking area trees.
(1) One deciduous tree shall be required for every 10 new off-street
parking spaces.
(2) If a lot will include 20 or more new parking spaces, landscaped
areas shall be provided within the parking area. Otherwise, the
trees may be planted around the parking area.
(3) Trees required by this section shall meet the following standards:
(a) Type of trees permitted. Required trees shall be chosen from
the list of approved large or medium trees in Chapter 245,
Trees, of the Code of the Borough of Catasauqua.
(b) Quality of trees. Required trees shall be of symmetrical growth
and free of insect pests and disease.
(c) Minimum size. The trunk diameter (measured at a height of six
inches above the finished grade level) shall be a minimum of
two inches or greater.
(d) Planting and maintenance. Required trees shall be:
[1] Planted with adequate unpaved surface around each for
water and air; and
[2] Properly protected by curbs, curb stops, distance or other
devices from damage from vehicles.
D. Street trees. As part of the construction of any new street or any new
principal nonresidential building or any new apartment building, street
trees shall be required to be planted. An average of one street tree shall
be planted for every 50 feet of street length. The street trees do not
need to be planted at specific intervals, but may be moved to fit with
utilities, driveways and other features.
(1) The trees shall be in locations approved by the Zoning Officer.
These locations may or may not be within the street right-of-way,
depending upon the circumstances of the site. If the trees are not
located in the right-of-way, they shall be placed within the yard
immediately adjacent to the right-of-way.
(2) New street trees shall not be required where existing healthy street
trees will be preserved and will serve the same purpose.
E. Landscaping maintenance. All shade tree, buffer yard and other
landscaping required by this chapter shall be perpetually maintained by
the property owner. Any landscaping needed to meet an ordinance
requirement that dies, is removed, or is severely damaged shall be
replaced by the current property owner as soon as is practical
considering growing seasons, within a maximum of 150 days.
§ 280-57 JUNKYARDS § 280-57
170:883
§ 280-58. Nonconformities.
F. Review. Where landscaping is required by this article, the applicant
shall submit a site plan showing proposed initial sizes, locations and
species of plantings and locations of any fencing in sufficient detail to
determine compliance with this section. Such landscaping plan should
be provided to the Zoning Officer for approval.
A. Proof and registration of nonconformities. It shall be the responsibility
of, with the burden of proof upon, a party asserting a nonconformity to
provide the evidence that it is lawful. A property owner may request a
written statement of nonconformity from the Zoning Officer after
providing sufficient evidence.
B. Continuation. A lawful nonconforming use, structure or lot as defined
by this article may be continued and may be sold and continued by new
owners. Any expansion of, construction upon or change in use of a
nonconformity shall only occur in conformance with this section.
C. Expansion of or construction upon nonconformities.
(1) Nonconforming structure.
(a) The Zoning Officer shall permit a nonconforming structure to
be reconstructed or expanded provided:
[1] That such action will not increase the severity or amount
of the nonconformity (such as the area of the building
extending into the required yard) or create any new
nonconformity [except as provided by Subsection C(1)(c)
below]; and
[2] That any expanded area will comply with the applicable
setbacks in that district and other requirements of this
article.
(b) In the case of a nonconforming structure which is used by a
nonconforming use, any expansion shall also meet the
requirements of this section regarding nonconforming uses.
(c) Extension along a nonconforming setback. If an existing
building has a lawfully nonconforming building setback,
additions may occur to increase the height above such setback
or to extend other portions of the building out to the
nonconforming side or rear setback line, provided that:
[1] The structure shall not be extended beyond the existing
nonconforming setback line;
[2] No additional nonconformity shall be created;
[3] The new nonconforming extension shall not be greater
than 25% of the existing floor area;
§ 280-57 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-58
170:884
[4] All other requirements of this chapter shall be met; and
[5] Such addition shall not be permitted for a nonresidential
building that abuts an existing principal residential use.
(2) Nonconforming lots.
(a) Permitted construction on a nonconforming lot. New permitted
structures for a single permitted-by-right principal use and its
customary accessory uses may be constructed, reconstructed
or expanded on a nonconforming lot of record held in single
and separate ownership as a permitted-by-right use if
minimum setback requirements are met.
(b) Lot width. The fact that an existing lawful lot of record does not
meet the minimum lot width requirements of this article shall
not by itself cause such lot to be considered to be a
nonconforming lot.
(3) Expansion of a nonconforming nonresidential use. A
nonconforming use or a building used by a nonconforming use shall
not be expanded, except in accordance with the following
provisions:
(a) An expansion of more than 5% in total building floor area shall
require special exception approval from the Zoning Hearing
Board under Article I.
(b) Such reconstruction or expansion shall be only upon the same
lot that the nonconforming use was located upon at the time
the use became nonconforming.
(c) The total building floor area used by a nonconforming use, or
the total land area covered by the nonconforming use,
whichever is more restrictive, shall not be increased by greater
than 40% beyond what existed in the nonconforming use at the
time the use first became nonconforming, under this chapter or
a previously adopted zoning ordinance, whichever came first.
The above maximum increase shall be measured in aggregate
over the entire life of the nonconformity. All expansions of the
nonconforming use and/or building(s) that occurred since the
use originally became nonconforming shall count towards the
above maximum increase.
(d) Any expansion of a nonconforming use shall meet the required
setbacks and other requirements of this article, unless the
Zoning Hearing Board grants a variance.
(4) Expansion of a nonconforming residential use. An existing
nonconforming residential use may be expanded as a permitted-byright
use provided that:
§ 280-58 JUNKYARDS § 280-58
170:885
(a) The number of dwelling units or rooming house units are not
increased;
(b) The expansion meets all applicable setbacks;
(c) No new types of nonconformities are created;
(d) A nonconformity is not made more severe; and
(e) All other dimensional requirements of this chapter are met.
(5) Nonconforming sign. The provisions of this article shall not be
interpreted to provide a right to expand or extend a nonconforming
sign. Instead, any expansions or extensions of a nonconforming
sign shall comply with this article.
D. Damaged or destroyed nonconformities. A nonconforming structure
that has been destroyed or damaged may be rebuilt in a nonconforming
fashion only if: the application for a building permit is submitted within
18 months after the date of damage or destruction; work begins in
earnest within 12 months afterwards and continues; and no
nonconformity may be created or increased by any reconstruction. The
property shall be properly secured during such time in such a way to
keep out trespassers and to avoid harm to neighboring properties.
E. Abandonment of a nonconformity.
(1) If a nonconforming use of a building or land is discontinued, razed,
removed or abandoned for 12 or more months, subsequent use of
such building or land shall conform with the regulations of the
district in which it is located, except as provided for in the
"damaged or destroyed nonconformities" provisions of this section.
(2) The applicant shall be responsible to provide evidence that the
nonconformity was not abandoned.
(3) An existing lawful separate dwelling unit may be unrented for any
period of time without being considered "abandoned" under this
article.
F. Changes from one nonconforming use to another.
(1) Once changed to a conforming use, a structure or land shall not
revert to a nonconforming use.
(2) A nonconforming use may be changed to a different nonconforming
use only if permitted as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing
Board. However, special exception approval is not needed for a
simple change within an existing building from one lawful
nonconforming retail store use to another retail store use or from
one lawful nonconforming personal service use to another personal
service use provided that the new use complies with any Zoning
§ 280-58 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-58
170:886
§ 280-59. Dumpster screening and location.
Hearing Board conditions that applied to the previous use and is
not more objectionable in external effects than the previous use.
(3) Where special exception approval is required for a change of a
nonconforming use, the Board shall determine whether the
applicant has provided sufficient proof to show that the proposed
new use will be equal or less objectionable in external effects than
the preexisting nonconforming use with regard to:
(a) Traffic safety and generation (especially truck traffic);
(b) Noise, dust, fumes, vapors, gases, odor, glare, vibration, fire,
hazardous substances, and explosive hazards;
(c) Amount and character of outdoor storage;
(d) Late night and early morning hours of operation if the use
would be close to dwellings; and
(e) Compatibility with the character of the surrounding area.
(4) A nonconforming use shall not be changed to a nonconforming
adult use.
G. District changes. Any uses, structures or lots that become
nonconforming because of a zoning district change shall be regulated
under this section on nonconformities.
A. Any newly placed solid waste dumpster shall be screened on all sides as
necessary to screen views from public streets and dwellings. Such
screening shall consist of decorative masonry walls, mostly solid
weather-resistant wood fencing or fencing of a similar appearance
(such as white vinyl vertical planks). Primarily evergreen plantings are
also encouraged in addition to the fence or wall. The fence or wall shall
include a self-latching door or gate.
B. Setback from dwellings. An outdoor solid waste container with a
capacity of over 25 cubic feet shall be kept the maximum distance that
is feasible from any abutting dwelling, in the determination of the
Zoning Officer, provided that the container is not in the minimum front
yard. In any case, an outdoor solid waste container shall be kept a
minimum of 15 feet from an abutting dwelling. A solid waste dumpster
shall not be located in a front yard.
C. If a solid waste dumpster is moved from one part of a lot to another part
of a lot, then it shall come into compliance with this § 280-59.
D. All waste containers shall be completely enclosed, and the lid shall be
kept in place. The locations of all dumpsters shall be shown on all site
plans and land development plans submitted to the Borough.
§ 280-58 JUNKYARDS § 280-59
170:887
E. This section shall not apply to dumpsters temporarily placed during
actual construction or demolition on the premises, or for recycling
containers that do not involve garbage.
§ 280-59 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-59
170:888
ARTICLE IX
Airport Hazards
§ 280-60. Authority; purposes.
§ 280-61. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this article shall have the
following meaning when used in this Article IX, unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise:
AIRCRAFT — Any contrivance, except an unpowered hang glider or
parachute, used for manned ascent into or flight through the air.
AIRPORT — Lehigh Valley International Airport ("LVIA"). Defined as any
area of land or water which is used, or intended to be used, for the
landing and takeoff of aircraft and any appurtenant areas which are used,
or intended to be used, for airport buildings or air navigation facilities or
rights-of-way, together with all airport buildings and facilities thereon. As
used herein, the term "airport" includes public airports but excludes private
A. This article is adopted pursuant to the authority conferred by 1984 PA
Laws 164, codified at 74 Pa.C.S.A. § 5101 et seq.
B. It is hereby found that an obstruction has the potential for endangering
the lives and property of users of the Lehigh Valley International Airport
("LVIA"); and property or occupants of land in its vicinity; that an
obstruction may affect existing and future instrument approach
minimums of the LVIA; and that an obstruction may reduce the size of
areas available for the landing, takeoff and maneuvering of aircraft,
thus tending to destroy or impair the utility of the LVIA and the public
investment therein. Accordingly, it is declared:
(1) That the creation or establishment of an obstruction has the
potential of being a public nuisance and may injure the region
served by the LVIA;
(2) That it is necessary in the interest of the public health, safety,
morals and general welfare that the creation or establishment of
obstructions that are a hazard to air navigation be prevented; and
(3) That the prevention of these obstructions should be accomplished,
to the extent legally possible, by the exercise of the police power
without compensation.
C. It is further declared that the prevention of the creation or
establishment of hazards to air navigation, the elimination, removal,
alteration or mitigation of hazards to air navigation, or the marking and
lighting of obstructions are public purposes for which a political
subdivision may raise and expend public funds and acquire land or
interests in land.
§ 280-60 JUNKYARDS § 280-61
170:889
airports and heliports. Public and private airports are defined separately in
this section.
AIRPORT ELEVATION — Three hundred ninety-four feet above mean sea
level. Defined as the highest point of an airport's usable landing area
measured in feet above sea level.
AIRPORT HAZARD — Any structure or object, natural or man-made, or use
of land which obstructs the airspace required for flight or aircraft in landing
or taking off at an airport or is otherwise hazardous as defined by "airport
hazard" in 74 Pa.C.S.A. § 5102.
AIRPORT HAZARD AREA — Any area of land or water upon which an airport
hazard might be established if not prevented as provided for in this chapter
and the Act 164 of 1984 (Pennsylvania Laws relating to aviation).
APPROACH SURFACE — A surface longitudinally centered on the extended
runway center line, extending outward and upward from the end of the
primary surface and at the same slope as the approach surface zone height
limitation slope set forth in § 280-63 of this article. In plan the perimeter of
the approach surface coincides with the perimeter of the approach surface
zone.
APPROACH, TRANSITIONAL, HORIZONTAL AND CONICAL SURFACE
ZONES — These zones are set forth in § 280-63 of this article.
CONICAL SURFACE — A surface extending outward and upward from the
periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to one for a horizontal
distance of 4,000 feet.
DEPARTMENT — Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
FAA — Federal Aviation Administration of the United States Department of
Transportation.
HEIGHT — For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set
forth in this article and shown on the Zoning Map, the datum shall be mean
sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
HORIZONTAL SURFACE — A horizontal plane 150 feet above the
established airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan coincides with
the perimeter of the horizontal surface zone.
LARGER THAN UTILITY RUNWAY — A runway that is constructed for and
intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of greater than 12,500
pounds maximum gross weight and jet powered aircraft.
NONPRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY — A runway having an existing
instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only
horizontal guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for which a
straight-in nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved
or planned.
OBSTRUCTION — Any structure, growth or other object, including a mobile
object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in § 280-63 of this article.
§ 280-61 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-61
170:890
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
association, joint stock association, or governmental entity; includes a
trustee, a receiver, an assignee, or a similar representative of any of them.
PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY — A runway having an existing
instrument approach procedure utilizing an instrument landing system
(ILS) or a precision approach radar (PAR). It also means a runway for which
a precision approach system is planned and is so indicated on an approved
airport layout plan or any other planning document.
PRIMARY SURFACE — A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When
the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface
extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway. For military runways or
when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface, or planned hard
surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of
the primary surface is set forth in § 280-63 of this article. The elevation of
any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest
point on the runway center line.
PRIVATE AIRPORT — An airport which is privately owned and which is not
open or intended to be open to the public as defined in 74 Pa.C.S.A. § 5102.
PUBLIC AIRPORT — An airport which is either publicly or privately owned
and which is open to the public as defined in 74 Pa.C.S.A. § 5102.
RUNWAY — A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff
of aircraft along its length.
STRUCTURE — For the sole purposes of Article IX, shall mean an object,
including a mobile object, constructed or installed by man, including but
without limitation, buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth formation
and overhead transmission lines.
TRANSITIONAL SURFACES — These surfaces extend outward at 90° angles
to the runway center line and the runway center line extended at a slope
of seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the
primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and
conical surfaces. Transitional surfaces for those portions of the precision
approach surfaces, which project through and beyond the limits of the
conical surface, extend a distance of 5,000 feet measured horizontally from
the edge of the approach surface and at 90° angles to the extended runway
center line.
TREE — Any object of natural growth.
UTILITY RUNWAY — A runway that is constructed for and intended to be
used by propeller driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight
or less.
VISUAL RUNWAY — A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft
using visual approach procedures.
§ 280-61 JUNKYARDS § 280-62
170:891
§ 280-62. Airport surface zones.
In order to carry out the provisions of this article, there are hereby created
and established certain zones which include all of the land lying beneath
the approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces and conical
surfaces. Such zones are shown on the ABE Airport Height Limitation and
Zoning District Map prepared by the PA Department of Transportation,
Bureau of Aviation, and dated Spring 1989, which is hereby included by
reference and made a part hereof. An area located in more than one of the
following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive
height limitation. The various zones are hereby established and defined as
follows:
A. Utility runway visual approach surface zone. Established beneath the
visual approach surface. The inner edge of this zone coincides with the
width of the primary surface and is 250 feet wide. The zone expands
outward uniformly to a width of 1,250 feet at a horizontal distance of
5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its center line is the continuation
of the center line of the runway.
B. Utility runway nonprecision instrument approach surface zone.
Established beneath the nonprecision instrument approach surface.
The inner edge of this zone coincides with the width of the primary
surface and is 500 feet wide. The zone expands outward uniformly to a
width of 2,000 feet at a horizontal distance 5,000 feet from the primary
surface. Its center line is the continuation of the center line of the
runway.
C. Runway larger than utility visual approach surface zone. Established
beneath the visual approach surface. The inner edge of this zone
coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 500 feet wide.
The zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 1,500 feet at a
horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its center
line is the continuation of the center line of the runway.
D. Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum greater than 3/4
mile nonprecision instrument approach surface zone. Established
beneath the nonprecision instrument approach surface. The inner edge
of this zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 500
feet wide. The zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 3,500 feet
at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the primary surface. Its
center line is the continuation of the center line of the runway.
E. Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum as low as 3/4 mile
nonprecision instrument approach surface zone. Established beneath
the nonprecision instrument approach surface. The inner edge of this
zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 1,000 feet
wide. The zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 4,000 feet at a
horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the primary surface. Its center
line is the continuation of the center line of the runway.
§ 280-62 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-62
170:892
§ 280-63. Airport surface zone height limitations.
Except as otherwise provided in this article, no structure shall be erected,
altered or maintained, and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any zone
created by this article to a height in excess of the applicable height limit
herein established for such zone. Such applicable height limitations are
hereby established for each of the zones in question as follows:
F. Precision instrument runway approach surface zone. Established
beneath the precision instrument approach surface. The inner edge of
this zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 1,000
feet wide. The zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 16,000
feet at a horizontal distance of 50,000 feet from the primary surface. Its
center line is the continuation of the center line of the runway.
G. Transitional surface zones. Established beneath the transitional
surfaces adjacent to each runway and approach surface as indicated on
the Height Limitation and Zoning District Map.
H. Horizontal surface zone. Established beneath the horizontal surface,
150 feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which
is constructed by swinging arcs of 5,000 feet radii for visual or utility
runways and 1,000 feet radii for all other runways from the center of
each end of the primary surface of each runway and connecting the
adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs. The horizontal
surface zone does not include the approach surface and transitional
surface zones.
I. Conical surface zone. Established beneath the conical surface. This
zone commences at the periphery of the horizontal surface and extends
outward therefrom a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.
A. Utility runway visual approach surface zone. Slopes 20 feet outward for
each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as
the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet
along the extended runway center line.
B. Utility runway nonprecision instrument approach surface zone. Slopes
20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the
same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal
distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway center line.
C. Runway larger than utility visual approach surface zone. Slopes 20 feet
outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same
elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance
of 5,000 feet along the extended runway center line.
D. Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum greater than 3/4
mile nonprecision instrument approach surface zone. Slopes 34 feet
outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same
elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance
of 10,000 feet along the extended runway center line.
§ 280-62 JUNKYARDS § 280-63
170:893
§ 280-64. Airport zoning requirements.
E. Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum as low as 3/4 mile
nonprecision instrument approach surface zone. Slopes 34 feet outward
for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation
as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000
feet along the extended runway center line.
F. Precision instrument runway approach surface zone. Slopes 50 feet
outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same
elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance
of 10,000 feet along the extended runway center line; thence slopes
upward 40 feet horizontally for each foot vertically to an additional
horizontal distance of 40,000 feet along the extended runway center
line.
G. Transitional surface zones. Slopes seven feet outward for each foot
upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the
primary surface and the approach surface, and extending to a height of
150 feet above the airport elevation which is 394 feet above mean sea
level. In addition to the foregoing when an airport has a precision
instrument runway approach zone, there are established height limits
sloping seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides
of and at the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending to
where they intersect the conical surface. Where the precision
instrument runway approach zone projects beyond the conical zone,
there are established height limits sloping seven feet outward for each
foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the
approach surface, and extending a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet
measured at 90° angles to the extended runway center line.
H. Horizontal surface zone. Established at 150 feet above the established
airport elevation or at a height of 544 feet above mean sea level.
I. Conical surface zone. Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward
beginning at the periphery of the horizontal surface and at 150 feet
above the established airport elevation and extending to a height of 350
feet above the established airport elevation or at a height of 744 feet
above mean sea level.
J. Excepted height limitations. Nothing in this article shall be construed
as prohibiting the construction or maintenance of any structure, or
growth of any tree to a height up to 45 feet above the surface of the
land.
A. Reasonableness. All airport zoning regulations adopted under this
article shall be reasonable; none shall impose any requirement or
restriction unless it is reasonably necessary to effectuate the purpose of
this article. In determining what regulations it may adopt, the Borough
shall consider, among other factors, the character of the flying
operations expected to be conducted at the airport, the nature of the
§ 280-63 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-64
170:894
§ 280-65. Airport approach permits and variances.
terrain within the airport hazard area, the character of the
neighborhood and the uses to which the property to be zoned is put and
adaptable.
B. Use restrictions. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article,
no use may be made of land or water within any zone established by this
article in such a manner as to create electrical interference with
navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and
aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights
and others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair
visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards, or
otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with the landing, takeoff or
maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport.
C. Nonconforming uses:
(1) Regulations not retroactive. The regulations prescribed by this
chapter shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering or
other change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming
to the regulations as of the effective date of this chapter, or
otherwise interfere with the continuance of any nonconforming
use, except as provided in § 280-65 (relating to permits and
variances). Nothing contained herein shall require any change in
the construction, alteration or intended use of any structure, the
construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective
date of this article, and is diligently executed.
(2) Marking and lighting. Notwithstanding the preceding provision of
this section, the owner of any existing nonconforming structure or
tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation and
maintenance thereon or nearby of such markers and lights as shall
be deemed necessary by the Zoning Officer acting in response to a
written recommendation by the Lehigh Valley International Airport
(LVIA) staff to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of
the airport the presence of such airport obstruction. Such markers
and lights shall be installed, operated and maintained at the
expense of LVIA. The Borough of Catasauqua shall not accept
responsibility to install, maintain, inspect or fund markers and
lights.
A. Future use. Except as specifically provided in Subsection A(1), (2) or (3)
hereunder, no material change shall be made in the use of land, no
structure shall be erected or otherwise established, and no tree shall be
planted in any zone hereby created unless a permit therefore shall have
been applied for and granted. Each application for a permit shall
indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired, with sufficient
particularity to permit it to be determined whether the resulting use,
structure or tree would conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If
such determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted. No
§ 280-64 JUNKYARDS § 280-65
170:895
permit for a use inconsistent with the provisions of this article shall
be granted unless a variance has been approved in accordance with
§ 280-65E and Article I.
(1) In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and conical
zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than
75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when, because
of terrain, land contour or topographic features, such tree or
structure would extend above the height limits prescribed for such
zones.
(2) In areas lying within the limits of the approach zones, but at a
horizontal distance of not less than 4,200 feet from each end of the
runway, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less
than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when,
because of terrain, land contour or topographic features, such tree
or structure would extend above the height limit prescribed for
such approach zones.
(3) In the areas lying within the limits of the transition zones beyond
the perimeter of the horizontal zones, no permit shall be required
for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above
the ground, except when such tree or structure, because of terrain,
land contour or topographic feature, would extend above the height
limit prescribed for such transition zones.
B. Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be construed
as permitting or intending to permit any construction, or alteration of
any structure, or growth of any tree in excess of any of the height limits
established by this article, except that no permit is required to make
maintenance repairs to or to replace parts of existing structures which
do not enlarge or increase the height of an existing structure.
C. Existing uses. Before any nonconforming structure may be replaced,
substantially altered or rebuilt or nonconforming tree allowed to grow
higher or replanted, a permit must be secured from the Borough
authorizing the replacement or change. No permit shall be granted that
would allow the establishment or creation of an obstruction or permit a
nonconforming use, structure or tree to become a greater hazard to air
navigation than it was on the effective date of this article or any
amendments thereto or than it is when the application for a permit is
made.
D. Nonconforming uses abandoned or destroyed. Whenever the Zoning
Officer determines that a nonconforming tree or structure has been
abandoned or more than 80% torn down, physically deteriorated or
decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or
tree to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from this
article.
E. Variance.
§ 280-65 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-65
170:896
§ 280-66. Enforcement; notification of variance.
(1) Any person desiring to erect any structure or increase the height of
any structure or permit the growth of any object of natural growth
or otherwise use his property in violation of airport zoning
regulations may apply to the Zoning Hearing Board for a variance
from the zoning regulations in question. A variance shall only be
granted after the requirements of § 280-66 are satisfied. A variance
may be allowed where a literal application or enforcement of the
regulations would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary
hardship and the relief granted would not be contrary to the public
interest but would do substantial justice and would be in
accordance with the spirit of the regulations and this article. Any
variance may be granted subject to any reasonable conditions that
the Zoning Hearing Board may deem necessary to effectuate the
purposes of this article.
(2) The application for variance shall be accompanied by a
determination from the Federal Aviation Administration as to the
effect of the proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities
and the safe, efficient use of navigable airspace. Additionally, no
application for variance to the requirements of this article may be
considered by the Zoning Hearing Board unless a copy of the
application has been furnished to the Airport Manager (or person
of equivalent description) for advice as to the aeronautical effects
of the variance. If the Airport Manager (or person of equivalent
description) does not respond to the application within 15 days
after receipt, the Zoning Hearing Board may act without such input
to grant or deny said application.
F. Hazard marking and lighting. In granting any permit or variance under
this section, the Zoning Hearing Board shall, if it deems the action
advisable to effectuate the purpose of this article and reasonable under
the circumstances, so condition the permit or variance as to require the
owner of the structure or object of natural growth in question to permit
the Lehigh Northampton Airport Authority, at its own expense, or
require the person or persons requesting the permit or variance, to
install, operate and maintain thereon such markers and lights as may
be required by guidelines or regulations adopted by the FAA.
A. Local enforcement. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to
administer and enforce the regulations prescribed herein. Applications
for permits and variances shall be made to the Zoning Officer upon a
form published for that purpose.
B. Notice to department. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the
Borough which decides to grant a permit or variance under this article
shall notify the Department of Transportation of its decision. This notice
shall be in writing and shall be sent so as to reach the department at
least 10 days before the date upon which the decision is to issue.
§ 280-65 JUNKYARDS § 280-67
170:897
§ 280-67. Acquisition of air rights.
A. In any case in which it is desired to remove, lower or otherwise
terminate a nonconforming structure or use, or the approach protection
necessary cannot, because of constitutional limitations, be provided by
airport zoning regulations, or it appears advisable that the necessary
approach protection be provided by acquisition of property rights,
rather than by airport zoning regulations, the Borough within which the
property or nonconforming use is located, or the Borough authority
owning the airport or served by it, may acquire by purchase, grant or
condemnation, in the manner provided by the law under which
municipalities are authorized to acquire real property for public
purposes, such air right, aviation easement or other estate or interest in
the property or nonconforming structure or use in question as may be
necessary to effectuate the purpose of this article.
B. In the case of the purchase of any property or any easement or estate,
or interest therein, or the acquisition thereof by the power of eminent
domain, the Borough making the purchase of exercising the power
shall, in addition to the damages for the taking, injury or destruction of
property, also pay the cost of the removal and relocation of any
structure or any public utility which is required to be moved to a new
location.
C. Relation to other regulations. In the event any airport zoning
regulations adopted under this article apply to the same matter as
another regulation applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be
with respect to the height of structures or trees, and the use of land, or
any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall
govern and prevail.
§ 280-67 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-67
170:898
ARTICLE X
WOD Waterfront Overlay District
[Added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 1189]
§ 280-68. Purposes.
§ 280-69. Uses.
A. To provide for mixed-use development that is open to the general public
along the Lehigh River and Lehigh Canal that has a strong pedestrian
orientation to the river and the canal.
B. To revitalize and enhance properties that adjoin the river and the canal,
while maintaining the neighborhood character of the Borough.
C. To establish, enhance and promote a culturally and socially diverse
residential and commercial environment that is complementary to
downtown Catasauqua.
D. To encourage streetscapes with complementary residential and office
uses located above and adjacent to ground floor retail, office and
service commercial uses.
E. To minimize negative traffic impacts by reducing the number and
length of automobile trips required to access everyday needs.
F. To establish a neighborhood character which is pedestrian-oriented and
open to the general public.
G. To promote pedestrian circulation throughout the Waterfront Overlay
District with sidewalks, crosswalks and pathways that are open to the
general public.
H. To revitalize the Borough by demolishing unsightly structures and
replacing them with more aesthetically and architecturally pleasing
structures.
I. To promote a range and diversity of housing types, shops and work
places.
A. The following uses are permitted in the Waterfront Overlay District:
(1) Mixed-use development consisting of three or more of the following
uses:
(a) Apartment as part of a live-work unit.
(b) Bakery, retail.
(c) Bed-and-breakfast inn.
(d) Catering for off-site consumption.
(e) Condominiums.
§ 280-68 JUNKYARDS § 280-69
170:899
(f) Conference center.
(g) Crafts or artisans studio.
(h) Custom printing, photocopying, faxing, mailing, courier service
and similar business services.
(i) Emergency services station not including a supporting social
club building or facility.
(j) Exercise club.
(k) Financial institution with drive-through, provided that the
drive-through component is on the back of the building,
opposite the primary frontage street.
(l) Hobby school.
(m) Hotel or motel, not to exceed four stories and 55 feet in height.
(n) Indoor recreation.
(o) Live-work unit along a public street.
(p) Library.
(q) Museum.
(r) Municipal uses, municipal buildings and all other types of
government facilities.
(s) Nightclub.
(t) Offices.
(u) Personal services (includes, but is not limited to, tailoring,
custom dressmaking, haircutting/styling, dry cleaning, shoe
repair, "massage therapy certified" and all other uses similar in
character to the above personal services).
(v) Publicly owned or publicly operated recreation.
(w) Restaurants with a drive-through service, as a special
exception.
(x) Restaurants without a drive-through service. Outdoor dining is
permitted.
(y) Retail stores.
(z) Theater.
(aa) Townhouse/rowhouse.
(bb) All accessory uses.
§ 280-69 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-69
170:900
§ 280-70. Dimensional criteria.
§ 280-71. Unified development and mix.
(cc) Planned multifamily residential community by special
exception. [Added 3-4-2013 by Ord. No. 1286]
A. Minimum setback for private roads, parking aisles, parking spaces and
access driveways shall be 10 feet from adjacent residential zoning
districts and zero feet from adjacent nonresidential zoning districts.
B. The maximum height for all buildings shall be 35 feet; provided,
however, that the building height may be increased up to 75 feet if the
building is set back at least 100 feet from a public street existing at the
time of preliminary plan submission that has 200 feet of frontage, and
further provided that such increase in height is subject to the review
and comment by the Fire Marshal.
C. The minimum perimeter setback from every tract property line shall be
10 feet for parking structures and 10 feet for all nonparking structures.
If a building has floors allocated for parking and the remainder of the
building is for nonparking, then every floor allocated to parking shall be
at least 10 feet from every property line; however, the upper floors that
are not used for parking shall be at least 15 feet from every property
line.
D. Maximum impervious surface coverage: 90%.
E. Maximum building coverage: 50%.
F. All residential dwellings including apartments and condominiums shall
be at least 600 square feet in floor area.
G. The maximum number of apartments shall be limited to seven dwelling
units per gross acre.
A. The total gross floor area of all buildings shall be at least 50%
residential use. Retail and other permitted nonresidential use shall be
100% of the ground floor front elevation facing a public street that has
200 feet of frontage. At least 20% of the ground floor, collectively but
not individually, for all buildings shall be a nonresidential use. Buildings
may combine nonresidential on the ground floor with residential on the
upper floors as a live-work unit.
B. The overall tract shall be a unified development that is approved at the
same time. However, the development may be proposed in phases,
provided that all public improvements are installed in the first phase.
Each phase need not comply with the mix of uses in this article.
However, the overall plan for the tract shall comply with the above mix
of uses, and all phases shall be interrelated and interconnected.
§ 280-69 JUNKYARDS § 280-71
170:901
§ 280-72. Design standards.
C. All development shall be coordinated with all existing and proposed
development in the District and existing and proposed infrastructure so
that the District may develop harmoniously as a whole and within the
Borough generally. Coordination shall be required with respect to
streets, interior and exterior, whether public or private, and with
intersections, sidewalks, curbing, waterlines, sanitary sewers,
stormwater BMPs, park and recreation land, open space and other
infrastructure and utilities.
A. A manual of written and graphic design guidelines shall be prepared by
the applicant and submitted for Borough approval with preliminary
subdivision/land development plans. The manual shall include all plans,
sketches, photographs and other images to convey the proposed use,
development and redevelopment.
(1) The manual shall be prepared by:
(a) A registered architect; and
(b) A registered landscape architect.
(2) The manual shall address:
(a) New buildings that will be complementary to existing buildings
in terms of scale, size, height, massing, proportion, and overall
design.
(b) Streetscape elements such as on-street parking, sidewalks,
crosswalks, street trees, streetlights, curbing, signage, and
banners.
(c) Civic amenities such as green areas, plazas, pergolas, gazebos,
benches, kiosks, and clock towers.
(d) Building elements such as porticos, porches, and stoops.
(e) Building and roof materials, fenestration, and related detailing.
(f) Storefronts and shop fronts for commercial buildings.
(g) Landscape materials and detailing.
(h) Specialty landscape features such as fountains, fences, walls,
ramps, and railings.
(i) Service and utility features for trash, electric, drainage, and
stormwater management.
B. An overall master plan shall be prepared and submitted as a sketch plan
prior to formal submission of a preliminary subdivision/land
development plan. The master plan shall demonstrate compliance with
this article.
§ 280-71 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-72
170:902
C. Article VI, Off-Street Parking and Loading, shall apply. However, due to
the uncertainty of the mix of uses, the allocation of parking spaces shall
be calculated upon occupancy. If there are insufficient parking spaces
for the individual proposed use at that time, then the individual
proposed use shall not be permitted occupancy until the required
parking spaces are made available; provided, however, that no more
than 80% of the total project shall be permitted occupancy until all
parking spaces are calculated, and all parking spaces are provided for
the remaining 20% of the project.
D. Apartments may only be provided as part of a live-work unit or a
planned multifamily residential community. [Amended 3-4-2013 by
Ord. No. 1286]
E. Overall streetscape design. The streetscape shall have the complete
ensemble of sidewalks, buildings along sidewalks, on-street parking,
street trees, streetlights, and crosswalks that interconnect throughout
the Waterfront Overlay District.
F. Street and alley network. Internal circulation shall be through an
interconnected network of streets, alleys and service drives. One-way
alleys and service drives shall be at least 12 feet in width, and two-way
alleys and service drives shall be at least 18 feet in width.
G. Building design.
(1) Building width. Any building that exceeds 36 feet in width shall
have pilasters, panels, bays, recesses, or projections to provide a
vertical articulation to the building.
(2) Building and parking location. Principal buildings shall be located
close to sidewalks. Parking shall be located behind buildings or on
the side of buildings along a primary frontage street.
(3) Build-to lines. New buildings shall create street walls. Buildings
shall collectively help to form the streetscape.
(4) Building design and materials. All proposed architectural features
shall be subject to evaluation through the manual referenced in
Subsection A.
H. Parking.
(1) On-street parking shall be provided along streets. Such parking
shall be counted toward the overall parking requirements for a use.
Such parking shall be curbside and parallel in bays at least seven
feet wide or angled in bays at least eight feet wide.
(2) Off-street parking shall be located behind, underneath or within
buildings to the maximum extent possible. Where necessary,
parking may be located on the side of buildings. However, no offstreet
parking shall be located in front of buildings between the
building and the curbline.
§ 280-72 JUNKYARDS § 280-72
170:903
I. Sidewalks and walkways shall be provided and shall have a minimum
width of four feet six inches, and shall be interconnected with other
sidewalks and walkways throughout the District. Sidewalks shall have
expansion or dummy joints every four feet six inches, and each square
so formed shall have a smooth trowel finish around the edges and a
broom finish within each section.
J. Crosswalks shall be provided and shall have a minimum width of six
feet, and shall be interconnected with other crosswalks throughout the
District. Crosswalks shall be constructed with interlocking brick
pavers.
K. Street trees, buffers, and other landscape enhancement shall be
provided in the form of street trees, shade trees, flowering trees, shrubs
and ground covers. Landscaping shall be installed and maintained in
accordance with a landscape plan, prepared by a registered landscape
architect, and shall include at a minimum:
(1) Street trees at three- to three-and-one-half-inch caliper, every 40
feet, along both sides of all streets.
(2) Shade trees at two and-one-half- to three-inch inch caliper within
planting islands or peninsulas in off-street parking lots. Such
planting islands or peninsulas shall comprise at least 5% of the
total parking area square footage.
(3) Shade trees at two-and-one-half- to three-inch caliper at a ratio of
at least one such tree for every 1,000 square feet of green area.
(4) Evergreen hedges with a minimum height of 4 1/2 feet at the time
of installation to serve as a buffer in the rear of properties along
any canal or other watercourse.
L. Street lights shall be provided at intervals of at least 90 feet. Such
lights shall be decorative and shall not exceed 20 feet in height.
Lighting shall be installed and maintained to prevent trespass glare. No
lighting at the property line of the tract perimeter shall exceed 0.5
footcandles.
M. Curb cuts shall be minimal along any block, and vehicular access shall
be provided in alleys and service drives.
N. Street furniture and furnishings, such as benches, planters, bicycle
racks, vertical pole-mounted banners and the like, shall be provided.
O. New utilities shall be constructed and maintained underground. All
waterlines shall be offered for dedication to the Borough in the event of
an interconnect with any other tract in the District.
P. Signage shall be installed and maintained in accordance with Article
VII, and the design guidelines for signs on awnings, buildings, pylons
and streets as set forth in the design guidelines. No sign shall be
backlit.
§ 280-72 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-72
170:904
Q. Restaurant - sidewalk cafe. Sidewalk cafes may be provided as an
accessory use to a restaurant. The following shall apply:
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct or maintain a
restaurant-cafe without first applying for and securing a permit
therefor as hereinafter provided.
(2) Any person who shall desire to open a restaurant-sidewalk cafe
shall make application therefor (the applicant), in writing, to the
Borough. Such application shall be accompanied by such
application fee as required by a schedule of fees established by and
amended from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council.
Such application shall be made upon forms provided by the
Borough and shall set forth and include the following:
(a) The name and address of the applicant.
(b) A plan specifying the precise location of the outdoor portion of
the restaurant-sidewalk cafe, including a calculation of the
proposed occupant load.
(c) The written consent of the property owner.
(d) An agreement of indemnity as outlined in Subsection Q(4).
(e) The indoor seating capacity of the restaurant-sidewalk cafe.
(3) No action shall be taken on any application for a permit under this
subsection until the application has been completed in its entirety
and the application fee, as required by a schedule of fees
established and amended from time to time by resolution of the
Borough, has been paid in full.
(4) The applicant shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the
Borough and its Council, boards, commissions and authorities and
the individual members thereof, and the officers, officials,
professional consultants and employees of the Borough of and from
any and all claims, demands, actions, charges, suits, and costs
alleging personal injury and/or property damage which arise out of
or relate or are alleged to arise out of or relate to the existence of
the restaurant-sidewalk cafe and all damages to persons or
property resulting from or in any manner caused by the presence,
location, use, operation, installation, maintenance, replacement or
removal of such restaurant-sidewalk cafe or by the acts or
omissions of the employees or agents of the applicant in connection
with such restaurant-sidewalk cafe.
(5) The restaurant-sidewalk cafe shall have a minimum indoor seating
capacity of 15 persons.
(6) The restaurant-sidewalk cafe outdoor areas are required to stop
seating and serving customers on or before 1:00 a.m. prevailing
§ 280-72 JUNKYARDS § 280-72
170:905
time, and clear all tables of food, beverages and customers on or
before 2:00 a.m. prevailing time.
(7) The applicant shall maintain the restaurant-sidewalk cafe in
accordance with all Borough ordinances and state and federal laws,
as well as rules and regulations promulgated and adopted by the
Borough which pertain to this use of restaurant-sidewalk cafe.
(8) The applicant shall remove the outdoor portion of the restaurantsidewalk
cafe within 30 days after written notice, if the Borough
determines that the restaurant-sidewalk cafe is detrimental to the
health, safety and general welfare of the Borough or its citizens.
(a) Due to pedestrian traffic changes, the restaurant-sidewalk cafe
narrows the sidewalk to the extent that pedestrian traffic is
impeded;
(b) The restaurant-sidewalk cafe interferes with the maintenance
or installation of an underground utility structure;
(c) The restaurant-sidewalk cafe is no longer being used as such;
(d) The restaurant-sidewalk cafe has been temporarily or
permanently closed for violation of any Borough, state or
federal law and/or regulation; or
(e) The restaurant-sidewalk cafe is operated in violation of any
ordinance, rule or regulation of the Borough.
(9) In the event that the applicant fails to remove the restaurantsidewalk
cafe within 30 days after written notice, the Borough may
proceed to remove and restore the area and charge the applicant
for the cost thereof. Should the restaurant-sidewalk cafe be
removed by the Borough, the applicant shall be entitled to a return
of the equipment, furnishings or appurtenances so removed only
after the payment of all costs due to the Borough and by requesting
the return in writing. The responsibility for removal under the
provisions of this subsection shall be the sole responsibility of the
applicant without any obligation or cost assessed against the
Borough.
(10) In any location where the restaurant-sidewalk cafe is not separated
from the flow of traffic by parking areas or other barriers, no table
shall be located within five feet of the curb.
(11) The restaurant-sidewalk cafe outdoor area must provide table
service.
R. Civic amenities such as green areas, plazas, pergolas, gazebos,
benches, kiosks, clock towers, and the like shall be subject to evaluation
through the manual referenced in Subsection A. At least 5% of the
overall lot or tract shall be designed, built and maintained for civic use
and green areas.
§ 280-72 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-72
170:906
§ 280-73. Procedures.
S. A planned multifamily residential community in this Waterfront Overlay
District shall comply with all of the following: [Added 3-4-2013 by
Ord. No. 1286]
(1) Building height shall not exceed 40 feet, measured from the
elevation of the intersection of the center lines of Front and
Strawberry Streets to the ceiling of the highest habitable floor.
(2) Compliance with all requirements of this Zoning Ordinance shall be
in the following priority: first, with the specific requirements of
§ 280-29A(39); second, and to the extent not inconsistent with
§ 280-29A(39), all requirements of the Waterfront Overlay District
as set forth in Article X hereof; and third, to the extent not
inconsistent with the requirements of § 280-29A(39) and the
Waterfront Overlay District regulations, the remaining, applicable
requirements of this Zoning Ordinance.
(3) To the extent that the planned multifamily residential community
consists in whole or in part of apartment units, at least 75% of the
total of all apartment units shall have 1,000 square feet or more of
floor area, and no more than 25% of the total of all apartment units
shall have less than 900 square feet of floor area. Required, private
porches and decks may be included in floor area calculations.
Common areas shall not be included in floor area calculations.
(4) Each apartment unit having at least 1,000 square feet of floor area
shall have individual, in-apartment, laundry facilities (washer and
dryer).
(5) Each apartment shall have a private porch or, in the case of a
ground floor apartment, a private deck.
(6) All streets shall be private, and all sanitary sewer and water
facilities, excluding laterals, shall be sold to the Borough for
nominal consideration by an appropriate bill of sale. All necessary
easements and cross-easements shall be provided and, where
necessary, dedicated to the Borough.
A. All applicants shall submit a master plan for all proposals. Such plans
may be informally reviewed as conceptual plans in order to provide an
opportunity for the Borough to make suggestions and recommendations
on the design of the proposed development and in order for the
applicant to demonstrate compliance with this article.
B. The applicant shall follow the preliminary and final plan application
requirements of the most recent version of the Catasauqua Borough
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (SALDO)235 and shall
235. Editor's Note: See Ch. 235, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 280-72 JUNKYARDS § 280-73
170:907
include the plans as required in the SALDO as well as those listed
below.
C. Building and parking plan.
(1) A separate plan sheet shall be submitted to depict the proposed
building program. Said plan shall indicate the proposed principal
and accessory buildings, the gross square footages of all buildings,
and the building heights. The building plan shall also indicate the
total impervious surface coverage, existing and proposed.
(2) Such plan shall also depict proposed surface parking and list the
number of parking spaces proposed in relation to the proposed
use(s).
(3) On-street parking spaces may be counted toward the overall
parking requirement whenever such parking is located along the
frontage of the building that is proposed for development.
D. Street, alley, and streetscape plan.
(1) A separate plan sheet shall be submitted to depict the proposed
interconnected street, alley, and service drive network. Such plan
shall indicate all street widths and rights-of-way widths.
(2) Such plan shall indicate all materials, depths of pavement courses,
and gradients.
E. Pedestrian access plan.
(1) A separate plan sheet shall be submitted to depict the proposed
interconnected network for pedestrian access, including sidewalks,
crosswalks, and pathways.
(2) Such plan shall indicate all materials and gradients for sidewalks,
crosswalks, and pathways.
F. Landscape and civic use plan.
(1) A separate plan sheet shall be submitted to depict all proposed
landscape features and civic uses.
(2) The landscape plan shall indicate all plant types, sizes and
quantities as well as the types, sizes, and materials for all paving,
benches, walls, and other structures.
(3) Such plan shall indicate all green areas and other common
features.
G. Signage plan.
(1) The provisions of Article VII shall apply.
(2) A separate general site signage plan sheet shall be submitted to
depict proposed signage for all such wall and window signs, as well
§ 280-73 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-73
170:908
§ 280-74. Applicability.
§ 280-75. Relationship to other ordinance provisions.
In the event of a direct conflict with any other ordinance provisions, the
Article X provisions shall apply.
as any proposed directional and way-finding signs, and all gateway
features.
(3) Such plan shall also depict the size, materials, colors, graphics, and
anchoring details for all signs and gateway features.
H. Utilities plan.
(1) A separate plan sheet shall be submitted to depict all proposed
utilities.
(2) Such plan shall indicate all proposed types, sizes, and materials of
utilities that are proposed.
I. Phasing plan. A separate plan sheet shall be submitted to depict
proposed staging or phasing of the total land development. Such plan
shall be accompanied by a typed schedule.
J. Declaration of covenants, easements and restrictions. A declaration
shall be submitted to the Borough and shall be satisfactory to the
Borough Solicitor.
A. The Waterfront Overlay District shall be as shown on the Catasauqua
Borough Zoning Map.
§ 280-73 JUNKYARDS § 280-75
170:909

ARTICLE XI
W Waterfront District
[Added 8-1-2016 by Ord. No. 1335]
§ 280-76. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to:
§ 280-77. Conditions of eligibility.
Development within the Waterfront District shall be contingent upon the
following conditions of eligibility:
A. Provide for mixed-use development that is open to the general public
along the Lehigh River and Lehigh Canal that has a strong pedestrian
orientation to the river and the canal.
B. To revitalize and enhance properties that adjoin the river and the canal,
while maintaining the neighborhood character of the Borough.
C. To establish, enhance and promote a culturally and socially diverse
residential and commercial environment that is complementary to
downtown Catasauqua.
D. To encourage streetscapes with complementary residential and office
uses located above and adjacent to ground floor retail, office and
service commercial uses.
E. To minimize negative traffic impacts by reducing the number and
length of automobile trips required to access everyday needs.
F. To establish a neighborhood character which is pedestrian oriented and
open to the general public.
G. To promote pedestrian circulation throughout the Waterfront District
with sidewalks, crosswalks and pathways that are open to the general
public.
H. To revitalize the Borough by demolishing unsightly structures, as
necessary, and replacing them with buildings and structures that are
aesthetically and architecturally context sensitive, while promoting the
adaptive reuse and protection of historic buildings, materials and
structures in the development tract.
I. To promote a range and diversity of housing types, shops and work
places.
J. To promote development that is consistent with the development
strategy plan and the Borough's development of the municipal complex
tract.
K. Meet the conditions of eligibility of § 280-77.
§ 280-76 JUNKYARDS § 280-77
170:911
§ 280-78. Uses.
Unless otherwise stated, the following uses are permitted by right in the
Waterfront District:
A. All development shall be served by public water and public sewer.
B. Front Street shall be improved in accordance with a traffic study
submitted by the applicant(s) and approved by Borough Council.
C. Bridge Street shall be extended in accordance with the development
strategy plan.
D. An interconnected street and driveway network shall be created
consistent with the development strategy plan.
E. An interconnected sidewalk, crosswalk, walkway and pedestrian
pathway network shall be created consistent with the development
strategy plan.
F. A mix of uses and a ratio of residential to nonresidential uses
reasonably consistent with the development strategy plan.
A. Mixed-use development consisting of four or more of the following uses:
(1) Apartment.
(2) Bakery, retail.
(3) Bed-and-breakfast inn.
(4) Catering for off-site consumption.
(5) Craft beverage production facility. See Subsection B(2) below.
(6) Craft beverage restaurant. See Subsection B(2) below.
(7) Conference center.
(8) Crafts or artisans studio.
(9) Custom printing, photocopying, faxing, mailing, courier service and
similar business services.
(10) Exercise club.
(11) Financial institution with drive-through opposite the primary
frontage street.
(12) Hobby school.
(13) Hotel or motel, subject to § 280-29A(15).
(14) Indoor recreation.
(15) Live-work unit.
§ 280-77 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-78
170:912
(16) Library.
(17) Museum.
(18) Office.
(19) Personal service establishment.
(20) Publicly owned recreation.
(21) Restaurant with drive-through service. See Subsection B(2) and (3)
below.
(22) Restaurant without drive-through service. See Subsection B(3)
below.
(23) Retail store.
(24) Theater.
(25) Townhouse/rowhouse.
(26) Planned multifamily residential community. See Subsection B(2)
below.
B. Uses accessory to Subsection A(1) through (26) above.
(1) Note 1: Upon the written request of an applicant and following a
review and comment by the Planning Commission, Borough
Council may, in its sole discretion, modify the number of uses
required by this section; however, in doing so, Borough Council
may place reasonable conditions upon the grant of any
modifications hereunder.
(2) Note 2: This use shall be a use permitted by special exception even
though part of a mixed-use development and, therefore, the special
exception requirements of this Zoning Ordinance shall apply to
such use.
(3) Note 3: A restaurant may provide outdoor seating in accordance
with § 280-81P.
(4) Note 4: Upon the written request of an applicant and following a
review and comment by the Planning Commission, Borough
Council may, in its sole discretion, grant bonuses with respect to
density, building coverage, building height and other dimensional
standards applicable to the use when the applicant complies with
§ 280-82K.
(5) Note 5: Enhanced lot area calculation. For the purpose of density
calculations only, an applicant shall be permitted to include land in
the municipal complex tract in its calculation of lot area applicable
to the development tract or any portion thereof. The amount of
municipal complex tract land to be included in the enhanced lot
§ 280-78 JUNKYARDS § 280-78
170:913
§ 280-79. Dimensional standards.
§ 280-80. Unified development standards.
area calculation shall be in the same proportion as the applicant's
land is to the development tract. By way of example, if the
applicant's land to be developed represents 50% of the total
amount of land in the development tract, then the applicant's lot
area may be enhanced by including 50% of the land in the
municipal complex tract. This note shall apply only to the initial
development of the land in the development tract. If development
tract land is developed and the lot area enhancement is not used,
it shall not be available for other development in the development
tract or to subsequent applicants without the approval of Borough
Council, which may impose conditions on such use.
A. Minimum setback for private roads, parking aisles, parking spaces and
access driveways shall be 10 feet from adjacent residential zoning
districts and zero feet from adjacent nonresidential zoning districts.
B. The maximum height for all buildings, measured from the elevation of
the center of the intersection of Front Street and Strawberry Street,
shall be 45 feet; provided, however, that the building height may be
increased up to 75 feet if the building is set back at least 100 feet from a
public street existing at the time of preliminary plan submission that
has 200 feet of frontage.
C. The maximum perimeter setback from every development tract
property line along a public street shall be 10 feet for parking
structures and 10 feet for all nonparking structures. The foregoing
setback may be enlarged for a nonparking structure where the
extended area is necessary to accommodate a use which is integral, or
accessory, to the permitted use and such use would otherwise interfere
with the functioning of the sidewalk or the pedestrian right-of-way, such
as an area to accommodate outdoor seating for a restaurant.
D. Maximum impervious surface coverage for the entire Waterfront
District: 80%.
E. Maximum building coverage for the entire Waterfront District: 65%.
F. All residential dwellings, including apartments and condominiums,
shall be at least 650 square feet in floor area.
G. The maximum number of apartments shall be 15 dwelling units per
gross acre for the entire Waterfront District.
A. The development tract shall be a unified development that is approved
at the same time. However, the development may be proposed in phases
in accordance with the requirements of applicable law and the overall
master plan. Each phase need not comply with the mix of uses in this
article. However, the overall master plan for the tract shall comply with
§ 280-78 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-80
170:914
§ 280-81. Design standards.
the above mix of uses and the development strategy plan, and all phases
shall be interrelated and interconnected.
B. The applicant may subdivide the tract in order to create separate
leaseholds, boundaries for mortgages or other purposes, provided such
subdivision is shown in a recorded subdivision plan. The above
notwithstanding, the laying out, proposal, design or construction of
public or private streets shall not in and of itself create a lot or
subdivision within a mixed use development authorized hereunder, and
the intent to subdivide shall be clearly depicted on the recorded
subdivision plan. [Amended 11-5-2018 by Ord. No. 1375]
C. All development shall be coordinated with all existing and proposed
development in the district and existing and proposed infrastructure so
that the district may generally develop harmoniously as a whole and
within the Borough. Coordination shall be required with respect to
streets, interior and exterior, whether public or private, and with
intersections, sidewalks, crosswalks, curbing, waterlines, sanitary
sewers, stormwater BMPs, park and recreation land, open space, and
other infrastructure and utilities.
A. A manual of written and graphic design guidelines shall be prepared by
the applicant and submitted for Borough approval with preliminary
subdivision/land development plans. The manual shall include all plans,
sketches, photographs and other images to convey the proposed use,
development and redevelopment.
(1) The manual shall be prepared by:
(a) A registered architect; and
(b) A registered landscape architect.
(2) The manual shall address:
(a) New buildings that will be complementary to one another in
terms of scale, size, height, massing, proportion, and overall
design.
(b) Streetscape elements such as on-street parking, sidewalks,
crosswalks, street trees, streetlights, curbing, signage, and
banners.
(c) Civic amenities such as green areas, plazas, pergolas, gazebos,
benches, and kiosks.
(d) Building elements such as porticos and stoops.
(e) Building and roof materials, fenestration, and related detailing.
(f) Storefronts and shop fronts for commercial buildings.
§ 280-80 JUNKYARDS § 280-81
170:915
(g) Landscape materials and detailing.
(h) Specialty landscape features such as fountains, fences, walls,
piers, planters, ramps, and lighting.
(i) Service and utility features for trash, electric, drainage, and
stormwater management.
(j) Evidence of reasonable compliance with the development
strategy plan.
B. An overall master plan shall be prepared and submitted in a form
consistent with the sketch plan requirements of the Catasauqua
Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance236 prior to
formal submission of a land development plan. The master plan shall
demonstrate compliance with this article and shall be reasonably
consistent with the development strategy plan.
C. Article VI, Off-Street Parking and Loading, shall apply except as to the
number of parking spaces required. Instead, the applicant shall submit
to the Borough for review and approval a master plan for parking,
prepared in accordance with the requirements of § 280-82C.
D. Overall streetscape design. The streetscape shall have the complete
ensemble of sidewalks, buildings along sidewalks, on-street parking,
street trees, streetlights, and crosswalks that interconnect throughout
the Waterfront District.
E. Street and alley network. Internal circulation shall be through an
interconnected network of streets, alleys and service drives. One-way
alleys and service drives shall be at least 10 feet in width, and two-way
alleys and service drives shall be at least 18 feet in width.
F. Building design.
(1) Building width. Any building that exceeds 36 feet in width shall
have pilasters, piers, panels, bays, recesses, or projections to
provide a vertical articulation of bays to a building.
(2) Building location. Principal buildings shall be located close to
sidewalks. Building location and design shall recognize and
accommodate significant, natural features.
(3) Build-to lines. New buildings shall create street walls. Buildings
shall collectively help to form the streetscape. If certain
typographic, hydrologic, and/or other site constraints preclude the
ability to achieve the street wall, then a street wall solution with
low walls, and/or piers and fences, shall be installed and
maintained.
236. Editor's Note: See Ch. 235, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 280-81 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-81
170:916
(4) Building design and materials. All proposed architectural features
shall be subject to evaluation through the manual referenced in
Subsection A.
(5) Building design shall be subject to review in accordance with the
procedures set forth in § 280-82A through J and, if applicable,
§ 280-82K(2) through (4).
G. Parking.
(1) On-street parking shall be provided along private and public streets
to the maximum extent possible in bays at least seven feet wide and
22 feet in depth. Such parking shall be counted toward the overall
parking requirements for a use.
(2) Off-street parking shall be located behind, underneath or within
buildings to the maximum extent possible. Where necessary,
parking may be located on the side of buildings. However, no offstreet
parking shall be located in front of buildings between the
building and the curbline.
H. Sidewalks and walkways shall be provided and shall have a minimum
width of five feet, and shall be interconnected with other sidewalks and
walkways throughout the district. Sidewalks shall have expansion or
dummy joints every five feet, and each square so formed shall have a
smooth trowel finish around the edges and a broom finish within each
section.
I. Crosswalks shall be provided and shall have a minimum width of six
feet, and shall be interconnected with other crosswalks throughout the
district. Crosswalks may be continental-type parallel white bars.
J. Street trees, buffers, and other landscape enhancement shall be
provided in the form of street trees, shade trees, flowering trees, shrubs
and ground covers. Landscaping shall be installed and maintained in
accordance with a landscape plan, prepared by a registered landscape
architect, following the requirements of the Catasauqua Shade Tree
Ordinance (codified at Chapter 245) and shall include, at a minimum:
(1) Street trees at two-and-one-half- to three-inch caliper, every 40
feet, along both sides of all streets.
(2) Shade trees at two- to two-and-one-half-inch caliper within planting
islands or peninsulas in off-street parking lots. Such planting
islands or peninsulas shall comprise at least 5% of the total parking
area square footage.
(3) Shade trees at two-and-one-half- to three-inch caliper at a ratio of
at least one such tree for every 1,000 square feet of green area.
(4) Evergreen hedges with a minimum height of 36 inches to 42 inches
at the time of installation to serve as a buffer to off-street parking
lots.
§ 280-81 JUNKYARDS § 280-81
170:917
K. Street lights shall comply with the following design standards:
(1) Be installed and maintained on average at ninety-foot intervals.
(2) Be decorative, and not exceed 20 feet in height.
(3) Be installed and maintained to prevent trespass glare.
(4) Be less than 0.5 footcandle at the property line of the tract
perimeter.
(5) Be unified in design as LED-type lights.
(6) Have a flat black color for all light posts, pole arms, and the
housing for the light globes.
L. Curb cuts shall be minimal along any block, and vehicular access shall
be provided in alleys and service drives.
M. Street furniture and furnishings, such as benches, planters, bicycle
racks, vertical pole-mounted banners, and the like shall be provided.
N. New utilities shall be constructed and maintained underground. All
waterlines and sewer lines, exclusive of laterals, shall be offered for
dedication to the Borough.
O. Signage shall be installed and maintained in accordance with Article VII
and the design guidelines for signs on awnings, buildings, pylons and
streets as set forth in the manual of design guidelines. No sign shall be
backlit.
P. Restaurant outdoor seating guidelines. In accordance with
§ 280-78A(21) and (22), restaurants may provide seating outdoors in
accordance with the following requirements:
(1) Any person who shall desire to provide outdoor seating in
connection with a restaurant shall obtain a zoning permit therefor
and shall identify, among other things, the indoor and outdoor
seating capacity and provide a plan depicting, with reasonable
specificity, the location of the outdoor service area, the number and
locations of tables and seating and any other information required
by this section or the Zoning Officer.
(2) The applicant shall maintain the restaurant outdoor seating areas
in accordance with all applicable Borough ordinances and state and
federal laws, as well as rules and regulations promulgated and
adopted by the Borough.
(3) The applicant shall remove the outdoor seating within 30 days after
written notice if the Borough determines that the outdoor seating is
detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of the
Borough or its citizens.
§ 280-81 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-81
170:918
(a) Due to pedestrian traffic changes, the restaurant outdoor
seating narrows the sidewalk to the extent that pedestrian
traffic is impeded;
(b) The restaurant outdoor seating interferes with the
maintenance or installation of an underground utility
structure;
(c) The restaurant outdoor seating is no longer being used as
such;
(d) The restaurant outdoor seating has been temporarily or
permanently closed for violation of any Borough, state or
federal law and/or regulation; or
(e) The restaurant outdoor seating is operated in violation of any
ordinance, rule or regulation of the Borough.
(4) In any location where the restaurant outdoor seating is not
separated from the flow of traffic by on-street parking areas or
other barriers, then no table shall be located within five feet of the
curb.
(5) The restaurant shall provide table service to the outdoor seating
area.
(6) The restaurant outdoor seating area shall not impede pedestrian
circulation.
Q. Civic amenities such as pocket parks, green areas, plazas, pedestrian
gathering areas, pergolas, pavilions, gazebos, benches, kiosks, and the
like shall be subject to evaluation through the manual referenced in
Subsection A. At least 5% of the overall lot or tract shall be designed,
built and maintained for civic use and green areas, and shall be subject
to the procedures set forth in § 280-82A through J and, if applicable,
§ 280-82K.
R. A planned multifamily residential community in this Waterfront District
shall comply with all of the following:
(1) Building height shall not exceed 45 feet, measured from the
elevation of the intersection of the center lines of Front and
Strawberry Streets to the ceiling of the highest habitable floor.
(2) Compliance with all requirements of this Zoning Ordinance shall be
in the following priority: first, with the specific requirements of
§ 280-29A(39); second, and to the extent not inconsistent with
§ 280-29A(39), all requirements of the Waterfront District as set
forth in Article XI hereof; and third, to the extent not inconsistent
with the requirements of § 280-29A(39) and the Waterfront District
regulations, the remaining applicable requirements of this Zoning
Ordinance.
§ 280-81 JUNKYARDS § 280-81
170:919
§ 280-82. Procedures.
(3) Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum habitable floor area of
650 square feet.
(4) All streets within the multifamily residential community shall be
private at the option of the Borough, and all sanitary sewer and
water facilities, excluding laterals, shall be sold to the Borough for
nominal consideration of $1 by an appropriate bill of sale. All
necessary easements and cross-easements shall be provided and
where necessary, offered for dedication to the Borough for nominal
consideration of $1.
A. All applicants shall submit a master plan for all proposals meeting the
sketch plan requirements of the Borough Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.237 Such plans may be informally reviewed as
conceptual plans in order to provide an opportunity for the Borough to
make suggestions and recommendations on the design of the proposed
development and in order for the applicant to demonstrate compliance
with this article.
B. The plans shall conform to the Catasauqua Borough Zoning Ordinance,
as well as the preliminary and final plan application requirements of the
most recent version of the Catasauqua Borough Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance (SALDO), and shall include the plans as
required in the SALDO as well as those listed below.
C. Building and parking plan.
(1) A separate building plan sheet shall be submitted to depict the
proposed building program. Said plan shall indicate the proposed
principal and accessory buildings, the gross square footages of all
buildings, and the building heights. The building plan shall also
indicate the total impervious surface coverage, existing and
proposed.
(2) The building plan sheet shall contain an overall master parking
plan which shall depict proposed parking and list the number and
location of parking spaces proposed in relation to the proposed
use(s). In this regard, see also § 280-81C.
(3) The building and master parking plan sheet shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Borough and upon approval shall be
implemented as part of the land development plan for the
development tract.
D. Street, alley, and streetscape plan.
237. Editor's Note: See Ch. 235, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 280-81 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-82
170:920
(1) A separate plan sheet shall be submitted to depict the proposed
interconnected street, alley, and service drive network. Such plan
shall indicate all street widths and right-of-way widths.
(2) Such plan shall indicate all materials, depths of pavement courses,
and gradients.
(3) Traffic impact study.
(a) A traffic impact study shall be submitted for every development
plan which involves one or more of the following:
[1] Generation of greater than 500 new, daily average,
weekday average vehicle trips (total of inbound and
outbound);
[2] Generation of 50 or more new a.m. or p.m. peak-hour trips
during the peak hour of the adjacent streets or of the
development.
(b) The traffic impact study area and scope shall be based on the
characteristics of the surrounding area and the impact of the
plan on the area. Prior to initiation of the study, the area and
scope shall be mutually agreed upon between the Borough
Engineer and the traffic engineer preparing the study.
(c) The traffic impact study shall be prepared by a professional
engineer registered in Pennsylvania with specific training in
traffic and transportation engineering, at least four years of
experience related to preparing traffic studies for existing or
proposed developments, and sufficient prior traffic study
experience to qualify the engineer to render any opinions and
recommendation in the study. The study shall be prepared in
accordance with PennDOT Publications and Procedures for
Transportation Impact Studies, Publication 46, Traffic
Engineering Manual, and Institute of Transportation Engineers
(ITE) recommended practice, Transportation Impact Analyses
for Site Development, or with respect to all or any successor
publications thereto.
E. Pedestrian access plan.
(1) A separate plan sheet shall be submitted to depict the proposed
interconnected network for pedestrian access, including sidewalks,
crosswalks, and pathways.
(2) Such plan shall indicate all materials and gradients for sidewalks,
crosswalks, and pathways.
F. Landscape plan and public realm plan.
(1) A separate plan sheet shall be submitted to depict all proposed
landscape features and public realm features.
§ 280-82 JUNKYARDS § 280-82
170:921
(2) The landscape plan shall indicate all plant types, sizes and
quantities as well as the types, sizes, and materials for all paving,
plazas, benches, walls, piers, planters and other structures.
(3) Such plan shall indicate all green areas and other common
features.
G. Signage plan.
(1) The provisions of Article VII shall apply.
(2) A separate general site signage plan sheet shall be submitted to
depict proposed signage for all such wall and window signs, as well
as any proposed directional and wayfinding signs, and all gateway
features.
(3) Such plan shall also depict the size, materials, colors, graphics, and
anchoring details for all signs and gateway features.
H. Utilities plan and lighting plan.
(1) A separate plan sheet shall be submitted to depict all proposed
utilities and lighting.
(2) Such plan shall indicate all proposed types, sizes, and materials of
utilities and lighting that are proposed.
I. Phasing plan. A separate plan sheet shall be submitted to depict
proposed staging or phasing of the total land development. Such plan
shall be accompanied by a typed schedule.
J. Declaration of covenants, easements and restrictions. A declaration
shall be submitted to the Borough and shall be satisfactory to the
Borough Solicitor.
K. Bonus provisions. Borough Council, upon review and recommendation
of the Borough Planning Commission, may grant bonuses for density,
building coverage, building height, or other dimensional standards,
provided that at least three of the following value-added features are
proposed:
(1) Streetscape improvements, including, without limitation,
decorative street lights, benches, bicycle racks, and waste
receptacles are designed along the street frontages.
(2) Buildings are designed with context-sensitive features for the
proposed architecture, reflecting the historical significance of the
property and environs.
(3) Buildings or structures are adaptively reused.
(4) Building materials existing on the site and having historical value
are reused in new construction.
§ 280-82 CATASAUQUA CODE § 280-82
170:922
§ 280-83. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY PLAN — Section 4, titled "Design Solutions," as
contained in the pamphlet titled "The Iron Works Catasauqua, Pennsylvania
2014," by Spillman Farmer Architects et al., a copy of which is available at
the Borough office.
DEVELOPMENT TRACT — All land in the Waterfront Zoning District not
included in the municipal complex tract, subject to the unified development
standards set forth in § 280-80.
MUNICIPAL COMPLEX TRACT — That parcel of land owned and developed
by the Borough of Catasauqua as a municipal complex, all as depicted on an
approved and recorded subdivision plan.
§ 280-84. Applicability.
The Waterfront District shall be as shown on the Catasauqua Borough
Zoning Map.
§ 280-85. Relationship to other provisions.
In the event of a direct conflict with any other ordinance provisions, the
Article XI provisions shall apply.
(5) Green infrastructure in the form of green roofs, rain gardens, and
the like, are designed to the satisfaction of the Borough Engineer.
(6) Buildings are designed to achieve at least a LEED Bronze
certification.
(7) The development tract is planned and designed to achieve LEEDND
(LEED for neighborhood design) certification.
(8) Parking is designed and built in excess of the master parking plan
for off-street parking in the Borough, subject to the review and
approval of the Borough.
(9) The development tract is designed, built, and maintained for civic
use and green areas, in excess of the 5% required in § 280-81Q.
§ 280-82 JUNKYARDS § 280-85
170:923
Appendix
Chapter A285
FEES
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of ordinances.
The last ordinance reviewed for the original publication of the Code was
Ord. No. 1182, adopted 3-7-2005.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1183 6-6-2005 Parks and playgrounds
amendment
Ch. 195, Art. III
1184 6-6-2005 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1185 6-6-2005 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1186 7-11-2005 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1187 9-6-1005 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1188 Approval of charges;
appointment of third-party
collector for unpaid real
property taxes
NCM
1189 11-7-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
1190 11-7-2005 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
1191 11-7-2005 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1192 12-19-2005 2006 real estate tax rate Superseded by Ord.
No. 1220
1193 12-19-2005 Manager amendment Superseded by Ord.
No. 1206
1194 3-6-2006 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
§ 280-85 CATASAUQUA CODE § DL-1
170:924
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1195 5-1-2006 Sex offender residency
regulations
Repealed by Ord.
No. 1269
1196 5-1-2006 Property Maintenance Code
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 1330
1197 7-17-2006 Calculation of tapping fees Ch. 237, Art. I
1198 7-17-2006 Water connection, customer
facilities and tapping fees
Ch. 265, Art. VI
1199 7-17-2006 Sewer connection, customer
facilities and tapping fees
Ch. 210, Art. V
1200 7-17-2006 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1201 9-5-2006 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1202 9-5-2006 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1203 10-2-2006 Alarm devices Ch. 98
1204 11-6-2006 General traffic regulations
amendment; parking
regulations amendment
Ch. 260, Arts. I and
II
1205 11-6-2006 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1206 12-18-2006 Manager amendment Ch. 50
1207 12-18-2006 2007 real estate tax rate Superseded by Ord.
No. 1220
1208 1-8-2007 Streets and sidewalks:
street location and naming
amendment (Official Map)
Ch. 230, Art. I
1209 3-5-2007 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1210 3-5-2007 Street obstructions and uses
amendment; street
excavations amendment
Ch. 230, Arts. VII
and VIII
1211 4-2-2007 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1212 4-2-2007 Stormwater management Ch. 225
1213 5-7-2007 General traffic regulations
amendment; parking
regulations amendment
Ch. 260, Arts. I and
II
§ DL-1 JUNKYARDS § DL-1
170:925
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1214 6-4-2007 Police Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 55
1215 7-9-2007 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1216 8-6-2007 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1217 10-1-2007 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. I
1218 11-5-2007 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1219 12-17-2007 Local services tax Ch. 240, Art. X
1220 12-17-2007 2008 real estate tax rate Superseded by Ord.
No. 1231
1221 12-17-2007 Manager amendment Ch. 50
1222 1-7-2008 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1223 6-2-2008 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1224 8-4-2008 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1225 9-2-2008 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1226 11-3-2008 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1227 11-3-2008 Records: open records
policy
Ch. 68, Art. I
1228 12-1-2008 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1229 12-1-2008 Sidewalk, curb and gutter
construction and repair
amendment
Ch. 230, Art. V
1230 12-1-2008 Rental property Ch. 108, reference
only; 207
1231 12-22-2008 2009 real estate tax rate Superseded by Ord.
No. 1247
1232 12-22-2008 Manager amendment Ch. 50
1233 2-2-2009 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
§ DL-1 CATASAUQUA CODE § DL-1
170:926
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1234 2-2-2009 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1235 2-2-2009 Street vacation for portion
of Milton Street
NCM
1236 3-2-2009 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1237 3-2-2009 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1238 6-1-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
1239 6-1-2009 General traffic regulations
amendment; parking
regulations amendment
Ch. 260, Arts. I and
II
1240 7-6-2009 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1241 8-3-2009 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1242 8-3-2009 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1243 8-3-2009 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1244 10-5-2009 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. I
1245 10-5-2009 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1246 11-2-2009 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1247 12-15-2009 2010 real estate tax rate Superseded by Ord.
No. 1260
1248 12-15-2009 Manager amendment Ch. 50
1249 1-4-2010 Pensions, retirement and
benefits amendment (grant
of additional vacation leave)
See Ch. 55
1250 4-5-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
1251 5-3-2010 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. I
1252 5-3-2010 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. I
1253 6-7-2010 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. I
§ DL-1 JUNKYARDS § DL-1
170:927
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1254 7-12-2010 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. I
1255 9-7-2010 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. I
1256 10-4-2010 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. I
1257 11-1-2010 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. I
1258 11-1-2010 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. I
1259 12-6-2010 Water: rates and charges;
meters; water usage
amendment
Ch. 265, Art. IV
1260 12-20-2010 2011 real estate tax rate Superseded by Ord.
No. 1272
1261 12-20-2010 Manager amendment Ch. 50
1262 2-7-2011 Schedule of fees and
charges amendment
(attorney's fees)
New legislation
pending; see Ch.
A285
1263 3-7-2011 Solid waste: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 220, Art. I
1264 3-7-2011 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1265 4-4-2011 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1266 4-4-2011 Insurance: fire insurance
claims escrow
Ch. 167, Art. I
1267 4-4-2011 Pensions, retirement and
benefits amendment (preretirement
survivor benefit)
See Ch. 55
1268 6-6-2011 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1269 8-1-2011 Sex offender residency
restrictions repealer
Ch. 212, Art. I
(reference only)
1270 9-15-2011 Bond (sewer-system-related
capital improvements)
NCM
1271 10-3-2011 Earned income and net
profits tax amendment
Ch. 240, Art. I
1272 12-19-2011 2012 real estate tax rate Superseded by Ord.
No. 1295
§ DL-1 CATASAUQUA CODE § DL-1
170:928
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1273 12-19-2011 Manager amendment Ch. 50
1274 12-19-2011 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 235
1275 12-19-2011 Rental property amendment Ch. 207
1276 2-6-2012 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1277 6-4-2012 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1278 6-4-2012 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1279 8-6-2012 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1280 9-10-2012 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1281 11-5-2012 Ordaining and opening
portions of Bridge Street
(aka Strawberry Street)
NCM
1282 12-17-2012 Initial 2013 real estate tax
rate
NCM
1283 12-17-2012 Final 2013 real estate tax
rate
NCM
1284 12-17-2012 Manager amendment Ch. 50
1285 2-4-2013 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. I
1286 3-4-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
1287 4-1-2013 Sewers and sewage
disposal: wastewater
treatment amendment
Ch. 210, Art. III
1288 4-1-2013 General provisions: payment
of court costs and attorneys'
fees
Ch. 1, Art. II
1289 6-3-2013 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1290 6-3-2013 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1291 8-5-2013 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
§ DL-1 JUNKYARDS § DL-1
170:929
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1292 9-3-2013 Intergovernmental
agreements: Susquehanna
Municipal Trust
Ch. 43, Art. I
1293 9-3-2013 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. I
1294 11-4-2013 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1295 12-18-2013 Real estate tax rate
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 1308
1296 12-18-2013 Manager amendment Ch. 50
1297 3-3-2014 General traffic regulations
amendment; parking
regulations amendment
Ch. 260, Arts. I and
II
1298 4-7-2014 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1299 5-5-2014 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. I
1300 5-5-2014 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1301 6-2-2014 Trees amendment Ch. 245
1302 6-2-2014 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1303 7-14-2014 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1304 8-4-2014 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1305 8-4-2014 Garage sales amendment Ch. 160
1306 10-6-2014 General traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. I
1307 12-1-2014 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1308 12-17-2014 Real estate tax rate
amendment
Ch. 240, Art. IX
1309 12-17-2014 Manager amendment Ch. 50
1310 1-5-2015 Playgrounds and parks
amendment; skate park
rules
Ch. 195, Arts. III and
V
1311 3-2-2015 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
§ DL-1 CATASAUQUA CODE § DL-1
170:930
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1312 4-6-2015 Uniform Construction Code
amendment
Ch. 130, Art. V
1313 4-6-2015 Rental property amendment Ch. 207
1314 5-4-2015 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1315 5-4-2015 Authorization of
condemnation of 440 Front
Street for the purpose of
extending Bridge Street
NCM
1316 7-6-2015 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1317 10-5-2015 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1318 11-2-2015 Water connection, customer
facilities and tapping fees
amendment
Ch. 265, Art. VI
1319 11-2-2015 Sewer connection, customer
facilities and tapping fees
amendment
Ch. 210, Art. V
1320 11-2-2015 Calculation of tapping fees
amendment
Ch. 237, Art. I
1321 11-2-2015 Public safety radio
amplification systems
Ch. 206
1322 11-2-2015 Parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1323 12-16-2015 Real estate tax rate
amendment
Ch. 240, Art. IX
1324 12-16-2015 Manager amendment Ch. 50
1325 12-16-2015 Authorization of distribution
from Water Department
Contingency Fund
NCM
1326 2-1-2016 Vehicles and traffic: parking
regulations amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1327 4-4-2016 Vehicles and traffic: parking
regulations amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1328 5-2-2016 Vehicles and traffic: parking
regulations amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1329 5-2-2016 Buildings amendment Ch. 120
1330 6-6-2016 Uniform codes amendment Ch. 130, Art. I
§ DL-1 JUNKYARDS § DL-1
170:931
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1331 6-6-2016 Uniform codes amendment Ch. 130, Art. IV
1332 6-6-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
1333 6-28-2016 Bond NCM
1334 7-18-2016 Parks and recreation:
playgrounds and parks
amendment; Municipal
Swimming Pool amendment;
skate parks amendment
Ch. 195, Art. III; Ch.
195, Art. IV; Ch.
195, Art. V
1335 8-1-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
1336 8-29-2016 Bond NCM
1337 9-6-2016 Vehicles and traffic: parking
regulations amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1338 10-3-2016 Vehicles and traffic: parking
regulations amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1339 10-3-2016 Vehicles and traffic: parking
regulations amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1340 11-7-2016 Vehicles and traffic: general
traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. I,
footnote only
1341 12-5-2016 Vehicles and traffic: parking
regulations amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1342 12-14-2016 Taxation: real estate tax
rate
Superseded by Ord.
No. 1362
1343 12-14-2016 Manager amendment Ch. 50
1344 1-9-2017 Vehicles and traffic: parking
regulations amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1345 1-9-2017 Salaries and compensation:
Tax Collector amendment
Ch. 75, Art. II
1346 3-6-2017 Vehicles and traffic: general
traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. I,
footnote only
1347 4-3-2017 Vehicles and traffic: parking
regulations amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1348 5-1-2017 Vehicles and traffic: general
traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. I,
footnote only
1349 5-1-2017 Vehicles and traffic: parking
regulations amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
§ DL-1 CATASAUQUA CODE § DL-1
170:932
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1350 6-5-2017 Vehicles and traffic: general
traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. I
1351 6-5-2017 Vehicles and traffic: parking
regulations amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1352 7-10-2017 Vehicles and traffic: parking
regulations amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1353 8-7-2017 Vehicles and traffic: parking
regulations amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1354 8-7-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
1355 10-2-2017 Ordaining and opening a
portion of Bridge Street
NCM
1356 10-2-2017 Vehicles and traffic: parking
regulations amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1357 10-2-2017 Renaming a portion of
Bridge Street (aka
Strawberry Street)
NCM
1358 10-2-2017 Vehicles and traffic: parking
regulations amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1359 11-6-2017 Vehicles and traffic: parking
regulations amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1360 12-4-2017 Vehicles and traffic: parking
regulations amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II
1361 Not adopted
1362 12-20-2017 Taxation: real estate tax
rate
Ch. 240, Art. IX
1363 12-20-2017 Manager amendment Ch. 50
1364 2-5-2018 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
1365 3-5-2018 Pension Plan
Amendment
See Ch. 55 18
1366 3-5-2018 Parking
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II 18
1367 3-5-2018 Rental Property
Amendment
Ch. 207 18
§ DL-1 JUNKYARDS § DL-1
170:933
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
1368 4-2-2018 Parking
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II 18
1369 5-7-2018 Parking
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II 18
1370 6-4-2018 Parking
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II 18
1371 7-9-2018 Sewers and
Sewage Disposal:
Control of Fats,
Oils and Grease
Ch. 210, Art. VI 18
1372 Not Adopted 18
1373 8-13-2018 Streets and
Sidewalks:
Excavations in
Borough Streets
and Other
Borough
Properties
Ch. 230, Art.
VIII
18
1374 8-13-2018 Parking
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II 18
1375 11-5-2018 Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 280 18
1376 11-5-2018 Fire Inspector Ch. 37 18
1377 12-10-2018 Taxation: Real
Estate Tax Rate
Amendment
Ch. 240, Art. IX 18
1378 12-10-2018 Manager
Amendment
Ch. 50 18
1379 12-10-2018 General Traffic
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 260, Art. I 18
1380 2-4-2019 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM 18
1381 5-6-2019 Manager
Amendment
Ch. 50 18
§ DL-1 CATASAUQUA CODE § DL-1
170:934
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
1382 6-3-2019 Intergovernmental
Agreement:
School Resource
Officer
NCM 18
1383 8-5-2019 Parking
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 260, Art. II 18
1384 8-5-2019 General Traffic
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 260, Art. I 18
1385 8-5-2019 General Traffic
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 260, Art. I 18
1386 8-5-2019 General Traffic
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 260, Art. I 18
1387 9-3-2019 General Traffic
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 260, Art. I 18
§ DL-2. Disposition of resolutions.
The last resolution reviewed for the original publication of the Code was
Res. No. 3-05, adopted 2-7-2005.
Resolution
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4-05 2-7-2005 Authorizing contract with
county
NCM
5-05 2-7-2005 Bank form for checking
account
NCM
6-05 2-7-2005 Conditionally approving
minor subdivision plan
NCM
7-05 2-7-2005 Conditionally approving
minor subdivision plan
NCM
8-05 2-7-2005 Delinquent taxes Ch. 240, Art. XI
9-05 3-7-2005 Supporting
Transportation Equity Act
NCM
10-05 6-6-2005 Schedule of fees and
charges amendment
New legislation
pending; see Ch.
A285
§ DL-1 JUNKYARDS § DL-2
170:935
Resolution
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
11-05 6-6-2005 Conditionally approving
development plan
NCM
12-05 6-21-2005 Fee in lieu of dedication
of land for outdoor
recreation
New legislation
pending; see Ch.
A285
13-05 7-11-2005 Filing application with
Pennsylvania Liquor
Control Board
NCM
14-05 7-11-2005 Accepting highway safety
project grant
NCM
15-05 7-11-2005 Redevelopment plan NCM
16-05 8-1-2005 Authorization for thirdparty
delinquent tax
collection
NCM
17-05 12-5-2005 Adoption of official
deferred compensation
plan
See Ch. 55
18-05 12-19-2005 Schedule of fees and
charges amendment
New legislation
pending; see Ch.
A285
19-05 12-19-2005 Rate and eligibility
requirements for senior
citizen refuse assessment
discount beginning
1-1-2006
NCM
20-05 12-19-2005 Interfund transfers NCM
21-05 12-19-2005 Directing use of revenues NCM
22-05 12-19-2005 2006 annual budget NCM
1-06 1-3-2006 Authorizing reduction in
full-time employees'
contributions to police
pension fund
NCM
2-06 1-3-2006 Disposition of certain
Borough records
NCM
3-06 2-6-2006 Exonerating Tax Collector
ex officio from collection
of 2005 per capita taxes
from certain persons
NCM
4-06 2-6-2006 Schedule of fees and
charges amendment
New legislation
pending; see Ch.
A285
§ DL-2 CATASAUQUA CODE § DL-2
170:936
Resolution
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5-06 6-5-2006 Authorizing participation
in PACC contract
NCM
6-06 6-5-2006 Opposing current
franchising legislation
NCM
7-06 8-7-2006 Conditional approval of
subdivision application
(Todd and Antoinette
Dreisbach)
NCM
8-06 9-5-2006 Approval to implement
National Incident
Management Plan
NCM
9-06 11-6-2006 Adopting Hazard
Mitigation Plan Lehigh
Valley, PA, July 2006
NCM
10-06 12-18-2006 Schedule of fees and
charges amendment
New legislation
pending; see Ch.
A285
11-06 12-18-2006 Rate and eligibility
requirements for senior
citizen refuse assessment
discount beginning
1-1-2007
NCM
12-06 12-18-2006 Directing use of revenues NCM
13-06 12-18-2006 2007 annual budget NCM
1-07 1-8-2007 Authorizing reduction in
full-time employees'
contributions to police
pension fund
NCM
2-07 1-8-2007 Disposition of certain
Borough records
NCM
3-07 1-8-2007 Schedule of fees and
charges amendment
New legislation
pending; see Ch.
A285
4-07 2-5-2007 Authorizing participation
in Lehigh County
Congress of Governments
NCM
5-07 2-5-2007 Exonerating Tax Collector
ex officio from collection
of 2006 per capita taxes
from certain persons
NCM
§ DL-2 JUNKYARDS § DL-2
170:937
Resolution
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
6-07 2-5-2007 Conditional approval of
minor subdivision plan
(Thomas Cramer)
NCM
7-07 3-5-2007 Schedule of fees and
charges amendment
New legislation
pending; see Ch.
A285
8-07 5-7-2007 Snow emergencies
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. VI
9-07 9-4-2007 Conditional approval of
minor subdivision plan
(Dale and Jendy Sell/
Circle Drive)
NCM
10-07 9-4-2007 Price adjustment of
bituminous materials in
street resurfacing
contract
NCM
11-07 9-4-2007 Snow emergencies
amendment
Ch. 260, Art. VI
12-07 10-1-2007 Conditional approval of
minor subdivision plan
(James and Janice Jones/
Peach and Milton Streets)
NCM
13-07 10-1-2007 Conditional approval of
preliminary land
development plan of
Catasauqua Area School
District
NCM
14-07 11-5-2007 Conditional approval of
final land development
plan of Catasauqua Area
School District
NCM
15-07 11-5-2007 Adoption of health plan/
PPO plan
See Ch. 55
16-07 11-5-2007 Adoption of health plan/
Traditional Plan
See Ch. 55
17-07 12-3-2007 Vehicles and traffic: snow
emergencies amendment
Ch. 260, Art. VI
18-07 12-17-2007 Rate and eligibility
requirements for senior
citizen refuse assessment
discount beginning
1-1-2008
NCM
§ DL-2 CATASAUQUA CODE § DL-2
170:938
Resolution
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
19-07 12-17-2007 Use of 2007 revenue from
emergency and municipal
services tax
NCM
20-07 12-17-2007 Water turn-on fee
amendment
New legislation
pending; see Ch.
A285
21-07 12-17-2007 Adoption of 2008 budget NCM
1-08 1-7-2008 Police Pension Fund
contributions for full-time
employees
See Ch. 55
2-08 1-7-2008 Disposition of certain
Borough records
NCM
3-08 2-4-2008 Exonerating Tax Collector
ex officio from collection
of 2007 per capita taxes
from certain persons
NCM
4-08 2-4-2008 Approving charges and
fees of Borough Solicitor
for collection of
delinquent real estate
taxes for 2007
NCM
5-08 3-3-2008 Supporting Senate Bill
777, amending Municipal
Claims and Tax Liens Law
NCM
6-08 4-7-2008 Recognizing Historic
Catasauqua Preservation
Association
NCM
7-08 4-7-2008 Municipal building office
hours modified
NCM
8-08 4-7-2008 Approving and
authorizing submission of
a CDBG application to
Lehigh County
NCM
9-08 5-5-2008 Swimming pool and
pavilions fees amendment
New legislation
pending; see Ch.
A285
10-08 5-27-2008 Approving and
authorizing submission of
application to amend
2007 CDBG program
NCM
§ DL-2 JUNKYARDS § DL-2
170:939
Resolution
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
11-08 6-2-2008 Conditional approval of
minor subdivision plan
(Corrado Builders Inc.)
NCM
12-08 7-7-2008 Adopting downtown
revitalization plan
NCM
13-08 8-4-2008 Concurring with request
of Borough Authority to
call sewer bonds
NCM
14-08 10-6-2008 Intent to authorize
Borough Solicitor as
third-party delinquent tax
collector for 2007
NCM
15-08 11-3-2008 Public records duplication
fees and charges
New legislation
pending; see Ch.
A285
16-08 11-3-2008 Approving and
authorizing submission of
safe streets grant
application to Lehigh
County
NCM
17-08 12-1-2008 Authorizing preparation
and submission of
application for funding
assistance under
Pennsylvania Community
Transportation Initiative
NCM
18-08 12-22-2008 Rate and eligibility
requirements for senior
citizen refuse assessment
discount beginning
1-1-2009
NCM
19-08 12-22-2008 Refuse collection fee
amendment
New legislation
pending; see Ch.
A285
20-08 12-22-2008 2009 budget NCM
21-08 12-22-2008 Intent to authorize
Borough Solicitor as
third-party delinquent tax
collector for 2008
NCM
1-09 1-5-2009 Police Pension Fund
contributions for full-time
employees for 2009
See Ch. 55
§ DL-2 CATASAUQUA CODE § DL-2
170:940
Resolution
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2-09 1-5-2009 Disposition of certain
Borough records
NCM
3-09 1-5-2009 Use of Allentown Police
Academy for training of
police officers
NCM
4-09 2-2-2009 Exonerating Tax Collector
ex officio from collection
of 2008 per capita taxes
from certain persons
NCM
5-09 2-2-2009 Intent to follow schedules
and procedures for
disposition of records as
set forth in Municipal
Records Manual
NCM
6-09 2-2-2009 Authorizing beginning of
property-acquisition
process for fire station
use
Repealed by Res.
No. 8-09
7-09 3-2-2009 Adoption of recreational
plan
NCM
8-09 3-2-2009 Rescinding Res. No. 6-09 NCM
9-09 4-6-2009 Authorizing destruction of
audio voice recordings of
Council meetings
NCM
10-09 4-6-2009 Approving and
authorizing submission of
CDBG application to
Lehigh County
NCM
11-09 6-1-2009 Appointing Tax Collection
Committee
representatives
NCM
12-09 7-6-2009 Authorizing contract with
county for Borough
Business Revitalization
Program
NCM
13-09 7-6-2009 Conditionally approving
preliminary/final lot
consolidation plan and
preliminary/final minor
subdivision plan of James
Jones
NCM
§ DL-2 JUNKYARDS § DL-2
170:941
Resolution
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
14-09 7-6-2009 Conditionally approving
preliminary/final land
development plan of
Catasauqua Area School
District
NCM
15-09 7-6-2009 Schedule of fees and
charges amendment
(season ticket rates for
Catasauqua Municipal
Swimming Pool and
discounted rate for
admission after 5:00 p.m.)
New legislation
pending; see Ch.
A285
16-09 11-2-2009 Waiving subdivision and
land development
requirements for
subdivision of airport land
for BMX Park
NCM
17-09 10-5-2009 Price adjustment of
bituminous materials for
small quantities
NCM
18-09 11-2-2009 Conditionally approving
preliminary/final lot
consolidation plan of
Lehigh-Northampton
Airport Authority
NCM
19-09 12-15-2009 Rate and eligibility
requirements for senior
citizen refuse assessment
discount beginning
1-1-2010
NCM
20-09 12-15-2009 2010 budget NCM
21-09 12-15-2009 Intent to authorize
Borough Solicitor as
third-party delinquent tax
collector for 2009
NCM
1-10 1-4-2010 Police Pension Fund
contributions for full-time
employees for 2010
NCM
2-10 1-4-2010 Disposition of certain
Borough records
NCM
§ DL-2 CATASAUQUA CODE § DL-2
170:942
Resolution
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3-10 1-4-2010 Use of Allentown Police
Academy for training of
police officers
NCM
4-10 1-4-2010 Granting additional
vacation days to certain
employees in 2010
NCM
5-10 2-1-2010 Conditionally approving
preliminary/final land
development plan of
Catasauqua Area School
District
NCM
6-10 2-1-2010 Exonerating Tax Collector
ex officio from collection
of 2009 per capita taxes
from certain persons
NCM
7-10 2-1-2010 Disposition of certain
Borough records
NCM
8-10 3-1-2010 Affirmation of equal
employment opportunity
policy
NCM
9-10 4-5-2010 Affirmation of
appointment of Borough's
Tax Collector for
delinquent real estate
taxes
NCM
10-10 4-5-2010 Authorizing application
for funding under 2010
Community Development
Block Grant Program
NCM
11-10 4-5-2010 Mileage reimbursement
for personal vehicle use
by employees
NCM
12-10 4-5-2010 Encouraging
Pennsylvania General
Assembly to pass law
requiring reporting of lost
or stolen handguns
NCM
13-10 5-3-2010 Vehicles and traffic: snow
emergencies amendment
Ch. 260, Art. VI
14-10 5-3-2010 Rates for swimming pool
admission after 5:00 p.m.
amendment
New legislation
pending; see Ch.
A285
§ DL-2 JUNKYARDS § DL-2
170:943
Resolution
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
15-10 8-2-2010 Price adjustment of
bituminous materials for
street resurfacing
NCM
16-10 8-2-2010 Conditional approval of
minor subdivision plan of
James W. Greene for
proposed townhouse
development
NCM
17-10 9-7-2010 Opposing forced mergers
and consolidations of
local goverments
NCM
18-10 10-4-2010 Identity theft prevention
(red flag rule) policy
NCM
19-10 10-4-2010 Schedule of fees and
charges (permit
extensions) amendment
New legislation
pending; see Ch.
A285
20-10 12-20-2010 Schedule of fees and
charges amendment
(water rates)
New legislation
pending; see Ch.
A285
21-10 12-20-2010 Rate and eligibility
requirements for senior
citizen refuse assessment
discount beginning
1-1-2011
NCM
22-10 12-20-2010 2011 budget NCM
23-10 12-20-2010 Appointment of Borough's
Tax Collector for
delinquent 2010 real
estate taxes
NCM
1-11 1-3-2011 Police Pension Fund
contributions
See Ch. 55
2-11 1-3-2011 Disposition of certain
Borough records
NCM
3-11 1-3-2011 Schedule of fees and
charges amendment
(water rates)
New legislation
pending; see Ch.
A285
4-11 2-7-2011 Procedures for
Compliance with the
Professional Services
Contract Provisions of Act
44 of 2009
NCM
§ DL-2 CATASAUQUA CODE § DL-2
170:944
Resolution
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5-11 2-7-2011 Exonerating Tax Collector
ex officio from collection
of 2010 per capita taxes
from certain persons
NCM
6-11 3-7-2011 Establishment of deposit
accounts with Bank of
America
NCM
7-11 4-4-2011 Consent order and
agreement with
Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental
Protection
NCM
8-11 4-4-2011 Authorizing application
for funding under 2011
Community Development
Block Grant Program
NCM
9-11 4-4-2011 Department of
Conservation and Natural
Resources grant
application for park
improvements (sound
system and rock/play
climber)
NCM
10-11 4-4-2011 Incurrence of debt for
capital projects (sewer
system upgrade)
NCM
11-11 4-25-2011 DCNR grant: design of
D&L Trail
NCM
12-11 7-11-2011 Designation of
Berkheimer liaison
NCM
13-11 7-11-2011 Adoption of Berkheimer
Cost of Collection
Schedule
NCM
14-11 9-12-2011 Council support of and
interest in Weston
Solutions' acquisition and
development of FLSmidth
property
NCM
15-11 12-19-2011 2012 budget NCM
§ DL-2 JUNKYARDS § DL-2
170:945
Resolution
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
16-11 12-19-2011 Schedule of fees and
charges amendment
(sewer rates; refuse
collection fee; rental
program license fee)
New legislation
pending; see Ch.
A285
17-11 12-19-2011 Rate and eligibility
requirements for senior
citizen refuse assessment
discount beginning
1-1-2012
NCM
18-2011 12-19-2011 Appointment of Borough's
Tax Collector for
delinquent 2011 real
estate taxes
NCM
1-12 1-3-2012 Police Pension Fund
contributions
See Ch. 55
2-12 1-3-2012 Disposition of certain
Borough records
NCM
3-12 3-5-2012 Exonerating Tax Collector
ex officio from collection
of 2011 per capita taxes
from certain persons
NCM
4-12 4-2-2012 Amendment to consent
order and agreement with
Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental
Protection
NCM
5-12 4-2-2012 Authorizing application
for funding under 2012
Community Development
Block Grant Program
NCM
6-12 5-7-2012 Authorizing signing of
automated red light
enforcement program
project funding
agreement
NCM
7-12 7-9-2012 Civil Service Commission
rules and regulations
NCM
8-12 6-4-2012 Conditional acceptance of
offer of land to Borough
NCM
§ DL-2 CATASAUQUA CODE § DL-2
170:946
Resolution
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
9-12 7-9-2012 Price adjustment of
bituminous materials for
street resurfacing
NCM
10-12 8-6-2012 Conditional approval of
preliminary/final lot line
adjustment plan for Brian
and Melanie Zettlemoyer
NCM
11-12 8-6-2012 Conditional approval of
preliminary/final land
development plan of the
Borough and the
Catasauqua Area School
District
NCM
12-12 Not adopted
13-12 10-1-2012 Conditional approval of
preliminary/final minor
subdivision plan for
Jeffrey Joseph
NCM
14-12 9-5-2012 Conditional approval of
preliminary/final
subdivision and lot line
adjustment plan for the
estate of Glen J. Stine
NCM
15-12 12-17-2012 2013 budget NCM
16-12 12-17-2012 Schedule of fees and
charges amendment
(administrative surcharge
for failure to request
inspection of rental unit
prior to occupancy; Civil
Service Commission
application processing
fee)
New legislation
pending; see Ch.
A285
17-12 12-17-2012 Rate and eligibility
requirements for senior
citizen refuse assessment
discount beginning
1-1-2013
NCM
§ DL-2 JUNKYARDS § DL-2
170:947
Resolution
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
18-12 12-17-2012 Appointment of Dimmich
& Dinkelacker to serve as
delinquent tax collector
for 2012 real estate taxes
and reaffirming fees to be
paid for those services
NCM
19-12 12-17-2012 Agreement to purchase
approximately 2.5 acres
of real estate on west side
of Front Street
NCM
1-13 1-7-2013 Police Pension Fund
contributions
NCM
2-13 1-7-2013 Disposition of certain
Borough records
NCM
3-13 2-4-2013 Exonerating Tax Collector
ex officio from collection
of 2012 per capita taxes
from certain persons
NCM
4-13 2-4-2013 Approving and
authorizing the
submission of an
application under the
Keystone Historic
Preservation Program
NCM
5-13 2-4-2013 Expressing continued
support of Borough
Council for Second Street
Extension Project
NCM
6-13 2-4-2013 Conditionally approving
preliminary/final lot
consolidation plan of
Lehigh-Northampton
Airport Authority
NCM
7-13 4-1-2013 Schedule of fees and
charges amendment
(swimming pool
admission fees; rate for
bulk water sales to
commercial vendors)
New legislation
pending; see Ch.
A285
8-13 4-1-2013 Recognizing the Historic
Catasauqua Preservation
Association
NCM
§ DL-2 CATASAUQUA CODE § DL-2
170:948
Resolution
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
9-13 4-1-2013 Approving and
authorizing the
submission of the CDBG
application to Lehigh
County
NCM
10-13 5-6-2013 Terminating agreement to
purchase approximately
2.5 acres of real estate on
west side of Front Street
NCM
11-13 6-3-2013 Conditionally approving
preliminary/final plan of
W&M Resonance, LLC
(new parking lot at 840
Walnut Street)
NCM
12-13 7-8-2013 Borough Council: use of
conference calls for
participation and voting
at meetings
Ch. 15, Art. II
13-13 8-5-2013 Price adjustment of
bituminous materials for
street resurfacing
NCM
14-13 8-5-2013 Adopting the Lehigh
Valley 2013 Hazard
Mitigation Plan
NCM
15-13 8-5-2013 Adopting procedures for
choosing professional
services for pension plans
to comply with Act 44 of
2009 and Auditor
General's
recommendation
NCM
16-13 9-3-2013 Ratifying adoption of
HIPPA privacy policy
NCM
17-13 7-10-2013 Fiscal affairs: sale of
Borough property
Ch. 40, Art. VII
18-13 10-7-2013 Approving a joint
Whitehall Township,
Borough of Catasauqua
and Borough of Coplay
intermunicipal City
Revitalization and
Improvement Pilot Zone
application
NCM
§ DL-2 JUNKYARDS § DL-2
170:949
Resolution
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
19-13 12-18-2013 2014 budget NCM
20-13 12-18-2013 Appointment of Dimmich
& Dinkelacker to serve as
delinquent tax collector
for 2013 real estate taxes
and reaffirming fees to be
paid for those services
NCM
21-13 12-18-2013 Rate and eligibility
requirements for senior
citizen refuse assessment
discount beginning
1-1-2014
NCM
22-13 12-18-2013 Schedule of fees and
charges amendment
(refuse assessment rate;
water rate for meters one
inch and larger; pavilion
rentals)
New legislation
pending; see Ch.
A285
1-14 1-6-2014 Police Pension Fund
contributions
NCM
2-14 1-6-2014 Disposition of certain
Borough records
NCM
3-14 2-10-2014 Exonerating Tax Collector
ex officio from collection
of 2013 per capita taxes
from certain persons
NCM
4-14 2-10-2014 Approving and
authorizing submission of
an application under the
Keystone Historic
Preservation Program
NCM
5-14 2-10-2014 Reaffirming adoption of
Borough Civil Service
Commission rules and
regulations
NCM
6-14 4-7-2014 Approving and
authorizing submission of
a CDBG application to
Lehigh County
NCM
7-14 4-7-2014 Recognizing Historic
Catasauqua Preservation
Association
NCM
§ DL-2 CATASAUQUA CODE § DL-2
170:950
Resolution
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
8-14 5-5-2014 Sale of Borough property
at 22 and 28 14th Street
and 23, 24, 27, 28 and 37
13th Street
NCM
9-14 5-5-2014 Schedule of fees and
charges amendment
(zoning permits, appeals
and hearings; land
development, exclusive of
review fees)
See Ch. A285
10-14 6-2-2014 Approving issuance of
economic development
liquor license to Pies on
Pizzeria
NCM
11-14 6-2-2014 Authorizing a declaration
of taking of property for
traffic signal easement
NCM
12-14 6-2-2014 Supporting Second Street
Extension Alternate A
NCM
13-14 8-4-2014 Supporting Senate and
House bills to enable
municipal police to use
same motor vehicle
speed-timing equipment
as Pennsylvania State
Police
NCM
14-14 9-2-2014 Authorizing adoption of
Cafeteria Plan
NCM
15-14 9-2-2014 Change in street
addresses to conform to
grid address numbering
system
NCM
16-14 9-2-2014 Recognizing Historic
Catasauqua Preservation
Association
NCM
17-14 10-6-2014 Authorizing a
memorandum of
understanding with the
Lehigh County
Conservation District
NCM
18-14 11-3-2014 Adopting a safety and loss
control policy
NCM
§ DL-2 JUNKYARDS § DL-2
170:951
Resolution
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
19-14 11-3-2014 Designating accident and
illness prevention
program coordinator
NCM
20-14 12-17-2014 2015 budget NCM
21-14 12-17-2014 Appointment of Dimmich
& Dinkelacker to serve as
delinquent tax collector
for 2014 real estate taxes
and reaffirming fees to be
paid for those services
NCM
22-14 12-17-2014 Rate and eligibility
requirements for senior
citizen refuse assessment
discount beginning
1-1-2015
NCM
23-14 12-17-2014 Schedule of fees and
charges amendment
(refuse assessment rate)
See Ch. A285
1-15 1-5-2015 Police Pension Fund
contributions for full-time
employees for 2015
See Ch. 55
2-15 1-5-2015 Disposition of certain
Borough records
NCM
3-15 1-5-2015 Approving a Deputy Tax
Collector
NCM
4-15 1-5-2015 Approving issuance of
economic development
liquor license to F & J
Cuisine, LLC, trading as
"Pies on Pizzeria"
NCM
5-15 2-9-2015 Exonerating Tax Collector
ex officio from collection
of 2014 per capita taxes
from certain persons
NCM
6-15 4-6-2015 Recognition of Historic
Catasauqua Preservation
Association; approval of
request for liquor license
NCM
7-15 4-6-2015 Recognition of Historic
Catasauqua Preservation
Association; approval of
request for liquor license
NCM
§ DL-2 CATASAUQUA CODE § DL-2
170:952
Resolution
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
8-15 4-6-2015 Approving and
authorizing submission of
2015 CDBG application to
Lehigh County
NCM
9-15 5-4-2015 Schedule of fees and
charges amendment
(reservation of band shell
rates)
See Ch. A285
10-15 6-1-2015 Exonerating delinquent
Tax Collector ex officio
from collection of taxes
on 405 Crane Street
NCM
11-15 6-1-2015 Exonerating Dimmich and
Dinkelacker, P.C.,
Solicitor, from collection
of refuse and nuisance
demolition amounts on
405 Crane Street
NCM
12-15 7-6-2015 Price adjustment of
bituminous materials for
small quantities
NCM
13-15 7-6-2015 Provision of a smoke- and
tobacco-free workplace
NCM
14-15 8-3-2015 Authorizing Manager to
execute Schedule of
Equipment No. 01 to
master equipment lease
purchase agreement
NCM
15-15 10-5-2015 Request for public
disaster assistance
NCM
15-16 12-16-2015 2016 Budget NCM
15-17 12-16-2015 Appointment of Dimmich,
Dinkeacker and Anewalt,
P.C. to serve as delinquent
tax collector for Borough
real estate taxes and
reaffirming fees to be
paid for said services
NCM
§ DL-2 JUNKYARDS § DL-2
170:953
Resolution
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
15-18 12-16-2015 Rate and eligibility
requirements for senior
citizen refuse assessment
discount beginning
1-1-2016
NCM
1-16 1-4-2016 Police Pension Fund
contributions for full-time
employees for 2016
See Ch. 55
2-16 1-4-2016 Disposition of certain
Borough records
NCM
3-16 2-1-2016 Conditional approval of
area school district lot
consolidation plan at 201
North 14th Street
NCM
4-16 2-1-2016 Exonerating tax collector
ex officio from collection
of per capita taxes for
2015 from certain
persons
NCM
5-16 3-7-2016 Recognizing the Historic
Catasauqua Preservation
Association; approving
request of HCPA for
liquor license to be used
at Iron Works community
event on 5-21-2016
NCM
6-16 4-4-2016 Designation of agent for
FEMA-4267-DR
NCM
7-16 4-4-2016 Approving and
authorizing submission of
the 2016 CDBG
application to Lehigh
County
NCM
8-16 5-2-2016 Authorizing
reimbursement of
expenses relating to
construction of municipal
complex and other capital
projects
NCM
9-16 5-2-2016 Approving issuance of
economic development
liquor license to Richie's
Public House
NCM
§ DL-2 CATASAUQUA CODE § DL-2
170:954
Resolution
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
10-16 7-18-2016 Price adjustment of
bituminous materials for
small quantities as part of
the 2016 Street
Resurfacing Contract
NCM
11-16 7-18-2016 Recognizing the Historic
Catasauqua Preservation
Association; approving
request of HCPA for
liquor license to be used
at George Taylor House
event on 9-24-2016;
approving request of
HCPA for liquor license to
be used at Fest O' Fall
event on 10-1-2016, rain
date 10-2-2016
NCM
12-16 8-1-2016 Conditional approval of
lot consolidation plan of
Catty Charter, LP, for
treatment center, 124
Bridge Street
NCM
13-16 8-1-2016 Relative to the hotel room
rental tax
misappropriation of funds
to the Neighborhood
Improvement Zone in
Allentown, PA
NCM
14-16 9-6-2016 Accepting offer of 225
Front Street
NCM
15-16 9-6-2016 Accepting offer of 223
Front Street
NCM
16-16 10-3-2016 Officials to execute
documents between
Borough and
Commonwealth Financing
Authority
NCM
17-16 10-3-2016 Authorizing agreement
with Wilmington Trust Co.
or any affiliates
NCM
§ DL-2 JUNKYARDS § DL-2
170:955
Resolution
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
18-16 11-7-2016 Conditional approval of
lot consolidation and
subdivision plan for
Borough Iron Works
Project
NCM
19-16 12-5-2016 Granting PPL Electric
Utilities relating to one
pad mounted transformer
and underground
facilities to service
municipal complex
NCM
20-16 12-14-2016 2017 annual budget NCM
21-16 12-14-2016 Appointment of Dimmich,
Dinkelacker and Anewalt
to serve as delinquent tax
collector for 2016 real
estate taxes and
reaffirming fees to be
paid for those services
NCM
22-16 12-14-2016 Rate and eligibility
requirements for senior
citizen refuse assessment
discount beginning
1-1-2017
NCM
23-16 12-14-2016 Swimming pool fees
amendment
See Ch. A285
1-17 1-9-2017 Police Pension Fund
contributions for full-time
employees for 2017
See Ch. 55
2-17 1-9-2017 Disposition of certain
Borough records
NCM
3-17 2-6-2017 Reimbursement request
from PA DOT for water
and sewer facilities
relocation cost
NCM
4-17 3-6-2017 Property sale of Lot 2 of
Catasauqua Ironworks by
bid authorization
NCM
5-17 3-6-2017 Conditional approval of
land development plan for
the Ironworks Municipal
Building
NCM
§ DL-2 CATASAUQUA CODE § DL-2
170:956
Resolution
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
6-17 4-3-2017 Approving and
authorizing submission of
the 2017 CDBG
application to Lehigh
County
NCM
7-17 5-1-2017 DCNR grant: approving
and authorizing play
climber purchase
NCM
8-17 5-1-2017 DCNR grant: approving
and authorizing pool wing
wall deck replacement
NCM
9-17 5-22-2017 Approval request for
traffic signal from PA DOT
NCM
10-17 5-22-2017 Bituminous materials
price adjustment
NCM
11-17 6-5-2017 Reaffirming approval for
liquor license
NCM
12-17 9-5-2017 Recognizing Historic
Catasauqua Preservation
Association
NCM
13-17 7-10-2017 Continuing education
recommendation
NCM
14-17 10-2-2017 Personal use of Borough
vehicles policy
NCM
15-17 12-20-2017 2018 annual budget NCM
16-17 12-20-2017 Appointment of Dimmich,
Dinkelacker and Anewalt
to serve as delinquent tax
collector for 2017 real
estate taxes and
reaffirming fees to be
paid for those services
NCM
17-17 12-20-2017 Rate and eligibility
requirements for senior
citizen refuse assessment
discount beginning
1-1-2018
NCM
18-17 12-20-2017 Schedule of fees and
charges amendment
(water and sewer rates)
See Ch. A285
§ DL-2 JUNKYARDS § DL-2
170:957
Resolution
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
19-17 12-20-2017 Consent order and
agreement with PA DEP
NCM
1-18 1-2-2018 Police Pension Fund
contributions for full-time
employees for 2018
See Ch. 55
2-18 1-2-2018 Disposition of certain
Borough records
NCM
Res. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
3-18 3-5-2018 Sale of Property NCM 18
4-18 3-5-2018 Lease NCM 18
5-18 3-5-2018 Drug and
Alcohol Policy
NCM 18
6-18 3-5-2018 Schedule of Fees
and Charges
Amendment
(Water and
Sewer Rates)
See Ch. A285 18
7-18 4-2-2018 Authorizing
submission of a
Multimodal
Transportation
Fund Grant
Application to
the Pennsylvania
Department of
Transportation
NCM 18
8-18 4-2-2018 Approving and
authorizing
Submission of
the 2018 CDBG
Application to
Lehigh County
NCM 18
9-18 5-7-2018 Appointment of
Borough's Tax
Collector
NCM 18
§ DL-2 CATASAUQUA CODE § DL-2
170:958
Res. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
10-18 7-9-2018 Authorizing
submission of a
Multimodal
Transportation
Fund Grant
Application to
the
Commonwealth
Financing
Authority
NCM 18
11-18 9-4-2018 Conditionally
Approving
Preliminary/
Final Lot Line
Adjustment Plan
of M&G Land
Holdings, LLC
NCM 18
12-18 9-4-2018 Appointment of
Borough's Tax
Collector
NCM 18
13-18 10-1-2018 Application for
Traffic Signal
from PA DOT
NCM 18
14-18 10-1-2018 Authorizing an
Agreement with
PA DOT for
Acceptance of
TA Set Aside
Funds
NCM 18
15-18 11-5-2018 Setting forth job
description of
Borough's Fire
Inspector;
Appointment of
Borough's Fire
Inspector
NCM 18
16-18 11-5-2018 Adopting the
Lehigh Valley
2013 Hazard
Mitigation Plan
NCM 18
§ DL-2 JUNKYARDS § DL-2
170:959
Res. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
17-18 11-5-2018 Intergovernmental
Agreement:
Police Training
School at the
Allentown Police
Academy
NCM 18
18-18 12-10-2018 2019 Annual
Budget
NCM 18
19-18 12-10-2018 Appointment of
Dimmich,
Dinkelacker and
Anewalt to serve
as Delinquent
Tax Collector for
2018 Real Estate
Taxes and
Reaffirming Fees
To Be Paid For
Those Services
NCM 18
20-18 12-10-2018 Rate and
Eligibility
Requirements
for Senior
Citizen Refuse
Assessment
Discount
See Ch. 200 18
1-19 1-7-2019 Police Pension
Plan Amendment
See Ch. 55 18
2-19 1-7-2019 Disposition of
Certain Borough
Records
NCM 18
3-19 Sale of Former
Borough Hall
NCM 18
4-19 2-4-2019 Authorizing
Street Light
Services
Agreement with
PPL Electric
Utilities
NCM 18
§ DL-2 CATASAUQUA CODE § DL-2
170:960
Res. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
5-19 2-4-2019 Authorizing the
Application and
Business Plan
for the Iron
Works
Catasauqua
Project
NCM 18
6-19 3-4-2019 Sale of Former
Borough Hall
NCM 18
7-19 3-25-2019 Extending
Emergency
Proclamation:
Race Street
Bridge Repair
Detour
NCM 18
8-19 4-5-2019 Extending
Emergency
Proclamation:
Race Street
Bridge Repair
Detour
NCM 18
§ DL-2 JUNKYARDS § DL-2
170:961