Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 11-8-2011 by Ord. No. 507]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1008(b) of the Borough Code [53 P.S. § 46008(b)], the
codification of a complete body of legislation for the Borough of Danville,
County of Montour, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as revised, codified
and consolidated into chapters, articles and sections by General Code,
and consisting of Chapters 1 through 260, together with an Appendix, are
hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as a single ordinance of
the Borough of Danville, which shall be known and is hereby designated as
the "Code of the Borough of Danville," hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of
the prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued
in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by
the Borough Council of the Borough of Danville, and it is the intention of
said Borough Council that each such provision contained within the Code
is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such
provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and only
changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to be
enacted from the effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of ordinances not contained in Code.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted by the Borough of Danville and in force on the date of the adoption
of this Code and not contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the
effective date given in § 1-15 below, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-4. Ordinances saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 5-13-2011.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Borough prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Borough or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Borough.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Borough or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the Borough or other instruments or evidence of
the Borough's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Borough.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
§ 1-4 DANVILLE CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted ordinances.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Borough or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the Borough.
A. Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances and resolutions of the Borough for adoption and revision as
part of the Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the
Borough Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code
as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed had been previously
formally amended to read as such.
B. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, changes and revisions of a substantive
nature, as set forth in Schedule A attached hereto and made a part
hereof, are hereby made to various ordinances and resolutions included
in the Code. These changes are enacted to bring provisions into
conformity with the desired policies of the Borough Council, and it is
the intent of the Borough Council that all such changes be adopted as
part of the Code as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed had
been previously formally amended to read as such. All such changes
and revisions shall be deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of
the Code specified in § 1-15.1
C. Nomenclature. Throughout the Code, references to the following
agencies or officials are updated as indicated:
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-6B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, repealed) 11-8-2011 by Ord. No.
507." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all the changes, is on file in
the Borough offices.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:5
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-9. Filing of copy of Code.
At least one copy of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with
the Ordinance Book in the office of the Borough Secretary and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copy
or copies shall be certified to by the Borough Secretary, as provided by
law, and such certified copy or copies shall remain on file in the office of
the Borough Secretary, available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Borough Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
(1) "Department of Environmental Resources" or "DER" to
"Department of Environmental Protection" or "DEP."
(2) "Department of Community Affairs" or "DCA" to "Department of
Community and Economic Development" or "DCED."
(3) "Justice of the Peace," "District Magistrate" and "District Justice" to
"Magisterial District Judge."
(4) "Soil Conservation Service" or "SCS" to "Natural Resources
Conservation Service" or "NRCS."
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ 1-6 DANVILLE CODE § 1-10
1:6
into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall
thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the postbound
book containing said Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copy or copies
of the book containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the
Borough Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all
ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Borough Council subsequent to
the effective date of this codification which the Borough Council shall adopt
specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included
therein by reference until such changes or new ordinances or resolutions
are printed as supplements to said Code books, at which time such
supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Borough Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction and of the adoption of the
Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. The enactment
and application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the
notices of introduction and adoption, as required by law, and the availability
of a copy or copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed,
held and considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the
Code for all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the Borough
to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not
exceeding $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
thereof, by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or unconstitutional.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Borough Council that this
§ 1-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:7
ordinance and the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid
or unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or
part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after November 8, 2011.
§ 1-14 DANVILLE CODE § 1-15
1:8
Chapter 6
ANNEXATIONS
§ 6-1. Annexation of land.
The Borough of Danville hereby annexes all that territory owned by the
Borough of Danville in Mahoning Township, which is adjacent to and north
of the said Borough of Danville, which is more particularly described as
follows:
A. All those two certain pieces, parcels and tracts of land situate in
Mahoning Township, Montour County, Pennsylvania, more particularly
bounded and described as follows:
(1) The first thereof. Beginning at a point on the Danville Borough-
Mahoning Township line, which point is south eighty-nine (89)
degrees forty-four (44) minutes east a distance of six hundredseventy-
one and five tenths (671.5) feet from an existing corner of
the northern boundary line between Mahoning Township and the
Borough of Danville; thence north thirty-four (34) degrees fortyseven
(47) minutes west a distance of two hundred one and seven
hundredths (201.07) feet to a point; thence north forty-five (45)
degrees forty-four (44) minutes west a distance of seven hundred
forty-two and twenty-five hundredths (742.25) feet to a point;
thence north seventy-one (71) degrees ten (10) minutes east a
distance of five hundred ninety-three (593) feet to a point; thence
south twenty-five (25) degrees ten (10) minutes east a distance of
four hundred twenty (420) feet to a point; thence south fifty-three
(53) degrees ten (10) minutes east a distance of two hundred nine
(209) feet to a point; thence north fifty-seven (57) degrees ten (10)
minutes east a distance of nineteen and fifty hundredths (19.50)
feet to a point; thence south twenty-two (22) degrees thirty-six (36)
minutes east a distance of sixty-eight and forty-seven hundredths
(68.47) feet to a point; thence south twenty-five (25) degrees
twenty-nine (29) minutes east a distance of ninety-two and ninetyfour
hundredths (92.94) feet to a point; thence south forty-five (45)
degrees fourteen (14) minutes east a distance of one hundred
thirty-eight and sixty-three hundredths (138.63) feet to a point;
thence south ten (10) degrees seventeen (17) minutes west a
distance of one hundred thirty-nine and five tenths (139.5) feet to a
point on the Mahoning Township-Danville Borough line; thence
south eighty-nine (89) degrees forty-four (44) minutes east a
distance of four hundred sixteen and seven tenths (416.7) feet to a
point, the place of beginning, containing ten and eight tenths (10.8)
acres of land.
(2) The second thereof. Beginning at a point on the Mahoning
Township-Borough of Danville line, which point is south eighty-nine
(89) degrees forty-four (44) minutes east a distance of one
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-1
1:9
thousand two hundred ninety-six and two tenths (1,296.2) feet
from an existing corner on the northern boundary line between
Mahoning Township and the Borough of Danville; thence north
thirty-one (31) degrees twenty-two (22) minutes west a distance of
one hundred twenty-five and seven tenths (125.7) feet to a point;
thence north fifteen (15) degrees thirty-seven (37) minutes west a
distance of one hundred and seven tenths (100.7) feet to a point;
thence north twelve (12) degrees seven (7) minutes west a distance
of two hundred fifty and eight tenths (250.8) feet to a point; thence
north eight (8) degrees fifty-two (52) minutes west a distance of
six hundred twenty-three and seven tenths (623.7) feet to a point;
thence north fifty-five (55) degrees thirty-eight (38) minutes east
a distance of three hundred ninety-seven and seven tenths (397.7)
feet to a point; thence north thirty-four (34) degrees twenty-two
(22) minutes west a distance of five hundred forty-nine and nine
tenths (549.9) feet to a point; thence north fifty-five (55) degrees
thirty-eight (38) minutes east a distance of two hundred nineteen
and five tenths (219.5) feet to a point; thence north thirty-four
(34) degrees twenty-two (22) minutes west a distance of ninetyeight
(98) feet to a point; thence north fifty-five (55) degrees thirtyeight
(38) minutes east a distance of four hundred seventy-one and
four tenths (471.4) feet to a point; thence north thirty-four (34)
degrees twenty-two (22) minutes west a distance of four hundred
thirty-nine and nine tenths (439.9) feet to a point; thence north
fifty-five (55) degrees twenty-seven (27) minutes east a distance
of eight hundred seventy and four tenths (870.4) feet to a point;
thence south fifteen (15) degrees thirty-seven (37) minutes east
a distance of one thousand three hundred fifteen and one tenth
(1,315.1) feet to a point; thence south forty-eight (48) degrees
eight (8) minutes west a distance of seven hundred twenty-six
(726) feet to a point; thence south fourteen (14) degrees twentythree
(23) minutes west a distance of four hundred ninety-five
(495) feet to a point; thence north eighty-one (81) degrees eight
(8) minutes east a distance of three hundred thirty and sixty-eight
hundredths (330.68) feet to a point; thence south six (6) degrees
twenty-five (25) minutes east a distance of two hundred twentysix
and 93 hundredths (226.93) feet to a point; thence north sixtytwo
(62) degrees thirty-five (35) minutes east a distance of one
hundred ninety-three and five hundredths (193.05) feet to a point;
thence south twenty-seven (27) degrees twelve (12) minutes east
a distance of seven hundred forty-two and sixty-eight hundredths
(742.68) feet to a point; thence south seventy-three (73) degrees
fifty-seven (57) minutes west a distance of four hundred thirty-four
(434) feet to a point; thence north nine (9) degrees twenty (20)
minutes west a distance of fifty-five (55) feet to a point; thence
north zero (0) degrees fifty-seven (57) minutes west a distance of
seventy-nine and one tenth (79.1) feet to a point; thence north eight
(8) degrees twelve (12) minutes east a distance of fifty-three and
seven tenths (53.7) feet to a point; thence south seventy-three (73)
§ 6-1 DANVILLE CODE § 6-1
1:10
§ 6-2. Filing of plan required.
The proper officers of the Borough of Danville, as required by law, are
hereby authorized and directed to file a plan of the territory annexed in the
Office of the County Commissioners of Montour County and with the Clerk
of the Court in the Court of Common Pleas of the 26th Judicial District,
Montour County Branch, Quarter Sessions Division, and a copy of such
ordinance shall be certified to the Department of Community Affairs.
Chapter 10
AUDITOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 225.
§ 10-1. Appointment of independent auditor.
An independent auditor shall be appointed annually, by resolution of
Borough Council, before the close of each fiscal year.
degrees forty-four (44) minutes west a distance of four hundred
thirty-eight and twenty-eight hundredths (438.28) feet to a point;
thence north eighty-nine (89) degrees forty-four (44) minutes west
a distance of five hundred seventy-six and ninety-eight hundredths
(576.98) feet to the point, the place of beginning, containing sixtytwo
and six tenths (62.6) acres of land.
B. The above two tracts of land are more fully set forth on the map of the
Borough of Danville as surveyed in December, 1967, by W.G. Murdock,
R. E., and platted by F.O. Yohn, R. E.
C. The above two tracts of land are a part of the same premises which the
Reading Iron Company, by a series of four deeds, granted and conveyed
unto the Borough of Danville, said deeds being dated February 28,
1927, and duly recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds in and
for Montour County, Pennsylvania, in Deed Book 39, page 651; deed
dated November 2, 1936, and duly recorded in Deed Book 46, page 665;
deed dated July 27, 1939, and duly recorded in Deed Book 48, page 573;
and deed dated June 1, 1940, and duly recorded in Deed Book 49, page
431.
D. Said territory shall be admitted, annexed and added to the Borough of
Danville in the following manner: Parcel No. 1 or "the first thereof" shall
be a part and parcel of the Third Ward of the Borough of Danville and
Parcel No. 2 or "the second thereof" shall be admitted, annexed and
added to the Borough of Danville as part and parcel of the Fourth Ward.
§ 6-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-2
1:11
§ 10-2. Qualifications of independent auditor.
An independent auditor shall be a certified public accountant, registered in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, a firm of certified public accountants so
registered or a competent public accountant or a competent firm of public
accountants.
§ 10-3. Duties of independent auditor.
An independent auditor shall make an independent examination of the
accounting records of the Borough for such fiscal year and make a report of
such examination to the Borough Council and shall also perform the other
duties and exercise the powers as conferred upon him or her by Subdivision
(k) of Article XI of the Borough Code, Act of February 1, 1966, P.L. 1656,
No. 581, § 1196 et seq., as amended, 53 P.S. § 46196 et seq.
§ 10-4. Abolition of office of elected Auditors.
The office of elected Borough Auditor is hereby abolished.
§ 10-5. Completion of term of elected Auditors.
All elected Borough Auditors currently in office shall continue to hold their
office for the balance of the term for which they were elected, provided that
such elected Borough Auditors shall not audit, settle or adjust the accounts
audited by an independent auditor but shall perform any other duties of
their office during the balance of their terms.
Chapter 13
AUTHORITY, MUNICIPAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 194.
§ 10-2 DANVILLE CODE § 10-5
1:12
ARTICLE I
Establishment of Authority
[Adopted 5-18-1951 by Ord. No. 99 (Ch. 6, Art. I, of the 1975 Code)]
§ 13-1. Creation of Authority.2
The Borough Council, being the municipal authorities of the Borough of
Danville, hereby signifies its intention and desire to organize an Authority
under the provisions of the Municipal Authorities Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601
et seq., as amended.3
§ 13-2. Publication and filing of notice.4
The proper officers of the Borough are hereby directed, as required by the
Municipality Authorities Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq., to publish notice
of this chapter and of the day upon which said Articles of Incorporation will
be filed with the Secretary of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania; to file
said Articles of Incorporation, together with a certified copy of this chapter
authorizing the incorporation of the Authority and the necessary proofs of
publication, with the Secretary of the Commonwealth, and to do all other
things necessary or appropriate to effect the incorporation of the Danville
Municipal Authority.
§ 13-3. Duty to construct a sewage disposal plant.
The project which shall be first undertaken by the Authority shall be to
construct a sewage disposal plant in the Borough for operation by the
Authority or lease to the Borough as may be determined.
2. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
3. Editor's Note: Former Section 6-2, Articles of Incorporation, and Section 6-3, Terms of
office, which followed this section, were repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I). The original Articles of Incorporation are on file in the
Borough offices.
4. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 13-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-3
1:13

ARTICLE II
Extension of Term of Existence
[Adopted 2-17-1964 by Ord. No. 174 (Ch. 6, Art. II, of the 1975
Code)]
§ 13-4. Adoption and approval of amendment.
The Council of this Borough adopts and approves the amendment to the
Articles of Incorporation of the Authority, as proposed by a resolution duly
adopted by the Board of the Authority, a copy of which resolution, duly
certified by the Secretary of the Authority, has been submitted to the
Council of the Borough.
§ 13-5. Term of existence. [Amended 3-29-1977 by Ord. No. 2675]
The amendment to the Articles of Incorporation of the Authority, which
is adopted and approved, shall provide that the following paragraph shall
be added to said Articles of Incorporation: "The term of existence of said
Danville Municipal Authority shall be for a period ending on December 31,
2029."
§ 13-6. Authority to amend Articles of Incorporation.
Proper officers of the Authority are authorized to execute, verify and file
the appropriate Articles of Amendment with the Secretary of the
Commonwealth, and to take all other action and do all other things which
may be necessary in order to accomplish the amendment of the Articles of
Incorporation of the Authority in the manner herein adopted and approved.6
5. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
6. Editor's Note: A Management Agreement dated December 8, 2008, is on file in the
Borough offices.
§ 13-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-6
1:15
Chapter 16
CIVIL SERVICE
§ 13-6 DANVILLE CODE § 13-6
1:16
ARTICLE I
Definition of Terms
§ 16-1. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases,
wherever used in these rules, shall be construed to have the meaning
indicated herein:
APPLICANT — Any individual who applies in writing to the Commission in
response to a legally advertised notice of vacancy and/or examination for
any position in the Police Department.
APPOINTING AUTHORITY — The Borough Council of the Borough of
Danville, Montour County, Pennsylvania.
CERTIFICATION — The submission to the appointing authority pursuant to
its request for three names taken from the eligible list developed by the
Civil Service Commission.
CHAIRPERSON — The Chairperson of the Civil Service Commission of the
Borough of Danville, Pennsylvania.
COMMISSION — The Civil Service Commission of the Borough of Danville,
Pennsylvania.
COMMISSIONER — An individual appointed by the Borough of Danville,
Pennsylvania, to serve as a member of the Civil Service Commission.
ELIGIBLE — A person whose name is recorded on a current eligible list or
furlough list.
ELIGIBLE LIST — The list of names of persons who have passed all
examinations for a particular position in the Police Department.
EXAMINATION — The series of tests given to applicants to determine their
qualifications for a position in the Police Department.
FURLOUGH LIST — The list containing the names of persons temporarily
laid off from positions in the Police Department because of a reduction in
the number of officers.
PATROL OFFICER — For purposes of these rules, an entry level sworn fulltime
position in the Police Department.
PROBATIONER — An officer in the Police Department who has been
appointed from an eligible list, but who has not yet completed the work-test
period.
REDUCTION IN RANK — A change to a different position or rank where
the employee fulfilled all of the requirements of these rules for both the
prior and current position and rank. However, a decrease in salary without
a change to a different position or rank shall not necessarily constitute a
reduction in rank.
REMOVAL — The permanent separation of a police officer from the Police
Department.
§ 16-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-1
1:17
SECRETARY — The Secretary of the Civil Service Commission of the
Borough of Danville, Pennsylvania.
SUSPENSION — The temporary separation without pay of a police officer
from the Police Department.
§ 16-2. Gender.
The words "he," "his," "him" and "men," when used in these rules, represent
both the masculine and feminine genders.
§ 16-1 DANVILLE CODE § 16-2
1:18
ARTICLE II
Civil Service Commission
§ 16-3. Membership.
§ 16-4. Offices incompatible with Civil Service Commissioner.
No Commissioner shall at the same time hold an elective or appointed office
under the United States Government, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
or any political subdivision of the commonwealth, except that one member
of the Commission may be a member of the Borough Council and one may
be a member of the teaching profession.
§ 16-5. Organization; quorum.
The Commission first appointed shall organize within 10 days of its
appointment and shall elect one of its members as the Chair and one as the
Secretary. The Commission shall thereafter meet and organize on the first
Monday of each even-numbered year. Each Commissioner shall be notified
in writing of each and every meeting. Three members of the Commission
shall constitute a quorum. If, by reason of absence or disqualification of
a member, a quorum is not reached, the Chair shall designate as many
alternate members of the Commission to sit on the Commission as may
A. The Commission shall consist of three Commissioners who shall be
qualified electors of the Borough and shall be appointed by the Borough
Council initially to serve for the terms of two, four and six years, and as
terms thereafter expire shall be appointed for terms of six years.
B. Any vacancy occurring in any commission for any reason whatsoever
shall be filled by the Borough Council for the unexpired term within the
period of 30 days after the vacancy occurs.
C. The Borough Council may appoint no more than three qualified electors
of the Borough to serve as alternate members of the Commission. The
term of office of the alternate members shall be six years. When seated,
an alternate shall be entitled to participate in all proceedings and
discussions of the Commission to the same and full extent as provided
by law for Commission members, including, specifically, the right to
cast a vote as a voting member during the proceedings, and shall have
all the powers and duties set forth in this chapter and as otherwise
provided by law. Alternates shall hold no other office in the Borough. An
alternate may participate in any proceeding or discussion of the
Commission but shall not be entitled to vote as a member of the
Commission unless designated as a voting alternate member.
D. Each member of the Commission created by this article, before
entering upon the discharge of the duties of office, shall take an oath or
affirmation of office pursuant to 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 1141 (relating to form of
oaths of office). The Civil Service Commissioners shall receive no
compensation.
§ 16-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-5
1:19
be needed to provide a quorum. An alternate member of the Commission
shall continue to serve on the Commission in all proceedings involving
the matter or case for which the alternate was initially designated until
the Commission has made a final determination of the matter or case.
Designation of an alternate member pursuant to this section shall be made
on a case-by-case basis in rotation according to declining seniority among
the alternates. No action of the Commission may be valid unless it shall have
the concurrence of at least two members.
§ 16-6. Duties of Chairperson.
The Chairperson, or in his absence, the Vice Chairperson, shall preside at
all meetings and hearings of the Commission, decide all points of order or
procedure and perform any duties required by law or these rules.
§ 16-7. Duties of Secretary.
The Secretary shall carry on at the direction of the Commission all official
correspondence of the Commission, send out all notices required by law and
these rules, keep a record of each examination or other official action of the
Commission, and perform all other duties required by law or these rules.
§ 16-8. Meetings.
Except for the biennial organization meeting, all meetings shall be held
either at the call of the Chairperson or at the call of two members of
the Commission. The Commission shall have the discretion to determine
whether meetings shall be open to the public when not specifically
regulated by law or these rules. The Secretary of the Commission shall give
each Commissioner 24 hours' notice in writing of each and every meeting of
the Commission.
§ 16-9. Clerks and supplies.
The Borough shall furnish to the Commission, on its requisition, clerical
assistance that may be necessary for the work of the Commission. The
Borough shall provide a suitable and convenient room for the use of the
Commission. The Commission shall order from the Borough the necessary
stationery, postage, printing and supplies. The Borough shall also provide
the services of a Solicitor for the Commission to be appointed by the
Commission and paid by the Borough. The Borough shall have the authority
to place a reasonable limit on the amount allowed each year for the services
of the Commission Solicitor. The elected and appointed officials of every
borough shall aid the Commission in all proper ways in carrying out the
provisions of this chapter relating to civil service.
§ 16-10. Rules and regulations.
The Commission shall have power to prescribe, amend and enforce rules
and regulations for carrying into effect the provisions of this chapter and
shall be governed thereby. Before the effective date of the rules and
§ 16-5 DANVILLE CODE § 16-10
1:20
regulations, or amendments thereto, the same shall be first approved by
the Borough Council. When the rules and regulations, or amendments,
have been approved, they shall not be annulled, amended, or added to
without the approval of the Borough Council. All rules and regulations and
modifications shall be made available by the Borough for public distribution
or inspection.
§ 16-11. Minutes and records.
The Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings and records of
examinations and other official actions. All recommendations of applicants
for appointment received by the Commission shall be kept and preserved for
a period of five years, and all records and all written causes of removal filed
with the Commission, except as otherwise provided in § 16-44 (Hearings on
dismissals and reductions), shall be open to public inspection and subject to
reasonable regulation.
§ 16-12. Investigations.
The Commission shall have power to make investigations concerning all
matters touching the administration and enforcement of this chapter and
rules and regulations adopted thereunder. The Chair of the Commission is
hereby given power to administer oaths and affirmations in connection with
the investigations.
§ 16-13. Subpoenas.
A. The Commission shall have power to issue subpoenas over the
signature of the Chair, to require the attendance of witnesses and the
production of records and papers pertaining to any investigation or
inquiry. The fees of witnesses for attendance and travel shall be the
same as for witnesses appearing in the courts and shall be paid from
appropriations for the incidental expenses of the Commission.
B. All officers in public service and employees of the Borough shall attend
and testify when required to do so by the Commission.
C. If any person shall refuse or neglect to obey any subpoena issued by the
Commission, the person shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary
proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed $100, and in
default of the payment of the fine and costs, shall be imprisoned not to
exceed 30 days.
D. If any person shall refuse or neglect to obey any subpoena issued by the
Commission, the Commission may apply by petition to the Court of
Common Pleas of Montour County for its subpoena, requiring the
attendance of persons before the Commission or the Court to testify
and to produce any records and papers necessary, and in default
thereof, shall be held in contempt of court.
§ 16-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-14
1:21
§ 16-14. Annual report.
The Commission shall make an annual report to the Borough Council
containing a brief summary of its work during the year, which shall be
available for public inspection.
§ 16-14 DANVILLE CODE § 16-14
1:22
ARTICLE III
Applications and Qualifications
§ 16-15. Application for examination.
Each person desiring to apply for examination shall file with the
Commission a formal application in which the applicant shall provide the
following information, under oath or affirmation that the application is
completed truthfully, and the applicant is subject to the penalties of 18
Pa.C.S.A. § 4904 relating to unsworn falsification to authorities.
§ 16-16. Discrimination.
The Borough of Danville is an equal opportunity employer. It is the
Borough's and the Commission's policy to grant equal employment
opportunities to qualified persons without regard to race, religion, color,
national origin, gender, age, veteran status, marital status or non-jobrelated
physical or mental handicap or disability. The Borough and the
Commission will provide equal opportunities in employment and promotion.
§ 16-17. Availability.
Application forms shall be available to all interested persons at the Danville
Police Department. Application forms may be mailed upon written or
telephone request. However, the Commission assumes no responsibility for
missed filing deadlines due to a delay in the mail.
§ 16-18. Age and residency requirements.
No person shall be eligible to apply for examination unless the person is at
least 21 years of age at the date of application. An applicant need not be a
resident of the Borough. The Borough Council of the Borough may authorize
the Commission, by rule or regulation, to require police officers to become
residents of the Borough after appointment to the positions.
§ 16-19. General qualifications: all applicants.
Every applicant for any position in the Police Department shall possess a
diploma from an accredited high school or a graduate equivalency diploma.
In addition, every applicant must be a United States citizen, be physically
A. Full name and residence or post office address;
B. Citizenship and place and date of birth;
C. Condition of health and physical capacity for public service;
D. Business or employment and his residence for the past five years; and
E. Other information as may be required by the Commission's rules and
regulations, showing the applicant's qualifications for the position for
which the applicant is being examined.
§ 16-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-19
1:23
and mentally fit to perform the full duties of a police officer, and, prior to
appointment, possess a valid motor vehicle operator's license issued by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Applicants subject to any of the following
shall be disqualified:
§ 16-20. General qualifications: applicants for promotion.
A. Criminal conviction of a misdemeanor 1 or higher, or offense in another
jurisdiction that would be equivalent to a misdemeanor 1 or higher, if
the offense occurred in the State of Pennsylvania.
B. Criminal behavior admitted by the applicant that would constitute a
misdemeanor 1 or higher, regardless of arrest or conviction, excluding
behavior admitted with an acceptable explanation.
C. DUI conviction, not resulting in ARD, excluding conviction with
acceptable explanation.
D. Any violation of the Uniform Firearm Act, Brady Law and any other
federal law and amendment prohibiting possession of a firearm,
admitted by the applicant, and regardless of arrest or conviction.
E. Domestic violence resulting in judicial determination of guilt of
domestic violence against spouse, significant other, child or other
family member. Stipulation with no admission shall not be considered
judicial determination of guilt.
F. Excessive use of marijuana over the applicant's lifetime, or any use
within a one-year period prior to filing application.
G. Use of Schedule I controlled substances and nonprescribed Schedule II
substances, excluding marijuana, as listed in the Health and Safety Act,
within a five-year period prior to filing application. (Example: Including,
but not limited to: cocaine, heroin, MDMA (Ecstasy), gammahydroxybutyric
acid (GHB), LSD, methamphetamine, OxyContin®.)
H. Any use of nonprescribed steroids (Schedule III) within a three-year
period prior to filing application.
I. Any sale, delivery or manufacturing of a controlled substance graded as
a misdemeanor 1 or higher, admitted by the applicant and regardless of
arrest or conviction.
J. Failure to pass a drug screen test, excluding failure with acceptable
explanation. (Example: prescribed substances in system with valid
prescription.)
K. Dishonorable discharge from military service.
L. Failure to appear for any portion of the testing process.
A. In addition to meeting the qualifications in § 16-19 above, all applicants
for a promotional position, except Chief, shall have not been suspended
§ 16-19 DANVILLE CODE § 16-20
1:24
§ 16-21. Rejection of applicant; hearing.
without pay for more than five days in the three years prior to the
deadline for submitting applications. Any suspension to which the
applicant has timely appealed pursuant to a contractual grievance
procedure or these rules shall be disregarded unless the appeal is
resolved prior to the creation of the eligibility list.
B. All applicants shall have continuous prior service with the Police
Department of Danville as follows:
(1) An applicant for the position of Corporal shall have at least two
years of service with the Department;
(2) An applicant for the position of Sergeant shall have at least two
years of experience with the Department.
A. The Commission may refuse to examine, or, if examined, may refuse to
certify after examination as eligible, any applicant who is found to lack
any of the minimum qualifications for examination prescribed in the
rules and regulations adopted for the position or employment for which
he has applied, or who is physically unfit for the performance of the
duties of the position to which he seeks employment, or who is illegally
using a controlled substance, as defined in Section 102 of the
Controlled Substances Act (Public Law 91-513, 21 U.S.C. § 802), or who
has been guilty of any crime involving moral turpitude, or of infamous
or notoriously disgraceful conduct, or who has been dismissed from
public service for delinquency or misconduct of office, or who is
affiliated with any group whose policies or activities are subversive to
the form of government set forth in the Constitutions and laws of the
United States and Pennsylvania.
B. If the medical examiner shall deem any applicant to be medically or
psychologically unfit for the performance of the duties of a police officer
because of any bodily or mental defect, a person designated by the
appointing officer shall meet with the applicant for the purpose of
having one or more interactive discussions on whether the applicant
can, with or without reasonable accommodation, perform all the
essential functions of the position. If, at the conclusion of the interactive
discussion, the appointing officer determines that the applicant is unfit,
the appointing officer shall give written notice to the applicant and the
Borough Council, and said applicant shall be rejected and removed
from the eligibility list for either hiring or promotion.
C. If any applicant is aggrieved by the refusal of the Commission to certify
the applicant as eligible after examination, or a person is aggrieved by
refusal of the Commission to examine the person, the Commission shall,
at the request of the applicant or person aggrieved, within 10 days,
appoint a time and place for a public hearing. At the hearing, the
applicant or person aggrieved may appear with or without counsel, and
the Commission shall take testimony and review its refusal to provide
§ 16-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-21
1:25
§ 16-22. Recording and filing applications.
Applications for positions in the Police Department shall be received at
the Danville Police Department only after a hiring or promotional test has
been properly advertised and before the deadline for receiving applications,
which must be set forth in the public advertisement. Applications will be
received by the municipal officer designated in the public advertisement
or that officer's designee. That person shall record the receipt of all
applications and provide each applicant with notice of the time and place
for the first portion of the testing procedure, the written examination. Any
application containing material errors or omissions may, at the discretion
of the Commission, be returned to the applicant for correction prior to the
deadline for filing applications, after which no new applications or amended
applications will be accepted.
§ 16-23. Hearing for disqualified applicants.
Any applicants or other persons who believe that they are aggrieved by
the actions of the Commission in refusing to examine or to certify them as
eligible after examination may request a hearing before the Commission.
Within 10 days after such request, the Commission shall designate a time
and place for the hearing, which shall be conducted pursuant to the
procedures set forth in the Local Agency Law, 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 551 et seq. The
applicant or aggrieved party must make his request for a hearing in writing
within 10 calendar days of the date when the party knew or should have
known of the Commission's action which is being challenged.
§ 16-24. Public notice.
The Commission shall conspicuously post in the Borough Building an
announcement of the hiring or promotional testing and set forth the time
and place of every examination, together with the information as to the
type of position to be filled, the requirements for that position, where
applications may be obtained, and the deadline for filing those applications.
In addition, at least two weeks prior to the close of the application period,
publication of the notice shall occur in at least one newspaper of general
circulation or a newspaper circulating generally in the Borough.
examination or certification. The deliberations of the Commission,
including interim rulings on evidentiary or procedural issues, may be
held in the nature of a closed executive session. The Commission's
disposition of the matter shall constitute official action which shall
occur at a public meeting held pursuant to 65 Pa.C.S.A. Ch. 7 (relating
to open meetings). The decision of the Commission shall be final.
§ 16-21 DANVILLE CODE § 16-24
1:26
ARTICLE IV
Examination and Grading Procedure
§ 16-25. General provisions relating to examinations.
A. Rules and regulations.
(1) The Commission shall make rules and regulations, to be approved
as provided in § 16-10, providing for the examination of applicants
for positions in the police force and for promotions, which rules and
regulations shall prescribe the minimum qualifications of all
applicants to be examined and the passing grades. All examinations
for positions or promotions shall be practical in character and shall
relate to matters and include inquiries as will fairly test the merit
and fitness of the persons examined to discharge the duties of the
employment sought by them. All examinations shall be open to all
applicants who have the minimum qualifications required by the
rules and regulations. Each applicant for an original position shall:
(a) Be subject to the regulations adopted by the Commission;
(b) Either before or after the written examination, be required to
submit to a physical fitness or agility examination that is jobrelated
and consistent with business necessity;
(c) If made a conditional offer of employment, be given a physical
and psychological medical examination as provided in § 16-39;
and
(d) Be subject to a background investigation. Background
investigations may be restricted to those candidates on an
eligibility list or those to be certified to the Borough Council for
appointment in accordance with § 16-36.
(2) Each applicant for promotion shall be subject to the regulations
adopted by the Commission and to examination and selection in
accordance with § 16-42. Physical fitness or agility examinations
that are job-related and consistent with business necessity and
physical and psychological medical examinations may, but need
not, be required for promotions.
B. Public notice of the time and place of every examination, together with
the information as to the kind of position or place to be filled, shall be
given by publication once in a newspaper of general circulation, at least
two weeks prior to each examination, and a copy of the notice shall be
prominently posted in the office of the Commission or other public
place.
C. The Commission shall post in its office the eligibility list, containing the
names and grades of those who have passed the examination.
§ 16-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-26
1:27
§ 16-26. General examination requirements for position of patrol
officer.
The examination for patrol officer will consist of a written and an oral
examination which will be graded on a 100-point scale with the written
examination representing 70% of the final score and the oral examination
representing 30% of the final score. In addition, each applicant will undergo
a physical agility test, a polygraph test and a background investigation.
These tests and investigation will be graded on a pass/fail basis for every
applicant. After an applicant has been extended a conditional offer of
employment, final appointment shall be contingent upon the applicant
passing a medical and psychological examination.
§ 16-27. General examination requirements for promotions.
The examination for the positions of Corporal and Sergeant shall include a
written and an oral examination which will be graded on a 100-point scale
with the written examination representing 70% of the final score and the
oral examination representing 30% of the final score.
§ 16-28. Appointment of examiners.
The Commission shall appoint, as needed, a written examination
administrator, an oral examination administrator, a polygraph examiner, a
physical agility examiner, a medical examiner and a psychological examiner
to conduct the appropriate examination required by these rules.
§ 16-29. Written examination.
The written examination shall be graded on a 100-point scale, and an
applicant must score 75% or higher and receive one of the top 10 highest
scores, including ties, in order to continue in the application process.
Applicants scoring less than 75% shall be rejected. Within 30 days after
the administration of the written examination, all applicants shall be given
written notice of their test results only, and with the highest 10 scorers
scheduled for one or more oral examination appointments. The letters to
the passing applicants who scored in the top 10 shall be sent by certified
mail to the address provided by the applicant on the application. The letters
to the remaining applicants who did not score in the top 10 and the failing
applicants shall be sent by regular mail to the addresses provided on the
application. An applicant shall have no right to receive a copy of the graded
written test and shall not discuss or attempt to discuss the administration or
results of the written test with the administrator, and doing so shall result
in the automatic disqualification of the applicant.
§ 16-30. Oral examination.
A. The highest 10 scorers who have passed the written examination shall
be given an oral examination which will be graded on a 100% scale
consisting of five questions with each question being worth 20 points.
An applicant must score 70% or higher in order to continue in the
§ 16-26 DANVILLE CODE § 16-30
1:28
§ 16-31. Veterans' preference points.
Pursuant to the Veterans' Preference Act,7 any applicant for the position
of patrol officer who qualifies as a soldier under this Act shall receive an
additional 10 points on top of their total score if that applicant had received
passing scores under §§ 16-26, 16-29 and 16-30. Any applicant claiming
veterans' preference is responsible for providing any and all relevant
documents to the Commission.
§ 16-32. Polygraph examination.
application process. Applicants scoring less than 70% shall be rejected.
The oral examination shall involve questioning by three oral
administrators asking the applicant how he would handle situations
relevant to police work. The scores of the three oral examination
administrators for each question should be averaged to arrive at the
applicant's score for each question. The score of each question should
be added together to arrive at the applicant's oral examination score.
B. The written examination shall represent 70% of the applicant's total
score and the oral examination shall represent 30% of the total score.
The calculations for the combined total of the written examination and
the oral examination shall be made by multiplying the written
examination score by 70% and by multiplying the oral examination
score by 30% and then adding the two scores together.
C. An applicant shall have no right to receive a copy of the graded written
test and shall not discuss or attempt to discuss the administration or
results of the written test with the administrator, and doing so shall
result in the automatic disqualification of the applicant.
EXAMPLE:
Weighted factors: 70% - Written Examination 30% - Oral Examination
Candidate A - (Veteran)
Written Examination Score - 80% (80% x 70%) =
56%
1. 56%
Oral Examination - 80% (80% x 30%) = 24% 2. 24%
Total Score 80%
Add Veteran Preference - (Borough and First
Class Township) - 10 points
Final Score 90%
D. Within 30 days after the applicants' oral examination, they shall be
informed of their oral examination and total overall scores, and each
passing applicant shall be informed of the next step in the examination
process.
7. Editor’s Note: See 51 Pa.C.S.A. § 7101 et seq.
§ 16-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-32
1:29
§ 16-33. Physical agility testing.
An applicant for the position of police officer must meet the following
requirements:
A. Every applicant for the position of patrol officer shall fill out a personal
data questionnaire and undergo a polygraph examination. The
Commission shall furnish each polygraph examiner with forms upon
which the examiner shall state whether any of the applicant's responses
to questions from the applicant's personal data questionnaire are
deceptive. The report on each examination shall be submitted to the
Commission within five days after the date of the examination.
B. The examiner shall ask questions based on the information contained in
the personal data questionnaire. Before administering the test, the
examiner shall ask each applicant whether there is any more
information related to the personal data questionnaire which the
applicant would like to provide. There shall also be a post-test review,
during which the examiner shall again ask the participant, if deception
is indicated, whether there is any information which the applicant is
withholding.
C. If the examiner shall deem any of the applicant's responses to be
deceptive, the examiner must tell the applicant immediately and give
the applicant an opportunity to explain, deny or admit the deception. If
the applicant denies being deceptive or if the explanation is found
unsatisfactory by the examiner, the applicant will be given the
opportunity to retake the test with a second examiner. Notice of the
opportunity to retest shall be given in writing to the applicant. The
second examiner will not have access to the results of the first test prior
to readministering the polygraph. If the second examiner finds no
deception, the applicant will be considered as having passed the
polygraph. If the second examiner also finds the applicant deceptive,
the applicant will be considered as having failed the examination.
D. An applicant who has failed both tests may appeal to the Civil Service
Commission for a third examination, and the decision to give the
applicant an opportunity to take a third test resides solely within the
discretion of the Commission. If the applicant is awarded an
opportunity to take a third test and passes, then the applicant will be
considered as having passed the polygraph test. If the applicant is
found deceptive on a third test, the applicant will be rejected.
A. Body drag. An applicant is required to remove a simulated motor
vehicle operator weighing approximately 200 pounds from behind the
steering wheel of a motor vehicle and drag the simulated operator to a
point 50 feet from the motor vehicle.
B. Quarter mile run. An applicant is required to run a distance of 1/4 mile
on a premeasured course in less than 110 seconds.
§ 16-32 DANVILLE CODE § 16-33
1:30
§ 16-34. Background investigation.
§ 16-35. Examinations not required for certain positions.
Applicants applying for the position of Corporal or Sergeant shall not be
required to submit to a physical agility examination, background
C. Thirty-second trigger pull. Within a thirty-second time limit per hand,
an applicant is required to repeatedly pull 15 times for each hand the
trigger of a double action nonfunctional revolver with arms horizontally
extended.
A. The Commission shall request the Chief of Police or the Chief's
designee to conduct a background investigation on each applicant. The
background investigation shall also include interviews with the
applicant's family, acquaintances, current and former employers,
current and former neighbors, references and current and former
teachers and school officials. At a minimum, personal interviews shall
be conducted with at least three people that have personal knowledge
of the applicant but who are not related to the applicant and with the
applicant's employer(s) for the past five years. The background
investigation shall also include a criminal history check, including the
submission of fingerprints to the Central Repository for the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the Federal Bureau of
Investigation. The applicant's credit history and record of criminal
convictions shall also be investigated, as well as the applicant's driving
record for verification that he possesses a valid driver's license. The
applicant may be interviewed directly when the information collected
during the background investigation requires clarification or
explanation.
B. If necessary to complete a thorough background investigation on any
applicant, the Commission may, upon the request of the Chief of Police
or his designee, subpoena the personnel records maintained by any
other Police Department(s) by which the applicant was previously
employed.
C. After the background investigation is completed, the Chief, or designee,
shall make a written recommendation to the Commission on whether
the applicant is appropriate for consideration for appointment as a
police officer.
D. Appropriateness of the applicant shall be based on the criteria set forth
in Section 3.6 of these rules. This recommendation shall be in writing
and, if the recommendation is to disqualify, then a written explanation
of the reasons for disqualification must be included. The Commission
shall make the final determination on whether the information collected
during the background investigation warrants rejection of the
candidate. Within 30 days after the Commission considers the
recommendation of the Chief of Police or designee, each applicant will
be informed of whether they have passed the background investigation.
§ 16-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-35
1:31
investigation, polygraph examination, or medical or psychological
examination.
§ 16-35 DANVILLE CODE § 16-35
1:32
ARTICLE V
Certification of List of Eligibles; Appointment
§ 16-36. Eligibility list and manner of filling appointments.
A. At the completion of the testing process, including any physical agility
or other examination, with the exception of any background
investigation to be conducted after the establishment of an eligibility
list and physical and psychological medical examination pursuant to
§ 16-39, the Commission shall rank the candidates who have satisfied
the minimum requirements for appointment on an eligibility list. The
eligibility list shall contain the names of individuals eligible for
appointment listed from highest to lowest based on their scores on the
examinations administered by the Commission and any points for which
the applicant was entitled by virtue of 51 Pa.C.S.A. Ch. 71 (relating to
veterans' preference). The eligibility list will be valid for one year from
the date the Commission formally adopts the eligibility list. Prior to
expiration of the one-year period, the Commission may extend the
validity of the eligibility list for up to an additional 12 months by a
majority vote of the Commission at a duly authorized Commission
meeting. In the absence of a lawful extension by the Commission, the
list shall expire. The Commission may, at its sole discretion, void an
eligibility list at any time for any reason.
B. Except as provided in § 16-37, every original position or employment in
the police force, except that of Chief of Police, shall be filled only in the
following manner: The Borough Council shall notify the Commission of
any vacancy which is to be filled and shall request the certification of an
eligibility list. The Commission shall certify, for each existing vacancy
from the eligibility list, the names of the three persons, or a lesser
number where three are not available, who have received the highest
average. The Borough Council shall make a conditional appointment
from the three names certified, based solely on the merits and fitness of
the candidates, unless the Borough Council makes objections to the
Commission regarding one or more of the certified persons for any of
the reasons stated in § 16-21. Should the objections be sustained by the
Commission, as provided in § 16-21, or if the conditional appointee is
determined to be unqualified in accordance with the procedures set
forth in § 16-39, the Commission shall strike the name of the person
from the eligibility list and certify the next highest name for each name
stricken from the eligibility list. As each subsequent vacancy occurs in
the same or another position, precisely the same procedure shall be
followed.
C. For promotional positions, fulfilling the performance requirement set
forth in § 16-20 is also required. In the case of tied scores, the tie will be
broken by giving preference to the applicant who submitted a final
completed application first. If both tied applicants submitted their
complete applications on the same day, then the applicants shall be
ranked in alphabetical order by surname.
§ 16-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-37
1:33
§ 16-37. Appointment.
Any vacancy in an existing position in the police force which occurs as
a result of retirement, resignation, disability or death may be filled by
the Borough Council by the reappointment or reinstatement of a former
employee of the police force who had previously complied with the
provisions of this article. No examination, other than a physical examination
as directed by the Civil Service Commission, shall be required in any case
of reappointment or reinstatement.
§ 16-38. Appointment of Chief of Police.
In the case of a vacancy in the office of Chief of Police, the appointive power
may nominate a person to the Commission. It shall then become the duty of
the Commission to subject the person to a noncompetitive examination, and
if the person shall be certified by the Commission as qualified, he may then
be appointed to the position, and shall be subject to all the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 16-39. Physical and psychological medical examination.
A. An applicant selected from the eligibility list shall receive a conditional
offer of employment. The offer of employment shall be conditioned upon
the conditional appointee undergoing a physical and psychological
medical examination and a determination that the conditional
appointee is capable of performing all the essential functions of the
position. Physical medical examinations shall be under the direction of
a physician or other qualified medical professional. Psychological
medical examinations shall be under the direction of a psychiatrist or
psychologist.
B. The physician or other qualified medical professional and the
psychiatrist or psychologist shall be appointed by the Borough Council
and shall render an opinion as to whether the conditional appointee has
a physical or mental condition which calls into question the person's
ability to perform all of the essential functions of the position for which
the person was conditionally appointed.
C. If the opinion rendered by the physician, other qualified medical
professional, psychiatrist or psychologist calls into question the
conditional appointee's ability to perform all essential functions of a
position, a person designated by the Borough Council shall meet with
the conditional appointee for the purpose of having one or more
interactive discussions on whether the conditional appointee can, with
or without reasonable accommodation, perform all the essential
functions of the position.
D. If, at the conclusion of the interactive discussion under Subsection C,
the Borough Council determines that the conditional appointee is not
qualified, the Borough Council shall give written notice to the
conditional appointee and the Commission.
§ 16-37 DANVILLE CODE § 16-39
1:34
§ 16-40. Probationary period.
All original appointments to any position in the police force shall serve
a twelve-month probationary period, but during the probationary period
an appointee may be dismissed only for a cause specified in § 16-21 or
because of incapacity for duty due to the use of alcohol or drugs. If at the
close of a probationary period the conduct or fitness of the probationer
has not been satisfactory to the Borough Council, the probationer shall
be notified in writing that the probationer will not receive a permanent
appointment, and the appointment shall cease. If the probationer is not
notified or dismissed in accordance with this section, the probationer's
retention shall be equivalent to a permanent appointment. The decision of
a borough to suspend or discharge a probationer shall be final and shall not
be subject to the hearing provisions of § 16-44.
§ 16-41. Provisional appointments.
Whenever there are urgent reasons for the filling of a vacancy in any
position in the police force and there are no names on the eligibility list
for the appointment, the Borough Council may nominate a person to the
E. Physical or psychological medical examinations prior to conditional
appointment shall not be required prior to condition of appointment
with the exception of physical agility testing requirement of § 16-33.
F. As used in this section, the following definitions shall apply:
MEDICAL EXAMINATION — Any examination, procedure, inquiry or
test designed to obtain information about medical history or a physical
or mental condition which might disqualify an applicant if it would
prevent the applicant from performing, with or without a reasonable
accommodation, all of the essential functions of the position.
PHYSICIAN — Shall have the meaning given to it in 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1991
(relating to definitions).
QUALIFIED MEDICAL PROFESSIONAL — An individual, in
collaboration with or under the supervision or direction of a physician,
as may be required by law, who is licensed:
As a physician assistant pursuant to the Act of December 20, 1985
(P.L. 457, No. 112), known as the "Medical Practice Act of 1985,"8
or the Act of October 5, 1978 (P.L. 1109, No. 261), known as the
"Osteopathic Medical Practice Act"9; or
(1)
As a certified registered nurse practitioner pursuant to the Act
of May 22, 1951 (P.L. 317, No. 69), known as "The Professional
Nursing Law."10
(2)
8. Editor's Note: See 63 P.S. § 422.1 et seq.
9. Editor's Note: See 63 P.S. § 271.1 et seq.
10.Editor's Note: See 63 P.S. § 211 et seq.
§ 16-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-41
1:35
Commission for noncompetitive examination, and if the nominee shall be
certified by the Commission as qualified after noncompetitive examination,
the nominee may be appointed provisionally to fill the vacancy. Within
three weeks of the provisional appointment, the Commission shall hold
a competitive examination and certify an eligibility list, and a regular
appointment shall then be made from the name or names submitted by
the Commission, provided that nothing in this section shall prevent the
appointment, without examination, of persons temporarily as police officers
in cases of riot or other emergency cases.
§ 16-42. Promotions.
A. Promotions shall be based on merit to be ascertained by examinations
to be prescribed by the Commission. All questions relative to
promotions shall be practical in character and will fairly test the merit
and fitness of persons seeking promotion. The Borough Council shall
notify the Commission of a vacancy in the police force which is to be
filled by promotion and shall request the certification of an eligibility
list. The Commission shall certify for each vacancy the names of three
persons on the eligibility list who have received the highest average in
the last preceding promotional examination held within a period of two
years preceding the date of the request for the eligibility list. If three
names are not available, the Commission shall certify the names
remaining on the eligibility list. The Borough Council shall make an
appointment from the names certified, based solely on the merits and
fitness of the candidate, unless the Borough Council makes objections
to the Commission regarding one or more of the persons so certified for
any reason provided under § 16-21.
B. The Borough Council shall have power to determine in each instance
whether an increase in salary shall constitute a promotion.
§ 16-41 DANVILLE CODE § 16-42
1:36
ARTICLE VI
Suspensions, Removals and Reductions in Rank
§ 16-43. Removals.
§ 16-44. Hearings on dismissals and reductions.
A. No person employed in Police Department shall be suspended without
pay, removed or reduced in rank except for the following reasons:
(1) Physical or mental disability affecting the person's ability to
continue in service, in which cases the person shall receive an
honorable discharge from service.
(2) Neglect or violation of any official duty.
(3) Violation of any law which provided that the violation constitutes a
misdemeanor or felony.
(4) Inefficiency, neglect, intemperance, immorality, disobedience of
orders, or conduct unbecoming an officer.
(5) Intoxication while on duty.
(6) Engaging or participating in conducting of any political or election
campaign while on duty or in uniform or while using Borough
property otherwise than to exercise the person's own right of
suffrage.
(7) Engaging or participating in the conduct of a political or election
campaign for an incompatible office as provided in Section 1104(f)
of the Borough Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.11
B. A person so employed shall not be removed for religious, racial or
political reasons. A written statement of any charges made against any
person so employed shall be furnished to the person within five days
after the same are filed. The person so employed shall have 10 days
from the date of receiving the notice in which to submit a written
request for a hearing to the Civil Service Commission under § 16-44.
C. If, for reasons of economy or other reasons, it shall be deemed
necessary by any borough to reduce the number of paid employees of
the police force, then the borough shall furlough the person or persons,
including probationers, last appointed to the respective force. Such
removal shall be accomplished by furloughing in numerical order,
commencing with the person last appointed until such reduction shall
have been accomplished. In the event the said police force shall again
be increased, the employees furloughed shall be reinstated in the order
of their seniority in the service. The provisions of this subsection as to
reductions in force are not applicable to a Chief of Police.
11.Editor's Note: See 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 1104(f).
§ 16-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-44
1:37
A. The person suspended, removed or reduced in rank may make written
answers to any charges filed against the person not later than the day
fixed for hearing. The Commission shall grant the person a hearing,
which shall be held within a period of 10 days from the filing of charges
in writing, unless continued by the Commission for cause at the request
of the Borough Council or the accused. Notwithstanding this provision,
the failure of the Commission to hold a hearing within 10 days from the
filing of the charges in writing shall not result in the dismissal of the
charges filed.
B. At any hearing, the person against whom the charges are made may be
present in person and by counsel. The Borough Council may suspend
the person, without pay, pending the determination of the charges
against the person, but in the event the Commission fails to uphold the
charges, then the person sought to be suspended, removed or reduced
in rank shall be reinstated with full pay for the period during which the
person was suspended, removed or reduced in rank, and no charges
shall be officially recorded against the person's record. A stenographic
record of all testimony taken at the hearings shall be filed with, and
preserved by, the Commission, which record shall be sealed and not be
available for public inspection in the event the charges are dismissed.
C. All parties concerned shall have immediate right of appeal to the Court
of Common Pleas of the county, and the case shall there be determined
as the court deems proper. No order of suspension made by the
Commission shall be for a longer period than one year. The appeal shall
be taken within 30 days from the date of entry by the Commission of its
final order and shall be by petition. Upon the appeal being taken and
docketed, the Court of Common Pleas shall fix a day for a hearing and
shall proceed to hear the appeal on the original record and additional
proof or testimony as the parties concerned may desire to offer in
evidence. The decision of the court affirming or revising the decision of
the Commission shall be final, and the employee shall be suspended,
discharged, reduced in rank or reinstated in accordance with the order
of court.
D. The Borough Council and the person sought to be suspended, removed
or reduced in rank shall at all times have the right to employ counsel
before the Commission and upon appeal to the Court of Common Pleas.
Unless the Borough Council or the person sought to be suspended,
removed or reduced in rank requests that the proceedings before the
Commission be open to the public, the proceedings before the
Commission pursuant to this section shall be held in the nature of a
closed executive session that shall not be open to the public. Any such
request shall be presented to the Commission before the civil service
hearing commences. The deliberations of the Commission, including
interim rulings on evidentiary or procedural issues, may be held in
private and shall not be subject to a request for being open to the
public, the Borough Council or to the person sought to be suspended,
removed or reduced in rank. The Commission's disposition of the
§ 16-44 DANVILLE CODE § 16-44
1:38
disciplinary action shall constitute official action which shall occur at
a public meeting held pursuant to 65 Pa.C.S.A. Ch. 7 (relating to open
meetings).
§ 16-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-44
1:39

ARTICLE VII
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 16-45. Employees exempted.
All appointments in the police, including the Chief of Police or equivalent
official, prior to the creation of a Commission, shall continue to hold their
positions and shall not be required to take any examination under the
provisions of this chapter, except that which may be required for promotion,
provided that this section shall not be construed to apply to persons
employed temporarily in emergency cases.
§ 16-46. Discrimination on account of political or religious
affiliations.
§ 16-47. Penalty.
Any member of the Borough Council who, by vote, causes to be appointed
any person to the police force contrary to the provisions of this chapter,
or any member of the Borough Council or member of the Commission
who willfully refuses to comply with, or conform to, the provisions of this
chapter, shall be deemed guilty of a summary offense, and upon conviction,
shall be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $100, or suffer imprisonment
not exceeding 90 days, or both.
§ 16-48. Police force defined.
"Police force" shall mean a police force organized and operating as
prescribed by law, the members of which devote their normal working hours
to police duty or duty in connection with the bureau, agencies and services
connected with police protection work, and who are paid a stated salary or
compensation for such work by the Borough. "Police force," as used in this
chapter, shall not include:
A. No question in any form of application for examination or in any
examination shall be so framed as to elicit information concerning the
political or religious opinions or affiliations of any applicant, nor shall
inquiry be made concerning the opinion or affiliations, and all
disclosures of opinion or affiliation shall be ignored.
B. No discrimination shall be exercised, threatened or promised by any
person against or in favor of any applicant or employee because of
political or religious opinions or affiliations or race, and no offer or
promise or reward, favor or benefit, directly or indirectly, shall be made
to or received by any person for any act done or duty omitted or to be
done under this chapter.
A. Any special police appointed by the Mayor to act in emergencies;
B. Any person appointed solely for parking meter enforcement duties;
C. Any special school police;
§ 16-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-48
1:41
D. Any extra police serving from time to time or on an hourly or daily basis;
or
E. Any auxiliary policeman appointed under the Act of January 14, 1952
(P.L. 2016)12 who is paid a stated salary or compensation for such work
done by the Borough.
12.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 731 et seq.
§ 16-48 DANVILLE CODE § 16-48
1:42
ARTICLE VIII
Resolution for Adoption of Rules
§ 16-49. Enactment.
The foregoing civil service rules, which are in accordance with powers
granted by the civil service provisions of the Borough Code, enacted by the
General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and in accordance
with the authority granted by the municipal governing body of Danville,
Pennsylvania, are hereby adopted by the Civil Service Commission of
Danville, Pennsylvania, on October 23, 2012.
§ 16-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-49
1:43
Chapter 24
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 49. Emergency services reimbursement — See
Ch. 115.
§ 24-1. Creation of Department.
The several volunteer fire companies now in service in the Borough of
Danville, namely, the Friendship Fire Company, Washington Fire Company,
Continental Fire Company and Goodwill Fire Company, shall together form
the Fire Department of the Borough of Danville, hereinafter designated
as the "Fire Department." The fire companies as a Department shall be
represented by the Danville Firemen's Executive Board.
§ 24-2. Authority of Fire Chief, Deputy Fire Chief and Assistant Fire
Chiefs.
The Fire Department shall be under the supervision of an officer to be
known as the "Borough Fire Chief," a Deputy Fire Chief and three Assistant
Fire Chiefs.
§ 24-3. Election of Fire Chief, Deputy Fire Chief and Assistant Fire
Chiefs; rotation system.
A. The Borough Fire Chief shall be elected biennially in the following
manner: for the balance of the year 1961 and for the years 1962 and
1963, from the Goodwill Fire Company, for the years 1964 and 1965,
from the Friendship Fire Company; for the years 1966 and 1967, from
the Washington Fire Company; for the years 1968 and 1969, from the
Continental Fire Company; for the years 1970 and 1971, from the
Goodwill Fire Company; and thereafter in the same order every two
years. [Amended 3-7-2017 by Ord. No. 541]
(1) The term for the Borough Fire Chief may be extended from two
years to four years. A vote will be taken after the second and third
year to determine whether the Chief will stay on or the next Chief
will take office. In order to proceed with the Chief's term extension,
the Chief must request to stay on, and then there must be a
unanimous vote by Fire Board members in favor of the request.
B. A new Assistant Fire Chief shall be elected every two years, in order of
the company rotation system outlined in Subsection A, such elections to
be conducted according to the bylaws of each company.
C. The Assistant Fire Chief who has the longer current continuous service
as Assistant Fire Chief shall be the Deputy Fire Chief, so that the
§ 16-49 DANVILLE CODE § 24-3
1:44
§ 24-4. Selection of Fire Chiefs; approval.
The fire company entitled to select the Borough Fire Chief shall have the
sole right to make the selection from the membership of its company.
However, the Borough Fire Chief, the Deputy Fire Chief and all Assistant
Fire Chiefs shall be subject to approval by the Danville Borough Council
after first having been recommended to the Danville Borough Council by the
Danville Firemen's Executive Board.
§ 24-5. Rejection of Fire Chief, Deputy Fire Chief or Assistant Fire
Chief; replacement procedure.
In the event that the Borough Council rejects the person selected for
Borough Fire Chief, Deputy Fire Chief or any of the Assistant Fire Chiefs,
then the fire company shall nominate another member for Borough Fire
Chief, Deputy Fire Chief and/or Assistant Fire Chief and submit this name
to the Danville Firemen's Executive Board for its recommendation and for
subsequent approval by the Danville Borough Council.
§ 24-6. Qualifications for Assistant Fire Chiefs.
Deputy Fire Chief will become Borough Fire Chief in the year that the
company which he represents is scheduled to have the Borough Fire
Chief.
D. In the event that a company is unable to elect an Assistant Fire Chief
meeting the qualifications outlined in § 24-6 of this chapter, that
company will forfeit its Assistant Fire Chief for two years to the next
company in line in the rotation in Subsection A. At the end of such twoyear
period, the company shall again have the opportunity to elect an
Assistant Fire Chief meeting the qualifications. If the company is again
unsuccessful, it shall forfeit its Assistant Fire Chief for another two
years to the next company in the rotation. This process shall continue
until the company is able to elect an Assistant Fire Chief meeting the
qualifications.
A. The qualifications required for an individual to be elected as an
Assistant Fire Chief are as follows:
(1) Five years' service in the Danville Fire Department.
(2) Completion of basic fire-fighting training.
(3) Completion of advanced fire-fighting training.
(4) Completion of officers' training.
(5) Completion of arson investigation training.
(6) Completion of hazardous materials training.
§ 24-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-6
1:45
§ 24-7. Death, resignation or removal from office; replacement
procedure.
In the event of death, resignation or removal from office of the Borough Fire
Chief, Deputy Fire Chief or an Assistant Fire Chief, the remaining Chiefs
shall fill the vacancy by moving up in order of rank, subject to approval
by the Borough Council pursuant to §§ 24-4 and 24-5 of this chapter. The
company which lost its Chief by death, resignation or removal from office
would elect a new Assistant Fire Chief for the balance of the two-year
period. In the event that the company is unable to elect an Assistant Fire
Chief meeting the qualifications outlined in § 24-6 of this chapter, the next
company in the rotation would do so, pursuant to § 24-3D of this chapter.
§ 24-8. Oath required before assuming office.
Before assuming office as such, the Borough Fire Chief, Deputy Fire Chief
and each of the Assistant Fire Chiefs shall take an oath, to be administered
by the Mayor, to faithfully perform the duties of their respective offices.
§ 24-9. Authority of Borough Council to remove Chiefs.
The Borough Council shall have the authority to remove the Borough Fire
Chief, Deputy Fire Chief or any Assistant Chief for inconsistency, neglect of
duty or any other cause touching upon the duties and powers of such officer
and his relations to the Fire Department.
§ 24-10. Salary of Fire Chief.
The Borough Fire Department shall be paid such salary or compensation as
shall be determined from time to time by the Borough Council.
§ 24-11. Duties of Fire Chief. [Amended 6-13-2000 by Ord. No. 412]
The Borough Fire Chief, or in his/her absence the Deputy Fire Chief or
Assistant Fire Chiefs in order of rank, shall have the following duties:
B. In addition, an Assistant Fire Chief must complete the following
training courses prior to election or prior to completion of the end of the
first two-year term of such Assistant Fire Chief:
(1) Building construction.
(2) Water supply.
C. State or local level training is satisfactory to meet the above
requirements. Written certification of training course completion must
be furnished to the Borough Fire Chief.
A. He or she shall have complete charge of the handling of all firefighters
and equipment in the fighting of all fires. He or she shall also have
supervision over the firefighters and fire-fighting equipment, with the
§ 24-6 DANVILLE CODE § 24-11
1:46
§ 24-12. Additional regulations authorized.
The Danville Borough Council, with the approval of the Mayor, by resolution
or ordinance, may from time to time make further rules and regulations
and provisions relating to the Borough Fire Chief of the Fire Department
and the Borough Fire Department in general, provided that such rules and
regulations do not violate any provisions of this chapter.
Chapter 31
INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 102. Emergency services reimbursement — See
Ch. 115.
approval of the Borough Council, during parades in and out of the
Borough.
B. He or she shall make careful inspections of all the buildings and other
property in the Borough and report all violations of all state laws and
Borough ordinances relating to fire hazards.
C. He or she shall furnish an annual itemized inventory before November 1
of each year to the Borough Council of all Borough-owned and
company-owned fire-fighting equipment.
D. He or she shall submit the following reports, on a monthly basis, to
Danville Borough Council: [Amended 5-13-2003 by Ord. No. 449]
(1) Individual incident reports, on the form provided by the Borough,
of all incidents responded to by the Fire Department.
(2) A monthly report of all fires and fire losses.
(3) A monthly report indicating all fire-fighting equipment that was
destroyed, damaged, lost or stolen, during the month.
E. He or she shall conduct monthly fire drills and tests in accordance with
the rules and regulations established from time to time by the Borough
Council and the Mayor.
F. The Borough Fire Chief shall attend to all needed repairs of the fire
hose and other fire-fighting equipment; provided, however, that the
expenses involved shall first be approved by the Borough Council.
G. The Borough Fire Chief shall not permit any of the Borough fire-fighting
equipment to attend out-of-town parades, conventions, etc., without
first obtaining the approval of the Borough Council.
§ 24-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-12
1:47

ARTICLE I
Joint Emergency Operations Plan
[Adopted 5-13-2003 by Ord. No. 452]
§ 31-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Danville Borough Joint Emergency
Operations Plan Ordinance."
§ 31-2. Parties.
The Borough of Danville hereby resolves to enter into an Intergovernmental
Cooperation Agreement with certain other townships and boroughs of
Montour County that have enacted a similar ordinance and such other
municipalities as would desire to enter into an intergovernmental
agreement in the future, whereby a Montour County Joint Emergency
Operations Plan will be created.
§ 31-3. Purpose.
The purpose of the County Emergency Operations Plan is to plan for and
respond to any natural or man-caused disaster emergencies that may occur
within the geographical boundaries of Montour County.
§ 31-4. Conditions and agreement.
The conditions of the intergovernmental cooperation agreement to be
entered into between the participating municipalities and the county are
generally as follows:
A. The municipalities agree that they shall take steps to assure the
formulation of the County Emergency Operations Plan, and they shall
adopt and declare the County Emergency Operations Plan to be the
emergency operations plan of each of their municipalities for the
purpose of fulfilling the requirement in Subsection 7503(1) of the
Emergency Management Services Code13 to prepare, maintain, and
keep current a disaster emergency management plan for each of their
municipalities.
B. Each municipality agrees and shall provide necessary information to
the County Emergency Management Agency on a periodic basis, as
determined by the Coordinator of the Montour Emergency
Management Agency (hereafter referred to as the "Coordinator"), in
order to prepare and maintain a joint Emergency Operations Plan that
can and will be implemented for response to emergencies affecting the
municipalities that are parties to this Agreement. Each municipality
agrees that the County Emergency Operations Plan shall constitute the
joint Emergency Operations Plan of the municipalities.
13.Editor's Note: See 35 Pa.C.S.A § 7503(a).
§ 31-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-4
1:49
§ 31-5. Registration with county.
A copy of this article shall be filed with the Montour County Emergency
Management Agency and shall remain in effect unless amended. Any
amendments shall also be filed with the Montour County Emergency
Management Agency.
C. Each municipality shall provide reimbursement to the Montour County
Emergency Management Agency for the printing and mailing of said
joint emergency operations plan.
D. Each municipality agrees to use the Montour County Emergency
Operations Plan for a term of five years. At the end of this period of
time, any municipality may withdraw from this agreement after
providing: 30 days' written notice to the other member municipalities;
and acceptance by the Montour County Emergency Management
Coordinator of a standalone emergency operations plan for that
municipality. This agreement, however, shall continue to exist among
the remaining municipalities.
§ 31-4 DANVILLE CODE § 31-5
1:50
ARTICLE II
Uniform Construction Code Board of Appeals
[Adopted 12-13-2005 by Ord. No. 468]
§ 31-6. Establishment of Appeals Board.
§ 31-7. Purpose.
The Appeals Board is established to provide a process for the resolution of
code grievances derived from the decision of the code official in order to
insure the health, safety, and general welfare for the citizens of the Montour
County Council of Governments Region.
§ 31-8. Organization.
A. The municipalities of the Montour County Council of Governments,
which participate in the UCC program, do hereby create and establish
the Montour County Board of Appeals, hereinafter referred to as the
"Appeals Board."
B. The participating municipalities shall designate by ordinance the
Appeals Board as the body to hear appeals brought under:
(1) The codes and standards promulgated in the most current version
of the Uniform Construction Code (Act 45 of 1999) of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as amended by the participating
municipalities, and as subsequently adopted in Title 34 Pa. Code
Chapters 401, 403 and 405.
(2) The Rules and Regulations contained in Title 34 Code Chapters 401
to 405, adopted by the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and
Industry.
(3) The International Code Council Property Maintenance Code as
amended by the participating municipalities that have adopted this
code.
(4) The International Code Council Fire Code as amended by the
participating municipalities that have adopted that code.
A. Any resident of the Montour COG Region having the qualifications
according to Subsection E or F shall be eligible for appointment to the
Appeals Board regardless of whether the resident's home municipality
participates in the code administration program. The intent of the
regional appeals board is to provide uniform interpretation of the codes
and to recruit persons who are well qualified professionally, regardless
of residence. Therefore, it is not expected that representation will
necessarily reflect any sort of balance among the municipalities. A non-
Montour County COG Region resident may fill a position on the Appeals
Board when the Montour County COG cannot find a person within the
§ 31-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-8
1:51
county region who satisfies the requirements of Title 34, Chapter
403.121, C.1.
B. The Montour County COG representatives shall recommend to the
Montour County COG appointments to the Appeals Board. The Montour
County COG shall consider the appointments and shall recommend a
slate of nominations to the participating municipalities for appointment
by the participating municipalities.
C. The Appeals Board shall consist of five members with two alternate
members.
D. Members of the participating municipalities' governing board and their
code officials may not serve on the Board of Appeals.
E. The Board of Appeals shall consist of members who are qualified by
experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building
construction and are not employees of the jurisdiction.
F. Members of the Appeals Board shall serve for the period as follows:
(1) Members shall serve a maximum of three consecutive terms (a
term consists of three years). Any midterm replacement or
appointment shall not be considered a full term.
(2) A year shall commence on January 1 and end the succeeding
December 31.
G. The Appeals Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from the
Board at the January organizational meeting of which date and time is
set by the COG.. The Appeals Board at the organizational meeting shall
establish meeting dates, times, and locations for the year. The
Chairman, or Vice Chairman, in the absence of the Chairman, shall have
the authority to call the Appeals Board into a special session.
H. The Director of the Montour County COG Code Administration or the
Director's designee shall be the Secretary to the Appeals Board.
I. The Appeals Board shall only consider the following factors when
deciding an appeal under Title 34, Chapter 403.121, Rules and
Regulations — Board of Appeals:
(1) The true intent of the act or Uniform Construction Code was
incorrectly interpreted.
(2) The provisions of the act do not fully apply.
(3) An equivalent form of construction is proposed.
J. The Appeals Board may consider the following factors when ruling upon
a request for extension of time or the request for variance:
(1) The reasonableness of the Uniform Construction Code's application
in a particular case.
§ 31-8 DANVILLE CODE § 31-8
1:52
§ 31-9. Appeal procedure.
(2) The extent to which the granting of a variance or an extension of
time will pose a violation of the Uniform Construction Code or an
unsafe condition.
(3) The availability of professional or technical personnel needed to
come into compliance.
(4) The availability of materials and equipment needed to come into
compliance.
(5) The efforts being made to come into compliance as quickly as
possible.
(6) Compensatory features that will provide a degree of protection
equivalent to the protection to the Uniform Construction Code.
K. If the owner or owner's agent requests a hearing, the Appeals Board
shall schedule a hearing and notify the owner or owner's agent and the
building code official of the date, time and place of the hearing. The
Appeals Board may:
(1) Deny the request in whole or in part.
(2) Grant the request in whole or in part.
(3) Grant the request upon certain conditions being satisfied.
A. All appeals shall be legally advertised and conducted according to the
Pennsylvania State Sunshine Act (65 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 701 through 716), as
amended. The Appeals Board shall adopt formal rules for its
proceedings.
B. The appellant wishing to appeal the decision of the Code Official shall
do so within 30 calendar days upon receipt of the written decision.
C. The Appeals Board may request and obtain legal counsel through the
Montour County Council of Governments or the legal counsel of the
district where the appeal has been made.
D. The appellant wishing to appeal the decision of the Appeals Board shall
do so to the Court of Common Pleas in accordance with, as far as
practicable, the rules of civil procedure of the supreme court regarding
appeals from administrative agencies.
E. The Appeals Board shall also retain in its files a copy of the decision,
which files shall be available for inspection by the public. Each decision
shall set forth fully the reasons for the decision of the Appeals Board
and the finding of the facts on which the decision was based. The
Appeals Board shall make an order on its decision and the Code
Enforcement officer shall take immediate action to carry out said order.
§ 31-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-9
1:53
§ 31-10. Withdrawal procedures.
§ 31-11. Amendment procedures.
Amendments to these Joint Articles of Agreement may be recommended
by the Code Administration Committee, by the Montour County COG, or
by the participating municipalities. Any amendment or change to these
articles shall be approved by the Montour County COG General Forum,
participating municipalities, and shall take effect upon passage of
appropriate municipal ordinances.
§ 31-12. When effective; fees and compensation .
F. The Appeals Board shall provide a written notice of its decision to the
owner and to the building code official.
A. A participating municipality shall withdraw from the Appeals Board if it
withdraws from the Montour County COG in accordance with the
Articles of Agreement and the Montour County COG Articles of
Agreement.
B. A participating municipality shall have the right to withdraw from the
Appeals Board and to establish its own by following the COG Articles of
Agreement for withdrawal. Withdrawal will not affect membership in
the Montour County COG.
A. The effective date of this agreement shall be upon enactment by
ordinance of this agreement by the participating municipalities.
B. The Montour County Council of Governments (governing body) shall set
the fee schedule and appeals board member compensation as needed
by resolution.
§ 31-9 DANVILLE CODE § 31-12
1:54
ARTICLE III
Pennsylvania Municipal Health Insurance Cooperative
[Adopted 1-3-2006 by Ord. No. 472]
§ 31-13. Incorporation of caption and preamble.
The caption and preamble of this article set forth above are incorporated
herein by reference.14
§ 31-14. Approval of agreement.
This political subdivision hereby approves entering into the agreement, a
copy of which is attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference (and
which shall be filed with the minutes of the meeting at which this article
was enacted), with the intent and effect that this political subdivision shall
be bound by the agreement.
§ 31-15. Execution of agreement.
The Chairman or Vice Chairman of the governing body, acting alone or
together with the Secretary or Assistant Secretary, are hereby authorized
and directed on behalf of the political subdivision, to execute and deliver
the agreement, and to execute and deliver such additional instruments,
and to take such further actions, as may be necessary or appropriate
to carry forth the agreement and the transactions to be effected under
the agreement, including payment to the Pennsylvania Municipal Health
Insurance Cooperative (PMHIC) of such amounts as are due by the political
subdivision pursuant to the agreement.
§ 31-16. Ratification of prior actions.
All actions of any officer, agent or other representative of this political
subdivision heretofore taken in the pursuit of the establishment of the
PMHIC and/or the political subdivision's participation therein, are hereby
ratified and approved in all respects.
§ 31-17. Authorization of other actions.
The governing body of the political subdivision is hereby authorized to take
such other action as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out the
purposes of this article and of the agreement.
§ 31-18. Findings.
As required by the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, the
following matters are specifically found and determined:
A. The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the agreement.
14.Editor's Note: Refers to the caption and preamble of the original ordinance; said caption
and preamble to Ord. No. 472 are on file in the Borough offices.
§ 31-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-18
1:55
§ 31-19. No effect on prior proceedings.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to affect any suit or
proceeding in any court, or any rights acquired or liability incurred, or any
cause of action existing prior to the enactment of this article.
B. This political subdivision shall participate in the PMHIC for an initial
term of three years from the date that they first elected to purchase
benefits through PMHIC. Thereafter, termination of the agreement
shall be as further set forth therein.
C. The purpose and objectives of the agreement are as set forth in the
preamble of this article and in the agreement.
D. The manner and extent of financing the agreement are that:
(1) No borrowing will be required by the political subdivision;
(2) Funds to implement the political subdivision's obligations under
the agreement same shall come from normal and usual budgeted
amounts for such matters; and
(3) Other provisions governing the manner and extent of the financing
of the PMHIC shall be as set forth in the agreement.
E. The PMHIC shall be managed by its Board of Directors pursuant to the
terms of the agreement.
F. All property, real or personal, of the PMHIC, shall be acquired,
managed, licensed or disposed of by the PMHIC in accordance with the
terms of the agreement.
G. The PMHIC created by the agreement shall be empowered to enter into
contracts for policies of group insurance and employee benefits
pursuant to the terms of the agreement.
§ 31-18 DANVILLE CODE § 31-19
1:56
ARTICLE IV
Schuylkill Region Insurance Cooperative
[Adopted 1-3-2006 by Ord. No. 473]
§ 31-20. Incorporation of caption and preamble.
The caption and preamble of this article set forth above are incorporated
herein by reference.15
§ 31-21. Approval of agreement.
This political subdivision hereby approves entering into the agreement, a
copy of which is attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference (and
which shall be filed with the minutes of the meeting at which this article
was enacted), with the intent and effect that this political subdivision shall
be bound by the agreement.
§ 31-22. Execution of agreement.
The Chairman or Vice Chairman of the governing body, acting alone or
together with the Secretary or Assistant Secretary, are hereby authorized
and directed on behalf of the political subdivision, to execute and deliver the
agreement, and to execute and deliver such additional instruments, and to
take such further actions, as may be necessary or appropriate to carry forth
the agreement and the transactions to be effected under the agreement,
including payment to the Schuylkill Region Insurance Cooperative (SRIC)
of such amounts as are due by the political subdivision pursuant to the
agreement.
§ 31-23. Ratification of prior actions.
All actions of any officer, agent or other representative of this political
subdivision heretofore taken in the pursuit of the establishment of the SRIC
and/or the political subdivision's participation therein, are hereby ratified
and approved in all respects.
§ 31-24. Authorization of other actions.
The governing body of the political subdivision is hereby authorized to take
such other action as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out the
purposes of this article and of the agreement.
§ 31-25. Findings.
As required by the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, the
following matters are specifically found and determined:
A. The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the agreement;
15.Editor's Note: Refers to the caption and preamble of the original ordinance; said caption
and preamble to Ord. No. 473 are on file in the Borough offices.
§ 31-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-25
1:57
§ 31-26. No effect on prior proceedings.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to affect any suit or
proceeding in any court, or any rights acquired or liability incurred, or any
cause of action existing prior to the enactment of this article.
B. This political subdivision shall participate in the SRIC for an initial term
of three years All renewal terms shall be as further set forth therein;
C. The purpose and objectives of the agreement are as set forth in the
preamble of this article and in the agreement;
D. The manner and extent of financing the agreement are that:
(1) No borrowing will be required by the political subdivision;
(2) Funds to implement the political subdivision's obligations under
the agreement same shall come from normal and usual budgeted
amounts for such matters; and
(3) Other provisions governing the manner and extent of the financing
of the SRIC shall be as set forth in the agreement.
E. The SRIC shall be managed by its Board of Directors pursuant to the
terms of the agreement;
F. All property, real or personal, of the SRIC, shall be acquired, managed,
licensed or disposed of by the SRIC in accordance with the terms of the
agreement; and
G. The SRIC created by the agreement shall be empowered to enter into
contracts for policies of group insurance and employee benefits
pursuant to the terms of the agreement.
§ 31-25 DANVILLE CODE § 31-26
1:58
Chapter 41
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 63.
§ 31-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-26
1:59

ARTICLE I
Delinquent Tax Collector
[Adopted 1-19-2002 by Ord. No. 436]
§ 41-1. Appointment of elected Tax Collector.
The Council of the Borough of Danville hereby appoints the elected Tax
Collector as the delinquent Tax Collector for the year 2002.
§ 41-2. Rights, privileges and duties.
The delinquent tax collector so appointed shall have the same rights,
privileges, duties and obligations as set forth in 24 P.S. § 6-686 of the Public
School Code of 1949.
§ 41-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 41-2
1:61
Chapter 45
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
220.
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
§ 45-1. Creation of Commission; powers and duties.
Pursuant to Act No. 247 of 1968, known as the "Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code," as amended,16 supplemented and in effect, there is hereby
created a Borough Planning Commission, which shall have all the powers
and duties conferred upon it by law and other powers vested in it by law or
ordinance.
§ 45-2. Membership; appointment; compensation.
The Borough Planning Commission shall consist of not less than three nor
more than nine members, as the Council may from time to time determine
by resolution. The members shall be appointed by the Council and shall
serve without compensation, except that they shall be reimbursed for
expenses incurred in carrying out their Commission duties.
§ 45-3. Annual report.
In addition to the powers and duties conferred upon said Commission by
law, the Borough Planning Commission shall make an annual report to
the Borough Council, showing its transactions and recommendations. The
report shall review in substance all transactions and recommendations
made during the year, together with any new recommendations which the
Commission might wish to include.
Chapter 49
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 24.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 41.
Police pension fund — See Ch. 52.
16.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 41-2 DANVILLE CODE § 45-3
1:62
ARTICLE I
Establishment of Department
[Adopted 11-21-1960 by Ord. No. 156 (Ch. 25, Art. I, of the 1975
Code)]
§ 49-1. Recognition and reestablishment of Department.
The existing Police Department is hereby recognized and reestablished in
and for the Borough of Danville. The Chief of Police shall be the chief
executive of the Police Department. He shall, under the direction of the
Mayor, be in charge of the police force and have supervision over its
members in the exercise of their powers, duties and authority.
§ 49-2. Chain of command; number of officers; compensation.
[Amended 12-12-2000 by Ord. No. 41717]
Subordinate to the Chief of Police Department, the following classifications
are hereby established: Sergeant, Corporal, and Patrolmen. The priority
of authority among such subordinate classifications shall be in the order
listed above. The number of persons to serve in each of subordinate
classifications, on a full-time or a part-time basis, and the compensation of
each, shall be as determined by the Borough Council from time to time.
§ 49-3. Authority to appoint special policemen not affected.
Nothing herein contained shall affect the authority of the Mayor to appoint
special policemen.
17.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Ch. 25, Police Department, Art. II,
Subsistence Allowance, adopted 6-25-1958 by Ord. No. 131.
§ 49-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 49-3
1:63
Chapter 52
POLICE PENSION FUND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 49.
§ 49-3 DANVILLE CODE § 49-3
1:64
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 11-18-1957 by Ord. No. 12618 (Ch. 27, Art. I, of the 1975
Code)]
§ 52-1. Establishment of fund; source of funds; officers. [Amended
5-14-1975 by Ord. No. 258]
There is hereby established a Police Pension Fund, hereinafter referred to
as the "fund," under the authority granted by the Act of 1956, May 29,
P.L. (1956) 1804, known as Act No. 600, as amended,19 and other statutes
now or hereafter pertaining or applicable hereto and any ordinance that
may be lawfully enacted for the purposes hereof. The fund shall be created
and maintained by an equal and proportionate monthly charge against each
member of the police force in the maximum amount of 5% of the pay of such
member and also from other sources of revenue. The fund shall be for the
benefit of all members of the police force who elect to become members
thereof, and shall be under the direction of the Borough Council, unless
and until the Council shall designate a committee therefor. While under
the direction of Council, the officers of the fund shall be as follows: the
President of Council shall be President of the fund, the Borough Secretary
shall be Secretary of the fund and the Borough Treasurer shall be Treasurer
of the fund.
§ 52-2. Applicability; scale of allowances; policeman defined.
The fund shall be applied in accordance with present and future laws, and
shall be under such regulations, herein or hereafter, as the Council may
lawfully prescribe for the benefit of such members of the police force as
shall receive honorable discharge therefrom by reason of age or disability,
and the families of such as may be injured or killed in the service. Any
allowance made to those who are retired by reason of disability or age shall
be in conformity with a uniform scale. For the purpose of this article, unless
and until changed by statute or ordinance, a "policeman" means a full-time
paid policeman or policewoman.
§ 52-3. Method of joining fund.
Any policeman, as defined, may elect to join the fund by notifying the
Borough Secretary in writing and therein authorizing the proper Borough
authorities to deduct a maximum of 5% from his pay as his contribution to
the fund, and in such communication naming a beneficiary or beneficiaries
to whom payments shall be made in the event of his death while a member
of the police force and the fund, and further stipulating and agreeing that
he shall be bound by the provisions of the law pertaining hereto and of this
article and by any future statutes and ordinances pertaining hereto.
18.Editor's Note: Original Section 18 of this ordinance, which incorporated the provisions of
certain unnamed resolutions into this article, was repealed 5-14-1975 by Ord. No. 258.
19.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 767 et seq.
§ 52-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-4
1:65
§ 52-4. Disposition of funds; acceptance of outside contributions.
The contribution deducted from any member of the police force shall be
forthwith deposited to the credit of the fund, and into the fund shall likewise
be deposited and credited any and all contributions that may be lawfully
made by the Borough to the fund, and the Borough Council or said
Committee, if and while it functions, is hereby authorized to accept and
likewise deposit and credit any and all contributions, revenues or proceeds
from any source and gifts, grants, devises, bequests, money or profit, and
any sum or sums paid to the Borough and inuring to the fund from any
official of the department of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania under any
present or future law pertinent thereto.
§ 52-5. Assets to be kept separate; regulation of funds.
The assets of the fund shall be kept separate and apart from other Borough
funds. All funds shall be subject to regulations as the Borough Council may
prescribe from time to time.
§ 52-6. Records to be open for inspection; audit of accounts.
The books and records of the fund shall be open for inspection by any
interested party, and the accounts shall be audited as Council or Committee
directs.
§ 52-7. Formulation of rules or bylaws authorized.
The Borough Council or the Committee may formulate rules or bylaws
to implement and effectuate the intent and purpose of the statutes and
ordinances relating to police pensions.
§ 52-8. Eligibility for pension; service on police reserve. [Amended
6-13-1972 by Ord. No. 126; 2-10-1976 by Ord. No. 26120,21]
All officers may retire and receive benefits after 25 years of service and
at least 55 years of age. Policemen so retired shall be subject to service
as police reserve until unfit therefor by age or disability, when they may
be finally discharged. While on duty as a police reserve, they shall be paid
as wages, in addition to the regular pension, such sum as the Council may
determine.
§ 52-9. Discharge or withdrawal from service; disability; death;
vesting. [Amended 5-10-1983 by Ord. No. 294]
A. Should a policeman be discharged or voluntarily withdraw from service
or otherwise cease to become a member of the fund before vesting his
pension as hereinafter provided, he shall be paid from the fund the full
20.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it take effect 1-1-1976.
21.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 52-4 DANVILLE CODE § 52-9
1:66
amount of the deductions from his pay, with interest at the rate of 4%
per annum. [Amended 1-13-1987 by Ord. No. 314]
B. Should a policeman not eligible to pension, but in good standing in the
fund, be honorably discharged because of disability, he shall likewise be
paid from the fund the full amount of the deductions from his pay, with
interest at the rate of 4% per annum, and shall, if he shall have been in
the service at least one full year, be granted, in addition to any other
grants or privileges to which he may be entitled, leave of absence for
one month with pay from the fund. [Amended 1-13-1987 by Ord. No.
314]
C. Should a policeman die in service before vesting of his pension as
hereinafter provided, there shall be paid to his widow or other
beneficiary named by the decedent, or to his family, or, in the discretion
of the Council or Committee, to other proper persons, including, in
proportionate shares, medical and hospital services during the last
illness or funeral expenses, from the fund the full amount of the
deductions from the decedent's pay with interest at the rate of 4% per
annum, and in addition, there shall be paid from the fund the full
amount of the deductions from the decedent's pay, with interest at the
rate of 4% per annum, in Subsection B, an amount equal to the last
month's salary paid to the decedent as an earned leave of absence for a
month for the purpose. The payments provided in Subsections B and C
are alternative and not cumulative. [Amended 1-13-1987 by Ord. No.
314]
D. Any police officer who has completed 12 years of total service and who
for any reason ceases to be employed as a full-time police officer by the
Borough before attaining his normal retirement age and completing the
number of years of service required for normal retirement pension
benefits may elect to vest his retirement benefits by filing with the
Borough an election to vest retirement benefits. Such election shall be
written and must be filed within 90 days of the date he ceases to be a
full-time police officer.
E. Provided that the election is made in a timely manner, the retirement
benefits shall commence to be paid on the date which would have been
the police officer's normal retirement date had he continued to be
employed as a full-time police officer. The retirement benefits shall be
calculated as follows:
§ 52-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-9
1:67
§ 52-10. Leaves of absence.
Upon application in writing stating a reason deemed good and sufficient to
it, the Borough Council may grant any policeman leave of absence without
pay for a period not exceeding six months, unless such period shall be
extended by a majority vote of the entire Council, during which time the
member shall be considered in relation to the fund as being in active
service, and he shall not lose any rights to pension or benefits hereunder,
provided that while on leave of absence he regularly makes a contribution
to the fund in the amount that would be deducted from his pay, if he were
on active duty. The provisions of this section may likewise apply where any
member is prevented by injury or illness from performing his regular duties
if he remains a member of the police force and of the fund, provided that
such leave of absence shall not affect any law, ordinance or action of Council
providing for sick leave or vacations.
§ 52-11. Rate of pension. [Amended 6-13-1972 by Ord. No. 126;
2-10-1976 by Ord. No. 26122,23]
A/B x NP
Where:
A = Officer's actual years of service.
B = Officer's years of service had he continued to work until his
normal retirement date.
NP = Normal pension, determined by using the officer's monthly
average salary received during the appropriate period prior
to his termination of employment.
A. All officers may retire and receive benefits after 25 years of service and
at least 55 years of age. All officers shall be entitled to be retired and
eligible for a pension upon the recommendation of the Police Pension
Fund Committee or upon application by the officer to the said
Committee for retirement, and said Committee, in either case, shall
order and direct said officer to be paid out of said Police Pension Fund
the yearly pension, payable in monthly installments, equal to a sum not
in excess of 50% of the average salary which he received for the 60
months immediately preceding his retirement, provided further that
any federal social security payments due any officer covered by the
Police Pension Fund shall not be computed in determining the amount
to be paid said officer out of the Police Pension Fund.
B. In the event of an officer's death after retirement, a widow shall receive
50% of the officer's pension until such time as she remarries or dies;
and if there are children under 18 years of age at the time of her death
or remarriage, such children may receive the same pension as the
22.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it take effect 1-1-1976.
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 52-9 DANVILLE CODE § 52-11
1:68
§ 52-12. Appeal of rulings or actions of Council.24
Any policeman aggrieved by any ruling or action of Council regarding
the fund and his relation thereto shall have the right to a hearing before
Council, to be held within 10 days of his written request therefor, at which
he may attend in person, be represented by counsel and may further require
the attendance of any witnesses on his behalf by subpoena to be issued by
the Borough Council on his written request. Minutes and records shall be
kept of testimony and facts produced, and Council may thereupon make
such order and ruling in the matter as may seem just and lawful.
§ 52-13. Assignment or attachment of payments prohibited.
No payments under this article may be assigned or attached in any manner
or for any purpose, reason or cause or under any circumstances.
§ 52-14. Provisions subject to change or repeal.
The provisions of this article, insofar as they are the same as the statutory
provisions, shall be subject to change or repeal in order to comply with
any future statutory provisions, and the provisions of this article may be
amended or repealed if statutory authority be granted therefor or statutory
restrictions or mandates are eliminated and discretion vested in the
Borough authorities.
§ 52-15. Agreement by applicants to be bound by provisions.
The policeman applying for membership in the fund agrees to be bound by
the provisions of this article and by any future laws or ordinances pertinent
to the subject matter of this article.
unmarried widow would have been entitled to receive, but the right of
the child shall only continue until he or she reaches 18 years of age.
24.Editor's Note: Original Section 12, which immediately preceded this section and which
authorized the discontinuance of benefits for cause, was repealed 5-14-1975 by Ord. No.
258.
§ 52-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-15
1:69

ARTICLE II
Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System
[Adopted 2-10-1987 by Ord. No. 315 (Ch. 27, Art. II, of the 1975
Code)]
§ 52-16. Enrollment in system; purpose.
The Borough of Danville hereby elects to enroll their police officers in
the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System, established by the
Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Law, Act 15 of 1974, as amended,25
for the express purpose of having the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement
System administer the pension plan established by the Borough for the
police officers of the Borough. The Borough of Danville does hereby agree
to be bound by all the requirements and provisions of the Pennsylvania
Municipal Retirement Law, and the amendments thereto, and to assume all
obligations, financial and otherwise, placed upon member municipalities.
All references hereafter shall be based on benefits negotiated between the
Board26 and the municipality under the provisions of Article IV.27
§ 52-17. Mandatory membership.
Membership in the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System shall be
mandatory for all police officers holding a full-time position with the Police
Department.
§ 52-18. Credit for prior service; Borough liability.
Credit for prior service toward the annuity of each original member shall be
for all years of service to the Borough of Danville. The Borough does hereby
assume the liability for any unfunded liability created by the crediting of
said prior service that is not met upon the transfer of accumulated assets,
both municipal and member, upon enrollment in the system.
§ 52-19. Contribution by Borough.
Payment for the obligation as set forth in this article and the agreement
between the Board and the Borough of Danville shall be made by the
Borough in accordance with said Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Law
and Act 205 of 1984, the Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and
Recovery Act.28
§ 52-20. Acceptance of benefits.
As part of this article, the Borough of Danville agrees to the outline of
benefits set forth in the agreement between the Board and the Borough of
25.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 881.101 et seq.
26.Editor's Note: "The Board" refers to the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Board.
27.Editor's Note: "Article IV" refers to Article IV of the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement
Law, 53 P.S. § 881.401 et seq.
28.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.101 et seq.
§ 52-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-20
1:71
Danville, dated February 10, 1986. The passage and adoption of this article
by the Council of the Borough of Danville is an official acceptance of said
benefit structure and the financial obligations in the administration of said
benefit package.
§ 52-21. System approved by members.
The Borough of Danville acknowledges that a referendum was conducted
among the existing pension plan members for the purpose of obtaining
the consent of the employees to transfer the administration of the Danville
Borough Police Pension Plan to the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement
System in accordance with the above-referenced agreement and that at
least 75% of the members concurred in the enrollment in the Pennsylvania
Municipal Retirement System.
§ 52-22. Termination of previous pension program.
By adoption of this article, the Borough of Danville agrees to terminate,
upon the effective date of membership in the Pennsylvania Municipal
Retirement System, the previously maintained police pension program. The
Borough elects, as provided in the agreement, for the existing retirees of
the previous plan to also become members of the Pennsylvania Municipal
Retirement System and to have their benefits also administered by the
system. All assets and liability associated with the existing retirees and
their beneficiaries are to be transferred to the Pennsylvania Municipal
Retirement System.
§ 52-23. When effective.
A duly certified copy of this article and the accompanying agreement shall
be filed with the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Board of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Membership for the police officers of the
Borough of Danville in the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System shall
be effective the first day of January 1987.
§ 52-20 DANVILLE CODE § 52-23
1:72
Chapter 56
PURCHASING
§ 56-1. Intent to participate in commonwealth purchase contracts.29
In accordance with Section 2403, Act of April 9, 1929, (P.L. 177 as
amended)30 the Borough of Danville hereby signifies its intention to
participate in the purchase of purchase contracts for materials, supplies
and equipment entered into by the Department of General Services of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 56-2. Request for authorization to participate.31
The Borough of Danville hereby requests the Department of General
Services that it be authorized to participate in purchase contracts of the
Department, and agrees that it will be bound by such terms and conditions
as the Department may prescribe and that the Borough of Danville shall
be responsible for payment directly to the vendor under each purchase
contract.
§ 56-3. Request to make direct purchases.
The Borough of Danville further requests that it be permitted to make direct
purchases of materials, supplies and equipment or of purchase contracts
entered into by any other administrative department authorized to make
direct purchases.
Chapter 60
RIGHT-TO-KNOW LAW
§ 60-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the
meanings given to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
ACT — Act 3 of 2008.32
APPEALS OFFICER — The person or persons assigned by the DCED's Office
of Open Records to hear an appeal from the Borough's decision on a request
for a record.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Danville.
COUNCIL — The Council of the Borough of Danville.
29.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
30.Editor's Note: See 71 P.S. § 633(h).
31.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
32.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 67.101 et seq.
§ 52-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-1
1:73
DEPUTY OPEN RECORDS OFFICER — The Finance Officer shall serve as
the Open Records Officer in the absence of the Open Records Officer.
OPEN RECORDS OFFICER — The Borough Secretary shall be the open
records officer for the Borough of Danville. As such, the Secretary shall
receive requests submitted to the Borough under the Act, direct requests to
other appropriate persons within the Borough; track the Borough's progress
in responding to requests and issue interim and final responses under the
Act. The Chief of Police shall be the open records officer for all records
dealing with law enforcement activities. As such, the Chief shall receive
requests for law enforcement records under the Act; direct requests to
other appropriate persons; track the Borough's progress in responding to
requests and issue interim and final responses under the Act.
PUBLIC RECORD — Any record, except those expressed in Section 708 of
the Act, of the Borough of Danville.
RECORD — Any document maintained by the Borough of Danville, in any
form, whether public or not.
REQUESTER — Any person, company or organization requesting a record
from the Borough of Danville pursuant to the Act.
RESPONSE — The Borough's written notice granting, denying, or partially
granting or partially denying, access to a record pursuant to the Act.
SECRETARY — The Secretary or acting Secretary of the Borough of
Danville.
§ 60-2. Procedure for access to public records.
A. General rule. Unless otherwise provided by the Act, a public record of
the Borough of Danville shall be accessible for inspection and
duplication by a requester in accordance with this chapter. A public
record shall be provided to a requester in the medium requested if the
public record exists in that medium; otherwise, it shall be provided in
the medium in which it exists. Public records shall be available for
access during the regular business hours of the Borough. There shall be
no access to a record which is not a public record.
B. Requests. The Borough will fulfill verbal requests for access to records.
However, in the event that the requester wishes to pursue the relief and
remedies provided for in the Act, the requester must initiate such relief
with a written request on the form provided by the Borough. A standard
request form is attached to this Policy.
C. Written requests. A written request for access to records may be
received in person, by mail, by facsimile or by electronic means. A
written request shall be addressed to the Secretary of the Borough of
Danville, 239 Mill Street, Danville, Pennsylvania, 17821. Written
requests should identify or describe the records sought with sufficient
specificity to enable the Borough to ascertain which records are being
requested and shall include the name and address to which the
§ 60-1 DANVILLE CODE § 60-2
1:74
§ 60-3. Access to public records.
Borough should address its response. A written request need not
include any explanation of the requester's reason for requesting or
intended use of the records.
D. Creation of a public record. When responding to a request for access,
the Borough shall not be required to create a public record which does
not currently exist or to compile, maintain, format or organize a public
record in a manner in which it does not currently compile, maintain,
format or organize the public record.
E. Conversion of an electronic record to paper. If a public record is only
maintained electronically or in other non-paper media, the Borough
shall, upon request, duplicate the public record on paper when
responding to a request for access in accordance with this chapter.
A. Use. The Borough shall not deny a requester access to a public record
due to the intended use of the public record by the requester.
B. Redaction. If the Borough determines that a public record contains
information which is subject to access as well as information which is
not subject to access, the Borough's response shall grant access to the
information which is subject to access, and deny access to the
information which is not subject to access. If the information which is
not subject to access is an integral part of the public record and cannot
be separated, the Borough shall redact from the public record the
information which is not subject to access and the response shall grant
access to the information which is subject to access. The Borough may
not deny access to the public record if the information which is not
subject to access is able to be redacted. Information which the Borough
redacts in accordance with this subsection shall be deemed a denial.
C. Borough's response to written requests for access.
(1) General rule. Upon receipt of a written request for access to a
record, the Borough shall make a good faith effort to determine if
the record requested is a public record and to respond as promptly
as possible under the circumstances existing at the time of the
request, but shall not exceed five business days from the date the
written request is received by the Borough. If the Borough fails to
send the response within five business days of receipt of the written
request for access, the written request for access shall be deemed
denied.
(2) Exception:
(a) Upon receipt of a written request for access, if the Borough
shall determine if one of the following applies:
[1] The request for access requires redaction of a public
record in accordance with Section 706 of the Act.
§ 60-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-3
1:75
[2] The request for access requires the retrieval of a record
stored in a remote location.
[3] A timely response to the request for access cannot be
accompanied due to bona fide and specified staffing
limitations.
[4] A legal review is necessary to determine whether the
record is a public record subject to access under the Act.
[5] The requester has not complied with the Borough's
policies regarding access to public records.
[6] The requester refuses to pay applicable fees.
[7] The extent or nature of the request precludes a response
within the required time period.
(b) Upon a determination that one of the factors listed in
Subsection A applies, then the Borough shall send written
notice to the requester within five business days of its receipt
of the request notifying the requester that the request for
access is being reviewed, the reason for the review and a
reasonable date that the response is expected to be provided.
If the date that a response is expected to be provided is in
excess of 30 days following the five business days allowed in
Section 901 of the Act, the request for access shall be deemed
denied.
(c) If the Borough's response grants a request for access, it shall,
upon request, provide the requester with a certified copy of the
public record if the requester pays the applicable fees
pursuant to § 60-4.
(3) Denial. If the Borough's response is a denial of a written request for
access, whether in whole or in part, a written response shall be
issued and include:
(a) A description of the record requested.
(b) The specific reason(s) for the denial, including a citation of
supporting legal authority. If the denial is the result of a
determination that the record requested is not a public record,
the specific reasons for the Borough's determination that the
record is not a public record shall be included.
(c) The typed or printed name, title, business address, business
telephone number and signature of the public official or public
employee on whose authority the denial is issued and the
name, business address and business telephone number of the
Open Records Officer.
(d) Date of the response.
§ 60-3 DANVILLE CODE § 60-3
1:76
§ 60-4. Fees.
(e) The procedure to appeal the denial of access under the Act.
D. Final determination.
(1) Filing of appeal. If a written request for access is denied or deemed
denied, the requester may file an appeal with the Pennsylvania
Department of Community and Economic Development's (DECD)
Office of Open Records, Keystone Building, 400 North Street, Plaza
Level, Harrisburg, PA 17120-0225, within 15 business days of the
mailing date of the Borough's denial, or within 15 days of a deemed
denial. The Office of Open Records shall assign an Appeals Officer
to review the denial. The appeal shall state grounds upon which the
requester asserts that the record is a public record and shall
address any grounds stated by the Borough for delaying or denying
the request. All appeals dealing with law enforcement records shall
be handled pursuant to Section 503(d) of the Act.
(2) Determination. Unless the requester agrees to an extension of
time, the Appeals Officer shall make a final determination
regarding the appeal within 30 days of the mailing date of the
appeal. Prior to issuing the final determination regarding the
appeal, the Appeals Officer may conduct a hearing. The
determination shall be the final order and the order shall be mailed
to both the Borough and the appellant and shall include a written
explanation of the reason for the decision.
A. Postage. The Borough may impose a fee for postage, which may not
exceed the actual prevailing cost of mailing.
B. Duplication. The Borough may impose fees for duplication of public
records pursuant to Section 1307 of the Act for photocopying, printing
from electronic media or microfilm, copying onto electronic media,
transmission by facsimile or other electronic means and other means of
duplication.
C. Certification. The Borough may impose a fee of $10 for official
certification of copies if the certification is at the behest of the
requester and for the purpose of legally verifying the public record.
D. Waiver of fees. The Borough may waive the fees for duplication of a
public record, including, but not limited to, when:
(1) The requester duplicates the public record; or
(2) It deems it is in the public interest to do so.
E. Other fees/limitations. Except as otherwise provided by the Act, no
other fees shall be imposed. A reasonable fee equal to the actual cost
shall be imposed if the Borough, out of necessity, incurs costs not
otherwise described in this chapter for complying with the request.
§ 60-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-4
1:77
§ 60-5. Procedure for review and duplication of records.
Chapter 63
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 41.
However, the Borough recognizes it may not impose a fee for its review
of a record to determine whether the record is a public record subject
to access.
F. Prepayment. Prior to granting a request for access in accordance with
the Act, a requester shall prepay an estimate of the fees authorized
under this section if the fees required to fulfill the request are expected
to exceed $100.
A. Although not required, it is preferred that the requester provide up to
24 hours' notice of his/her visit to review records. Because of the
sensitivity and value of public records, the following shall govern how
records are reviewed and duplicated:
(1) The Borough will provide space for the requester to review the
records.
(2) The requester may not possess a briefcase, folder, or other item
capable of concealing a public record, while reviewing the
record(s)
(3) If multiple files/records are requested, only one file at a time may
be opened.
(4) Duplication, if requested, shall only occur in batches. The Borough
will provide the requester with flags to mark those records, or
portions of records, that he/she would like duplicated.
(5) Only Borough employees shall duplicate records.
(6) A Borough employee shall accompany and otherwise observe the
requester at all times.
B. The Borough may adopt amendments to this chapter which are
necessary to implement the provisions and purposes of the public
Right-to-Know Law.
C. Posting. A copy of this chapter shall be conspicuously posted at the
Borough's Offices.
§ 60-4 DANVILLE CODE § 60-5
1:78
ARTICLE I
Salary of Mayor
[Adopted 4-18-1960 by Ord. No. 146 (Ch. 33, Art. I, of the 1975
Code)]
§ 63-1. Amount of compensation. [Amended 12-12-2000 by Ord. No.
418; 11-8-2011 by Ord. No. 507]
The Mayor of the Borough of Danville shall be paid from the Borough
treasury the sum of $1,875 each year, to be paid in monthly installments of
$156.25 each month.
§ 63-2. Compensation to be in lieu of costs and fees.
The compensation payable to the Mayor shall be in lieu of all costs and fees
previously allowed the Mayor.
§ 63-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-2
1:79

ARTICLE II
Salary of Councilmen
[Adopted 4-18-1960 by Ord. No. 147 (Ch. 33, Art. II, of the 1975
Code)]
§ 63-3. Rate of compensation. [Amended 11-8-2011 by Ord. No.
507]
The Councilpersons of the Borough of Danville shall be paid from the
Borough treasury the sum of $1,875 each year, to be paid in monthly
installments of $156.25 each month.33
33.Editor's Note: Original § 33-4, Compensation contingent upon attendance, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 12-12-2000 by Ord. No. 418.
§ 63-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-3
1:81

ARTICLE III
Compensation, Costs and Expenses of Tax Collector
[Adopted 2-12-2013 by Ord. No. 5132013]
§ 63-4. Compensation.
The per annum compensation of the Tax Collector of the Borough of Danville
for the collection of taxes commencing calendar year 2014 shall be 2.5% on
taxes collected for the Borough of Danville; provided, however, said salary
paid shall not exceed 5% of the amount of taxes collected in any calendar
year.
§ 63-5. Costs and expenses.
The following costs and expenses associated with the Tax Collector's
collection of Borough taxes shall be paid by the Borough of Danville.
A. Tax Collector's bond as a prorated share attributable to the collection of
Borough taxes;
B. Tax bills and tax duplicates;
C. Envelopes and postage.
§ 63-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-5
1:83
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 77
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 24. Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 102.
§ 77-1. Purpose and scope.
The purpose of this chapter is to create administrative and enforcement
remedies in order to deter and reduce the number of false alarms of fire or
other emergency originating within the Borough of Danville. This chapter
does not provide criminal penalties for knowingly causing a false alarm;
such actions are addressed in the Crimes Code of Pennsylvania at Title 18,
Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes, Section 4905, entitled "False Alarm to
Agencies of Public Safety." The penalties of this chapter may be imposed
regardless of or in addition to any criminal penalties provided by the Crimes
Code.
§ 77-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM — Any call, sound, light or other signal for giving notice of an
emergency.
ALARM SYSTEM — Any electric, telephonic, electronic and/or mechanical
device or combination of devices designed to summon the Fire Department
or other agency for dealing with emergencies involving real or threatened
danger to persons or property. This term shall not include devices which are
designed solely to warn the occupants of a particular structure of potential
danger, but not to summon the Fire Department or other agency (for
example, residential smoke detectors which are not designed to summon
the Fire Department).
FALSE ALARM — Any alarm from an alarm system which results in a
response by personnel and/or equipment from the Fire Department or other
agency, but which is erroneous or not true in that there was not an actual
emergency involving real or threatened danger to persons or property. This
term includes all false alarms, regardless of whether or not a false alarm
was transmitted knowingly or intentionally.
§ 63-5 DANVILLE CODE § 77-3
1:84
§ 77-3. Responsibilities of owner and operator.
The owner and operator of any alarm system shall be responsible for
keeping the alarm system in good repair and for maintaining the system in
such manner as to prevent the system from transmitting any false alarms.
§ 77-4. Administration; penalties.
A. Whenever any false alarm has been transmitted by an alarm system, the
Police Department shall cause an investigation to be made. The Police
Department shall keep a record of all false alarms transmitted by any
alarm system.
B. The following sanctions shall be imposed for false alarms:
(1) First and second alarms. During any calendar year, a warning shall
be issued for the first two false alarms transmitted by any alarm
system. The warning shall be issued by the Police Department to
the person occupying the premises where the alarm system is
located. The first false alarm warning shall include a copy of the
chapter. The second false alarm warning shall include a statement
that any further false alarms will subject the person to further
sanctions as set forth in this chapter.
(2) For third and subsequent false alarms.
(a) During any calendar year, the owner and the operator of the
alarm system are subject to a civil penalty on the following
schedule:
[1] Third false alarm: $100.
[2] Fourth false alarm: $200.
[3] Fifth false alarm: $300.
[4] Sixth false alarm: $400.
[5] Seventh and subsequent false alarm: $500 for each false
alarm over six.
(b) In addition the owner and the operator shall be responsible for
payment of all court costs and attorney fees incurred by the
Borough in bringing a civil enforcement action.
C. The notice required by this section may be given by personal service or
by first class mail. Notice by mail to the owner of the premises shall be
sufficient if addressed to the owner at the address maintained by the
Danville Borough Tax Collector for the owner. However, if notice is
unable to be given by personal service or by mail, the notice required by
this section may be posted on the premises.
D. Criminal penalties.
§ 77-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-4
1:85
§ 77-5. Persons authorized to bring action.
The Chief of Police or his designee is authorized to bring any action
provided under this chapter.
Chapter 81
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 161. Streets, sidewalks and driveways — See Ch.
216.
(1) A person that owns, uses or possesses an alarm device or automatic
dialing device may not, after causing or permitting three false
alarms to occur in a consecutive twelve-month period, cause or
permit a subsequent false alarm to occur in the same consecutive
twelve-month period. A person that violates this subsection
commits a summary offense and shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300.34
(2) Such criminal penalties may be imposed regardless of whether a
civil enforcement action is brought under this chapter.
34.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 77-4 DANVILLE CODE § 77-5
1:86
ARTICLE I
Curbing of Dogs
[Adopted 5-14-1991 by Ord. No. 340 (Ch. 43, Art. I, of the 1975
Code)]
§ 81-1. Restrictions.
Any person who owns, harbors, keeps or is in charge of any dog within or
frequenting the Borough shall not permit such dog to be unattended within
the Borough and shall require said dog to be restrained by a leash or other
appropriate device of control so that it cannot stray beyond the premises
on which it is secured, or under reasonable control of some person, which
for the purpose of this article shall be "curbing." Such curbing shall be
permitted only on public streets, public grounds and on private property
with the express permission of the owner of such property.
§ 81-2. Removal of feces.
Any person who curbs such a dog shall immediately remove all feces
deposited by such dog by any sanitary method, and the same shall be
deposited in the owner's garbage or disposed of in some other sanitary
method. The deposit shall be properly wrapped, packaged or protected so
as to prevent unsightly disposal, smell or interference with the health and
welfare of the community.
§ 81-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-9-2018 by Ord. No.
547]
Any person or persons convicted of violating this article shall be subject to
a fine of $75, plus the costs of prosecution, for the first violation, and of not
more than $500 for the second and each subsequent violation, together with
the costs of prosecution.
§ 81-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-3
1:87

ARTICLE II
Keeping of Animals
[Adopted 5-11-1993 by Ord. No. 359 (Ch. 43, Art. II, of the 1975
Code)]
§ 81-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL — Any domestic animal or fowl, any household pet or any wild
animal.
DANGEROUS ANIMAL — Any animal creating, threatening or risking a
hazardous, perilous or unsafe condition. This term includes but is not
limited to bobcats, wolves or crocodiles, or any other animal which presents
a danger to life or limb.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL — Any animal normally or ordinarily domesticated or
raised in the Danville area and climate as livestock or for work or breeding
purposes, or normally or ordinarily kept as a household pet.
DOMESTIC FOWL — Any of the several usually gallinaceous birds which
may be raised for food purposes, such as grouse, pheasants, turkeys,
partridges, ducks, geese, hens, chickens and roosters.
HOUSEHOLD PET — Any dog, cat, bird, gerbil, hamster or other domestic
animal normally and ordinarily kept in or permitted to be at large in the
dwelling of its owner. This term specifically excludes wild animals, such as
skunks, foxes, raccoons, ground hogs and squirrels, or dangerous animals,
such as bobcats or wolves, despite the fact that the owner or keeper of
such wild animal or dangerous animal desires to keep it as a pet. The term
"household pet" shall include Vietnamese potbellied pigs which are smaller
than 41 inches in length and 21 inches in shoulder height and weigh no
more than 90 pounds.
LARGE ANIMAL — Any wild or domestic animal of the family equidae, the
family bovidae, the family suidae or the family tayassuidae, including but
not limited to, horses, cows, sheep, goats, pigs, hogs and swine.
PERSON(S) — Any individual, partnership, company, association, society,
trust, corporation or other group or entity, whether an owner or lessee
of residences, commercial or institutional establishments.[Amended
11-8-2011 by Ord. No. 507]
SMALL ANIMAL — Any small domestic animal such as a rabbit, hare or
chinchilla.
WILD ANIMAL — Any animal, including any mammal, bird or reptile, not
normally or ordinarily domesticated; not normally or ordinarily raised in the
Danville area and climate as livestock or for work or breeding purposes; or
not a household pet as defined above.
§ 81-5. Certain animals prohibited.
§ 81-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-5
1:89
§ 81-6. Regulation of domestic animals.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any domestic animals, except
household pets other than as provided in this article:
§ 81-7. Household pet.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any dangerous animal, any
wild animal, any large animal or any domestic fowl at any place within
the Borough of Danville.
B. Traveling circuses, presenting a limited number of performances, are
specifically exempted from the application of this article.
A. Small animals shall be kept confined in quarters no part of which shall
be closer than 15 feet from the exterior limits of any dwelling.
B. Such owner shall be required to follow such procedures and practices
as to restrict the number of such domesticated animals to be kept, and
as to sanitation and odor control, to ensure that no nuisance shall be
created and no threat to the health of persons living on the premises
where such domestic animals are kept, or to the health and quiet
enjoyment of persons living elsewhere, shall be created.
C. The keeper of every such animal shall confine the same in an enclosure
sufficient to prevent such animal from running at large, and such
enclosure shall be of a size conducive to good sanitary practices, and
adequate and sanitary drainage facilities shall be provided.
D. Every keeper of any animal shall cause the litter and droppings
therefrom to be collected daily in a container or receptacle that when
closed shall be rodentproof and flytight, and after every such collection
shall cause such container or receptacle to be kept closed. At least
twice a week, every such keeper shall cause all litter and droppings so
collected to be disposed of in such manner as not to permit the
presence of fly larvae or malodorous condition.
E. Every keeper of any animal shall cause all feed provided therefor to be
stored and kept in a rodentproof and flytight building, box, container or
receptacle.
A. If any such pet shall be kept in a dwelling owned or occupied by its
owner, such owner shall be required to follow such procedures and
practices, as to the number of such pets to be kept there, and as to
sanitation, to ensure that no public nuisance shall be created or
maintained and no threat to the health of persons living elsewhere than
in such dwelling shall be created.
B. If any such pet shall be kept in an enclosure outside such dwelling, the
provisions of § 81-6 of this article, insofar as the same applies to small
animals, shall be applicable to the keeping of such household pet.
§ 81-5 DANVILLE CODE § 81-7
1:90
§ 81-8. Violation of state law.
§ 81-9. Violations and penalties.35
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more than $600 and costs
of such proceedings, or upon default of payment of such fines and costs,
by imprisonment in the county jail for a term of not more than 30 days.
The continuation of such violation for each successive day shall constitute
a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or permitting the
continuation of the violation may be punished as provided above for each
separate offense.
§ 81-10. Enforcement and administration. [Added 12-12-2000 by
Ord. No. 420]
It shall be the duty of the Borough Health Officer and the Danville Borough
Police Department to enforce the terms of this article and secure the
compliance with the requirements thereof.
C. This article shall not apply to the regulation of noise as such is provided
in Chapter 161 of the Code of the Borough of Danville.
A. Any violation of this article that would also constitute a violation of any
law of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall be prosecuted under
such law of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and not under this
article.
B. The defendant in any action for violation of this article shall have the
burden, by a fair preponderance of the evidence, of proving the
existence and applicability of any such law of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, in order to constitute a valid defense to a prosecution
under this article.
35.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 81-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-10
1:91
Chapter 88
BICYCLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Skateboards — See Ch. 199. Streets, sidewalks and driveways — See Ch.
216.
§ 88-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BICYCLE — Every device propelled by human power upon which any person
may ride, having two tandem wheels, either of which is 16 or more inches
in diameter.
§ 88-2. License available for residents.36
Any person who resides in the Borough of Danville and rides or propels a
bicycle on any street may have such bicycle licensed and a license sticker
attached thereto, as provided herein.
§ 88-3. License available for bicycles kept in Borough.37
Any person not a resident of the Borough of Danville who rides or propels
a bicycle, ordinarily kept within the limits of the Borough, on any street,
may have such a bicycle licensed and a license sticker attached thereto, as
provided herein.
§ 88-4. Application license.38
A. Every owner of a bicycle may make application to the Chief of Police for
a bicycle license and license sticker, such application is to be made on a
form provided by the Borough.
B. Such licenses shall be issued for as long as the applicant owns said
bicycle.39
36.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
37.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
38.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
39.Editor's Note: Former § 48-5, License and transfer fees, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 81-10 DANVILLE CODE § 88-5
1:92
§ 88-5. Registration tags and cards; issuance, attachment and
display.40
The Police Department shall provide, at the expense of the Borough, license
stickers, together with registration cards, which tags and cards shall have
numbers stamped thereon in numerical order, beginning with number one
and indicating the name of the Borough. Such tags shall be suitable for
attachment to either the rear mudguard or the frame of the bicycle for
which issued, in such a position as to be plainly visible. Such tag shall be
attached to the bicycle by the Police Department or persons designated by
the Police Department at the time of issuing the license and shall remain
attached to the bicycle for which it is issued. The Chief of Police or persons
designated by him shall also keep a record of such registration. Upon
issuance of a license and attachment of a tag to the bicycle, the Police
Department or persons designated by the Police Department shall also
furnish to the owner of such bicycle the corresponding registration card.41
§ 88-6. Dismantlers of bicycles to report activities.42
It shall be the duty of every person who dismantles, reduces to junk or
takes out of operation any bicycle, whether the same is registered or not
registered, to report the same to the Chief of Police and to turn in the
registration card and license sticker if such bicycle is registered.
§ 88-7. Altering frame number, sticker or card prohibited.43
It shall be unlawful for any person, willfully or maliciously, to remove,
destroy, mutilate or alter the number on any bicycle frame; it shall be
unlawful for any person to remove, destroy or alter any license sticker or
registration card during the time when such license sticker or registration
card is valid, except as provided in § 88-6 hereof; provided, however, that
if any bicycle does not have a serial number stamped on the frame thereof,
or if such number is illegible, then the Chief of Police shall stamp an
identification number on the frame of such bicycle.
§ 88-8. Replacement of lost or destroyed sticker or card.44
In case of loss or destruction of any license sticker and/or registration card
and/or operator's license, a duplicate sticker and/or card may be issued
to the registered owner of such bicycle, provided that such owner gives
satisfactory proof of such ownership and loss or destruction of such card
and/or sticker, by affidavit or otherwise, to the Chief of Police.45
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
41.Editor's Note: Former § 48-7, Safety inspection, which immediately followed this section,
was repealed 4-10-2001 by Ord. No. 425. Former § 48-8, Report of sale or transfer
required, and § 48-9, Purchaser to apply for license immediately, which immediately
followed this section, were repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
42.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
43.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
44.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 88-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-9
1:93
§ 88-9. Operation in violation of traffic ordinances prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any bicycle upon any street or
public alley in the Borough of Danville in violation of any traffic ordinances
of the Borough which are applicable to motor vehicles.
§ 88-10. Operation on sidewalks restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle upon any sidewalk in
a business district or place of public gathering in the Borough of Danville.
§ 88-11. Operating requirements.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any bicycle, when upon any street,
to ride with both hands off the handlebars, or to ride other than upon
or astride the permanent and regular seat attached thereto, or to carry
any other person upon such bicycle other than upon a firmly attached and
regular seat thereon, nor shall any person ride upon a bicycle other than as
above provided.46
§ 88-12. Interference with pedestrians prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle upon any street in
such a manner as to interfere with any pedestrian who is exercising due
care thereon.
§ 88-13. Riding abreast prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person operating a bicycle upon any street in
the Borough of Danville to propel such bicycle abreast of any other person
so propelling a bicycle except in passing such bicycle.
§ 88-14. Yielding right-of-way required.
The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building
shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across
any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on said
sidewalk or sidewalk area, and, upon entering the roadway, shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway.
§ 88-15. Parking of bicycles on streets and sidewalks.
When necessary to park bicycles on a street or sidewalk, bicycles must be
parked in an upright position and in a manner not to obstruct pedestrian or
vehicular traffic.
45.Editor's Note: Former § 48-13, Determination of lack of proper registration, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I).
46.Editor's Note: Former § 48-17, Bell or signal device required; sirens and whistles
prohibited, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 4-10-2001 by Ord. No.
425.
§ 88-9 DANVILLE CODE § 88-16
1:94
§ 88-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-10-2001 by Ord. No.
425]
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
determination of the Chief of Police, have his/her bicycle confiscated for a
period of not to exceed seven days, and or shall be subject to a fine not
to exceed $25. The parent or legal guardian having control or custody of
a person under 12 years of age whose conduct violates this chapter shall
be jointly and severally liable with the person for the amount of the fine
imposed.
Chapter 89
BRAKE RETARDERS; ENGINE SUPPRESSION; ENGINE
BRAKES
§ 89-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the Danville Borough "Brake Retarder/
Engine Suppression/Engine Brake Ordinance."
§ 89-2. Legislative intent.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Danville, Montour County,
Pennsylvania, finds as a fact that the operation of an engine brake or an
engine suppression device or a compression brake on a gasoline-powered
or diesel-powered motor vehicle not equipped with exhaust mufflers, or
equipped with defective or modified exhaust mufflers, so as to create
excessive noise through the use of said engine brake or engine suppression
device or compression brake, adversely affects the public health, safety
and welfare of the residents of the Borough of Danville and, therefore, is a
nuisance in fact.
§ 89-3. Engine brakes prohibited.
No gasoline-powered or diesel-powered motor vehicles shall be operated
on the streets, roads, alleys or highways listed below47 within the Borough
of Danville, Montour County, Pennsylvania, utilizing, in said operation, an
engine brake, engine suppression device or compression brake, without
exhaust mufflers, or with defective or modified exhaust mufflers permitting
excessive noise to be created by said motor vehicle.
§ 89-4. Streets subject to prohibition.
The streets subject to this prohibition shall be as follows:
A. U.S. 11 from the Danville wastewater treatment plant to the
intersection of S.R. 54,
47.Editor's Note: See § 89-4.
§ 88-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-4
1:95
§ 89-5. Emergency situations.
This chapter shall not apply to emergency driving situations requiring the
utilization of an engine brake to protect the safety and property of the
residents of Danville Borough, other motor vehicle operators, pedestrians,
and the operator and passengers of the motor vehicle involved in said
emergency situations.
§ 89-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, corporation or organization violating any of the provisions
of this chapter shall, upon summary conviction before a District Magistrate
having jurisdiction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50 nor more
than $300 and costs of prosecution, and in default of the payment thereof,
shall be sentenced to undergo imprisonment in any county jail for a period
not to exceed 10 days.
§ 89-7. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Danville Police
Department.
Chapter 90
BRIDGES
B. S.R. 54 from west of Ferry Street to the Susquehanna river bridge.
§ 89-4 DANVILLE CODE § 89-7
1:96
ARTICLE I
Utility Bridge Attachments on Locally Owned Bridges
[Adopted 8-12-2014 by Ord. No. 519]
§ 90-1. Permit required.
From and after the passage of this chapter, it shall not be lawful for
any telegraph, telephone, electric light, sewage, water or cable television
company, firm, corporation, authority, municipality, person or persons to
attach or cause to be attached any telegraph, telephone, electric light,
sewage, water or cable utilities upon any municipality-owned bridge within
the present limits of the Borough of Danville unless such company, firm,
corporation, authority, municipality, person or persons seeking to attach
such utilities shall first make application to the Borough for permission to
attach the same through a permit issued by the Borough Council.
§ 90-2. Application for permit; compliance with conditions.
It shall be the duty of said company, firm, corporation, authority,
municipality, person or persons to submit to the Borough a written
statement specifying the type of utilities, location of the utilities, a shop
drawing for the said structure attachments, including size, weight,
attachment details and safety features, specific dead load of the utility
and an engineer's certified statement stating structural feasibility of the
attachment and utility. In addition, a bridge analysis with the proposed
utility attached must also be submitted. If permission shall be granted
by the Borough to attach the utilities, said company, firm, corporation,
authority, municipality, person or persons shall cause the utilities be
attached either in accordance with the statement, or subject to such
conditions and modifications as the Borough may direct.
§ 90-3. Cost of application for permit.
Although there is no rental fee for said attachment of any utility to a
locally owned bridge in the present limits of the Borough of Danville, a
nonrefundable permit fee of $125 must accompany the written statement
acting as the application for the permit. In addition a $750 deposit must
be submitted to be used to pay for any additional engineering review or
legal review needed prior to granting permission by the Borough Council to
attach said utility. Said deposit will also be used to pay for any construction
inspection fees once permission is granted. Fees charged shall be
reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary and customary charges
for similar service in the community. Upon completion of the permitting
process and the installation of said utility and attachment, an itemized bill
will be submitted to the applicant, and any deposit not accounted for shall
be returned. In the event the reasonable fees have been greater than the
deposit, a final bill will be issued to the applicant for prompt payment.
§ 90-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-4
1:97
§ 90-4. Reporting and correction of violations.
If any company, firm, corporation, authority, municipality, person or persons
shall by the attachment of any utilities violate any of the foregoing
provisions of this chapter, it shall be the duty of the Manager of the said
Borough to report such violation to the Borough, who shall thereupon notify
said company, firm, corporation, authority, municipality, person or persons
to remove said utilities within 10 days from said notice or they shall be
subject to the penalty provided in § 90-9 hereof for every day the said
utilities are allowed to remain after the expiration of the notice.
§ 90-5. Responsibility for installation and maintenance.
It shall be the responsibility of any company, firm, corporation, authority,
municipality, person or persons permitted to attach the specified type of
utility to install and maintain the attachment and utility at the utility's
expense. It shall also be the responsibility of any company, firm,
corporation, authority, municipality, person or persons permitted to attach
the specified type of utility to move or reinstall the attachment and utility
in the future to accommodate any bridge maintenance work that may
be necessary and scheduled. All expenses associated with the attachment
and utility shall be the responsibility of the utility owner. Installation and
maintenance of utility attachments will be conducted so as not to
inconvenience or interfere with highway traffic and will comply with all
governing laws. Utility attachments must not impede the flow of water
through a structure or the movement of traffic, either pedestrian or
vehicular, and must be located so as not to interfere with routine
maintenance operations.
§ 90-6. Labeling of utilities required; effect of noncompliance.
All telegraph, telephone, electric light, sewer, water or cable television
utilities now or hereafter attached within the present limits of the said
Borough of Danville shall be designated by the names or initials of the
owner or owners of such utilities, and each of such utilities shall bear a
distinctive number, upon which said names, initials and numbers be legibly
marked. Upon the neglect or refusal of any owner or owners to so designate
and mark such utilities within 30 days after notice to do so, it shall be lawful
for the Borough to order the work to be done, and the cost thereof shall be
collected from the owner or owners of such utilities.
§ 90-7. Previous privileges not affected; revocation of privileges.
Upon complying with the provisions and requirements of this chapter, the
privileges heretofore granted to such companies, firms, corporations,
authority, municipality, person or persons by resolution or ordinance shall
not be in any way affected. The Council of said Borough of Danville,
however, reserves the right to revoke by ordinance any of the privileges
mentioned in this chapter or any other ordinance or resolution.
§ 90-4 DANVILLE CODE § 90-8
1:98
§ 90-8. Repeal of conflicting privileges.
Any privilege heretofore granted by resolution or ordinance for the
attachment and maintenance of said utilities for telegraph, telephone, light,
sewer, water or cable television purposes conflicting herewith is and the
same is hereby repealed.
§ 90-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more than $300 and costs
of such proceedings or, upon default of payment of such fines and costs,
by imprisonment in the county jail for a term of not more than 30 days.
The continuation of such violation for each successive day shall constitute
a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or permitting the
continuation of the violation may be punished as provided above for each
separate offense.
§ 90-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-9
1:99
Chapter 94
BURNING, OUTDOOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 102.
§ 94-1. Fires on public and private property. [Amended 12-11-2001
by Ord. No. 43348,49]
No person or persons shall set or maintain any fire on private property, or
upon any of the streets, sidewalks, alleys or public grounds, in the Borough
of Danville, without the express consent of the Borough Fire Chief or Police
Chief, pursuant to the open burning provisions of the International Codes
Council/International Fire Code 2009.
§ 94-2. Preparing food for human consumption. [Amended
12-11-2001 by Ord. No. 433]
Outdoor fires on private property shall be permitted for the sole purpose
of preparing food for human consumption. Fuel for such purposes shall be
limited to charcoal, gas or electric grills and wood-burning fireplaces.
§ 94-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-11-2001 by Ord. No.
433]
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more than $300 and costs
of such proceedings or, upon default of payment of such fines and costs,
by imprisonment in the county jail for a term of not more than 30 days.
The continuation of such violation for each successive day shall constitute
a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or permitting the
continuation of the violation may be punished as provided above for each
separate offense.
§ 94-4. Enforcement. [Added 6-13-2000 by Ord. No. 413]
It shall be the duty of the Police Department to enforce Chapter 94 of the
Code of the Borough of Danville.
48.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 68-2, Regulations and restrictions
governing fires on private property, as amended 6-13-2000 by Ord. No. 413.
49.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 90-9 DANVILLE CODE § 94-4
1:100
Chapter 102
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 77.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 180.
Sewers — See Ch. 194.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 212.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
220.
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
§ 102-1. Election to administer and enforce.
This municipality hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions
of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S.
§§ 7210.101-7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its regulations.
§ 102-2. Adoption by reference.
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters
401-405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference as the municipal building code of this municipality.
§ 102-3. Administration and enforcement methods.
Administration and enforcement of the Code within this municipality shall
be undertaken in any of the following ways as determined by the governing
body of this municipality from time to time by resolution:
A. By the designation of an employee of the municipality to serve as the
municipal code official to act on behalf of the municipality;
B. By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of the municipality;
C. By agreement with one ore more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of this Act through an intermunicipal
agreement;
D. By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this Act on behalf of this
municipality;
E. By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of
structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and utility
and miscellaneous use structures.
§ 94-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-4
1:101
§ 102-4. Board of Appeals.
A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the governing body
of this municipality in conformity with the requirements of the relevant
provisions of the code, as amended from time to time, and for purposes set
forth therein. If at any time enforcement and administration is undertaken
jointly with one or more other municipalities, said Board of Appeals shall be
established by the joint action of the participating municipalities.
§ 102-5. Effect on other provisions.
§ 102-6. Fees.
Fees assessable by the municipality for the administration and enforcement
undertaken pursuant to this chapter and the Code shall be established by
the governing body by resolution from time to time.
Chapter 115
EMERGENCY SERVICES REIMBURSEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 24.
§ 115-1. Authorization for recovery of costs.
The Borough of Danville hereby authorizes the recovery of reasonable costs
of equipment and materials involved in any hazardous material incident,
environmental incident, or any safety and rescue incident or operation,
including structure and nonstructure fires and vehicle accidents, from a
person's or persons' or entity's or entities' insurance company.
A. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were
adopted by this municipality on or before July 1, 1999, and which equal
or exceed the requirements of the Code shall continue in full force and
effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed the
minimum requirements of the code, as amended from time to time.
B. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this chapter and whose requirements
are less than the minimum requirements of the Code are hereby
amended to conform with the comparable provisions of the Code.
C. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of this municipality not
governed by the Code shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 102-4 DANVILLE CODE § 115-2
1:102
§ 115-2. Recovery by Borough or third party.
The recovery of said reasonable costs may be recovered directly by the
Borough of Danville or through a third-party agency agreement.
§ 115-3. Collection of interest and fees.
In addition to the aforementioned reasonable costs, the Borough of Danville
shall collect reasonable interest, administrative fees and any and all
additional fees as may be authorized by the Hazardous Material Emergency
Planning and Response Act,50 or as authorized by any other statutes or laws.
Chapter 120
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 102.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 212.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
220.
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
50.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6022.101 et seq.
§ 115-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-3
1:103

Part 1
[Adopted 9-13-1983 ByCOlorsdu. rNeo S. t2r9u7ct(uCrhes. 70, Art. I, Of The 1975
Code)]
ARTICLE I
Procedures for Operation
§ 120-1. Responsibility for service.
The closure structures presently existing in the Borough of Danville as part
of its floodproofing plan, including any floodgates erected and closures by
placement of sandbags and other means, shall be serviced by the Borough
of Danville, its agents, servants and employees as hereinafter stated.
§ 120-2. Operation and maintenance; compliance with standards.
The Borough of Danville shall undertake the operation and maintenance
of the aforesaid floodgates and shall see to the proper placement of the
sandbags at appropriate closure areas required to be sandbagged, it being
the express mandate of this Part 1 that the operation, maintenance and
sandbagging of the closures referred to in this section shall be the duty
of the Borough of Danville, all to be performed in accordance with the
Operation and Maintenance Manual for Flood Protection Projects within the
Borough of Danville as prepared by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
Department of Environmental Protection, Resources Management,
Harrisburg, Pennsylvania.
§ 120-3. Adoption of operational procedure.
The Borough of Danville shall adopt a formal operational procedure
designed to provide for the mandates of this Part 1.
§ 120-4. Testing; training of personnel.
As part of the Borough's formal operational procedure and as part of
the general mandate of this Part 1, all closure structure operations shall
be tested at least once annually, training of personnel to operate said
structures shall occur, and at least once annually there shall be conducted
a test of the training, operation, opening and closing of the aforesaid
structures.
§ 120-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-4
1:105

Part 2
[Adopted At Time FOlfo Aodd oDpatmionag Oef C Coondtero (lSee Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
ARTICLE II
Restrictions in Floodplain Areas
§ 120-5. Flood damage control.
In order to prevent excessive damage to buildings and structures due to
conditions of flooding, and to insure Danville Borough's participation in the
National Flood Insurance Program, all new construction occurring in the
one-hundred-year floodplain area shall be subject to the restrictions set
forth in this chapter.
§ 120-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-5
1:107

ARTICLE III
Identification of Floodplain Areas
§ 120-6. Identification.
§ 120-7. Description and special requirements of identified
floodplain areas.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
A. The identified floodplain area shall be any areas of Danville Borough,
classified as special flood hazard areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance
Study (FIS) and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs)
dated May 16, 2008, and issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or the most recent revision thereof,
including all digital data developed as part of the Flood Insurance
Study.
B. The above referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions
and amendments are hereby adopted by Danville Borough and declared
to be a part of this Part 2.
A. Floodway area.
(1) Description. The area identified as Floodway in the FIS which
represents the channel of a watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation by
more than one foot at any point. This term shall also include
floodway areas which have been identified in other available
studies or sources of information for those special floodplain areas
where no floodway has been identified in the FIS.
(2) Special requirements.
(a) Any encroachment that would cause any increase in flood
heights shall be prohibited except where the effect of such
construction on flood heights is fully offset by accompanying
stream improvements which have been approved by all
appropriate local and/or state authorities. Where a developer
proposes to offset the effects of development in the floodway by
the construction of stream improvements, he shall submit an
engineering study prepared by a registered professional
engineer which fully evaluates the effects of such construction.
The report shall use the regulatory flood, as herein defined, as
the basis of analysis. All adjacent communities and the State
Coordinator's Office shall be notified by the developer by
certified mail of all such intended activities prior to any
alteration or relocation of watercourse, and such developer
shall submit copies of such notification to the Federal
Insurance Administrator. In addition, the developer shall
§ 120-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-7
1:109
assure the Borough of Danville, in writing, that the floodcarrying
capacity within the altered or relocated portion of the
watercourse in question will be maintained.
(b) No new construction or development shall be allowed, unless a
permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection Regional Office.
(3) Permitted uses. In the Floodway District, the following uses and
activities are permitted, provided that they are in compliance with
the provisions of the underlying district and are not prohibited by
any other ordinance:
(a) Public and private recreational uses and activities, such as
parks, day camps, picnic grounds, golf courses, boat launching
and swimming areas, hiking and horseback riding trails,
wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries and
fishing areas.
(b) Accessory residential uses, such as yard areas, gardens, play
areas and pervious parking areas.
(c) Accessory industrial and commercial uses, such as yard areas,
pervious parking and loading areas.
(4) Danville Borough Council approval required. In the Floodway
District, the following uses and activities are permitted, provided
that they are in compliance with the provisions of the underlying
district, are not prohibited by any other ordinance and are
approved by Danville Borough Council:
(a) Residential and commercial structures which are elevated to
the base flood elevation plus 1 1/2 foot of freeboard.
(b) Utilities and public facilities and improvements such as
railroads, streets, bridges, transmission lines, pipelines, water
and sewage treatment plants and other similar or related uses.
(c) Water-related uses and activities, such as marinas, docks,
wharves, piers, etc.
(d) Temporary uses, such as circuses, carnivals and similar
activities.
B. Special floodplain area.
(1) Description. The areas identified as Zones AE and A1-30 in the FIS
which are subject to inundation by the one-percent-annual chance
flood event determined by detailed methods and have base flood
elevations (BFEs) shown.
(2) Special requirements.
§ 120-7 DANVILLE CODE § 120-7
1:110
(a) No new construction or development shall be located within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of
any watercourse, unless a permit is obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
(b) In Special Floodplain Areas without a designated floodway, no
new development shall be permitted unless it can be
demonstrated that the cumulative effect of all past and
projected development will not increase the BFE by more than
one foot.
C. Approximate floodplain area.
(1) Description. The areas identified as Zone A in the FIS which are
subject to inundation by the one-percent-annual-chance flood event
determined using approximate methodologies. Because detailed
hydraulic analyses have not been performed, no BFEs or flood
depths are shown.
(2) Special requirements.
(a) Requirements.
[1] No new construction or development shall be located
within the area measured 50 feet landward from the topof-
bank of any watercourse, unless a permit is obtained
from the Department of Environmental Protection
Regional Office.
[2] When available, information from other federal, state, and
other acceptable sources shall be used to determine the
BFE, as well as a floodway area, if possible. When no other
information is available, the BFE shall be determined by
using a point on the boundary of the identified floodplain
area which is nearest the construction site in question.
(b) In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant
to determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic
engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses
shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or others of
demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the
technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted
technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall
be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by the Danville Borough.
D. Shallow flooding area.
(1) Description. The areas identified as Zones AO and AH in the FIS.
These areas are subject to inundation by one-percent-annualchance
shallow flooding where average depths are between one
and three feet.
§ 120-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-7
1:111
§ 120-8. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Danville
Borough Council where studies or information provided by a qualified
agency or person documents the need for such revision. However, prior to
any such change, approval must be obtained from the FEMA. Additionally,
as soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the date such
information becomes available, a community shall notify the FEMA of the
changes by submitting technical or scientific data.
§ 120-9. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the Danville Borough Planning
Commission and any party aggrieved by this decision or determination may
appeal to the Danville Borough Council the burden of proof shall be on the
appellant.
(2) Special requirements. Establish drainage paths to guide
floodwaters around and away from structures on slopes.
§ 120-7 DANVILLE CODE § 120-9
1:112
ARTICLE IV
Technical Provisions
§ 120-10. General.
§ 120-11. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
A. Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(1) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have been
first obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
Regional Office.
(2) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
(3) In addition, the FEMA and Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse.
B. Technical or scientific data shall be submitted to FEMA for a Letter of
Map Revision (LOMR) within six months of the completion of any new
construction, development, or other activity resulting in changes in the
BFE.
C. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in this Part 2 and any other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.
A. Residential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated up to the base flood elevation plus 1 1/2 foot of freeboard.
(2) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to 1 1/2 foot of
freeboard above the regulatory flood elevation determined in
accordance with § 120-7C(2)(a)[2] of this Part 2.
(3) In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) 1 1/2 foot above
the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number
specified on the FIRM.
§ 120-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-11
1:113
(4) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2006 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2006 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401-405,
as amended) shall be utilized.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated up to the base flood elevation
plus 1 1/2 foot of freeboard, or be designed and constructed so that
the space enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
(a) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
(b) Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(2) In A Zones, where there no base flood elevations are specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or completely
floodproofed up to 1 1/2 foot of freeboard above the regulatory
flood elevation determined in accordance with § 120-7C(2)(a)[2] of
this Part 2.
(3) In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have their lowest floor elevated or completely floodproofed to
1 1/2 foot above the highest adjacent grade to at least as high as
the depth number specified on the FIRM.
(4) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations"
published by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972, as
amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent standard. All
plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall be
accompanied by a statement certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect which states that the proposed design and
methods of construction are in conformance with the above
referenced standards.
(5) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2006 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2006 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401-405,
as amended) shall be utilized.
C. Space below the lowest floor.
§ 120-11 DANVILLE CODE § 120-11
1:114
(1) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements)
which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building
access, or incidental storage in an area other than a basement,
shall be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic
forces on exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed space" also
includes crawl spaces.
(2) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed
the following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc. or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
D. Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
(1) The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation,
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles, or to the storage of
tools, material, and equipment related to the principal use or
activity.
(2) Floor area shall not exceed 100 square feet.
(3) The structure will have a low damage potential.
(4) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(5) Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory
flood elevation.
(6) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc. are prohibited.
(7) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(8) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation or
movement and shall be designed to automatically provide for the
entry and exit of floodwater for the purpose of equalizing
hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
§ 120-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-11
1:115
§ 120-12. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc. or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
(1) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all
points;
(2) Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills shall
not be permitted;
(3) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance
to erosion, scouring, or settling;
(4) Be no steeper than one vertical foot to two horizontal feet unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to and
approved by the Floodplain Administrator; and
(5) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent
properties.
B. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall insure proper drainage along streets, and provide positive
drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to
prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(3) No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within any
identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all state
and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or
contamination from it, during a flood.
§ 120-11 DANVILLE CODE § 120-12
1:116
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA No.
348, Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages, and the
International Private Sewage Disposal Code shall be utilized.
D. Other utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than
one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and
not listed in § 120-13, Development which may endanger human life,
shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation and/or
floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
H. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain without causing structural
damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a "marine" or water-resistant variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
J. Paints and adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of "marine" or water-resistant quality.
§ 120-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-12
1:117
§ 120-13. Development which may endanger human life.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a "marine" or water-resistant variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a
"marine" or water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
K. Electrical components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
base flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
L. Equipment.
(1) Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and ventilating units, and
other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or apparatus shall
not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to
prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges
from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made
for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater
infiltration occurs.
N. Uniform construction code coordination. The standards and
specifications contained 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401-405), as amended
and not limited to the following provisions shall apply to the above and
other sections and subsections of this Part 2, to the extent that they are
more restrictive and/or supplement the requirements of this Part 2.
(1) International Building Code (IBC) 2006 or the latest edition
thereof: Secs. 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and
Appendix G.
(2) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2006 or the latest
edition thereof: Secs. R104, R105, R109, R323, Appendix AE101,
Appendix E and Appendix J.
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Floodplain Management Act, and
the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially
improved structure which: will be used for the production or storage of
any of the following dangerous materials or substances; or will be used
for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than 550
gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous
materials or substances on the premises; or will involve the production,
storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substances; shall be
subject to the provisions of this section, in addition to all other
§ 120-12 DANVILLE CODE § 120-13
1:118
applicable provisions. The following list of materials and substances are
considered dangerous to human life:
(1) Acetone.
(2) Ammonia.
(3) Benzene.
(4) Calcium carbide.
(5) Carbon disulfide.
(6) Celluloid.
(7) Chlorine.
(8) Hydrochloric acid.
(9) Hydrocyanic acid.
(10) Magnesium.
(11) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(12) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(13) Phosphorus.
(14) Potassium.
(15) Sodium.
(16) Sulphur and sulphur products.
(17) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides).
(18)Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
B. Within any floodplain area, any new or substantially improved structure
of the kind described in Subsection A, above, shall be prohibited within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any
watercourse.
C. Within any floodway area, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection A, above, shall be prohibited.
D. Where permitted within any floodplain area, any new or substantially
improved structure of the kind described in Subsection A, above, shall
be:
(1) Elevated or designed and constructed to remain completely dry up
to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation;
§ 120-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-13
1:119
§ 120-14. Prohibited activities.
The following obstructions and activities are prohibited from being partially
or entirely within any floodplain district:
(2) Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity during
the course of a base flood.
E. Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards for completely dry floodproofing
contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing Regulations" (U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers, June 1972, as amended March 1992), or with some
other equivalent watertight standard.
A. The commencement of any of the following activities or the
construction, enlargement or expansion of any structure used or
intended to be used for any of the following activities:
(1) Hospitals.
(2) Nursing homes.
(3) Jails or prisons.
B. The commencement of or any construction of a new mobile home park
or mobile home subdivision or a substantial improvement to an existing
mobile home park or mobile home subdivision.
§ 120-13 DANVILLE CODE § 120-14
1:120
ARTICLE V
Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas
§ 120-15. Existing structures.
The provisions of this Part 2 do not require any changes or improvements to
be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement is
made to any existing structure, the provisions of § 120-16 shall apply.
§ 120-16. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to
an existing structure located within any identified floodplain area:
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any floodway area that would cause any increase in BFE.
B. No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use, or
activity within any floodplain area that would cause any increase in the
BFE.
C. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any special floodplain area that would, together with all other
existing and anticipated development, increase the BFE more than one
foot at any point.
D. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement, of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of 50% or more of
its market value, shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall
be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this Part 2.
E. The above activity shall also address the requirements of the 34 Pa.
Code, as amended, and the 2006 IBC and the 2006 IRC.
§ 120-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-16
1:121

ARTICLE VI
Variances
§ 120-17. General.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this Part 2 would result in an
exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner, the
Danville Borough may, upon request, grant relief from the strict application
of the requirements.
§ 120-18. Variance procedures and conditions.
A. Requests for variances shall be considered by the Danville Borough in
accordance with the following:
(1) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any floodway area that would cause any
increase in the BFE.
(2) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any floodway area that would cause any
increase in the BFE.
(3) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any special floodplain area that would,
together with all other existing and anticipated development,
increase the BFE than one foot at any point.
(4) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
(5) In granting any variance, the Danville Borough shall attach
whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers
necessary in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare,
and to achieve the objectives of this Part 2.
(6) Whenever a variance is granted, the Danville Borough shall notify
the applicant in writing that:
(a) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(b) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
(7) In reviewing any request for a variance, the Danville Borough shall
consider, at a minimum, the following:
(a) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(b) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(c) That the granting of the variance will:
§ 120-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-18
1:123
[1] Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense;
[2] Nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the
public, or conflict with any other applicable state or local
ordinances and regulations.
(8) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall
be maintained by the Danville Borough. In addition, a report of all
variances granted during the year shall be included in the annual
report to the FEMA.
B. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
one-hundred-year flood.
§ 120-18 DANVILLE CODE § 120-18
1:124
ARTICLE VII
Warning and Disclaimer
§ 120-19. Degree of protection.
The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this article is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on acceptable
engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions.
Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice
jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This article does not imply
that the area outside the floodplain districts will be free from flooding or
flood damages.
§ 120-20. Liability.
This article shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of Danville
or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
§ 120-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-20
1:125

ARTICLE VIII
Terminology
§ 120-21. Word usage.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this Part 2
shall be interpreted so as to give this Part 2 its most reasonable application.
§ 120-22. Definitions.
As used in this Part 2, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent-chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year flood").
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a 1% or greater
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets, and other paving; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance
Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and
the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
§ 120-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-22
1:127
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant partially enclosed area,
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental storage,
in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest floor of
a building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that the
structure is in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements
of this Part 2.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of
parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor
repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent,
or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting
public health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after June 17, 1977, and includes any subsequent
improvements thereto.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) plus
a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet. [NOTE: The one-and-one-half-foot
freeboard is an alternative to the basic NFIP elevation requirement.
Municipalities are free to establish freeboard requirements based on
existing conditions, historical data, etc.]
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown
on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
§ 120-22 DANVILLE CODE § 120-22
1:128
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of
a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first, alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs,
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include any project for
improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary
to assure safe living conditions.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new
construction in all municipalities whether administered by the municipality,
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, the code adopted the International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the state floodplain
§ 120-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-22
1:129
construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
§ 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be
in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
§ 120-22 DANVILLE CODE § 120-22
1:130
Chapter 123
GROUNDWATER
§ 123-1. Findings and purpose.
§ 123-2. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to terms used in this chapter:
AGRICULTURAL USE — Commercial agricultural activities, including, but
not limited to, irrigation of crops, watering of livestock, and food
production, processing or packaging.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Danville, County of Montour, Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
DEP — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Environmental
Protection.
DOMESTIC USE — The use of water for drinking, cooking, food preparation
and other food-related services, cleaning, washing, bathing, watering
lawns, gardens and landscaping irrigation, and similar household-type
water uses at any residential dwelling, or at any building in which
commercial/business, governmental/public or industrial activities are
conducted. The term does not include water used solely for closed loop heat
pumps, noncontact cooling, other types of geothermal units or production
and/or processing purposes of commercial or industrial enterprises.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL — The Borough Secretary or his or her
designee when acting in his or her capacity to enforce the terms of this
chapter pursuant to § 123-6 hereof.
OWNER — The holder of record title for a parcel.
PARCEL — Any plot of land defined by the metes and bounds set forth in the
deed for that land and located within the Borough.
A. The Borough Council has been informed and hereby finds that
groundwater in certain areas of the Borough has been contaminated or
otherwise adversely impacted by hazardous substances and that
identified public health, safety, and welfare risks may affect water
drawn from or around certain areas of such impacted groundwater. The
Borough Council has determined that it is necessary and appropriate to
prohibit the use of wells to supply water for domestic use or
agricultural use in order to protect Borough residents by minimizing
the health, safety and welfare risks. The purpose hereof is to protect the
public health, safety and welfare by imposing the restrictions and
requirements set forth herein.
B. The Borough Council further finds that the Borough is serviced by a
public water system that is available to residents of the Borough and
that providing public water is in the best interests of the health, safety,
and welfare of the residents of the Borough.
§ 120-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-2
1:131
PERSON — An individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership,
consortium, joint venture, commercial entity, authority, nonprofit
corporation or other legal entity which is recognized by law as the subject
of rights and duties. The term includes the federal government, state
government, political subdivisions and commonwealth instrumentalities.
PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM — A system for the provision to the public of water
for human consumption and/or domestic use and/or agricultural use.
WELL — An opening in the surface of the earth for the purpose of removing
water through nonmechanical or mechanical means for any purpose other
than a public emergency.
§ 123-3. Use restrictions.
Except as provided in § 123-7 hereof, no person shall install, construct,
develop, expand, modify or use a well within the Borough for the purpose
of removing water in any quantity through mechanical or nonmechanical
means for domestic use or agricultural use.
§ 123-4. Wells for purposes other than domestic or agricultural use.
A person shall be permitted to install, construct, develop, expand, modify
or use a well within the Borough for any reason other than domestic
use or agricultural use, such as groundwater monitoring and construction
dewatering. Under no circumstances, however, may a well installed for such
purposes be used for either domestic use or agricultural use.
§ 123-5. Connection to public system required.
Except as provided in § 123-7 hereof, in the event that any parcel is being
serviced by a well for domestic use and/or an agricultural use as of the
date of the enactment of this chapter, within 30 days after the effective date
of this chapter, the owner of said parcel shall be required to take those
steps necessary to connect to a public water system to obtain water for
domestic use and/or agricultural use. The cost of constructing a main from
the structure to be serviced to the boundary of the parcel and connecting to
a public water system shall be borne by the owner. The use of any existing
well for domestic use and agricultural use is expressly prohibited.
§ 123-6. Enforcement official; notification of violations.
The Borough Secretary, or his/her designee, shall be the official having the
authority to enforce this chapter. After the effective date of this chapter,
the enforcement official shall contact all owners of parcels which, from
the information available to the Borough, appear to have wells prohibited
under this chapter and give written notice of the need to cease using such
wells for domestic use and/or agricultural use and the need to connect to
a public water system, as required under § 123-5 hereof. The owner shall
take steps to comply with the provisions of this chapter within 30 days
from the date of such notice. Where, upon information available to the
§ 123-2 DANVILLE CODE § 123-6
1:132
enforcement official, it is suspected that a well is being used on a parcel in
violation of this chapter, the enforcement official may inspect such parcel
and serve an appropriate notice and order of such violation, requiring that
action be taken promptly by the owner to bring the parcel into compliance
with this chapter. If the owner fails to act in accordance with such order,
the enforcement official may seek remedies and penalties as provided in
§ 123-8.
§ 123-7. Grandfathered parcels.
As of the date of enactment of this chapter, the parcels situate at 101 Alton
Street, 237 Rooney Avenue, and 320 Church Street (the "grandfathered
parcels") currently have a well which is supplying or could supply water
for agricultural use or domestic use. The Borough Council finds that the
grandfathered parcels are outside the area where groundwater has been
impacted by hazardous substances which were the impetus for this chapter.
As a result, the grandfathered parcels are exempt from the requirements
of §§ 123-3 through 123-5 hereof; provided, however, that if the owner of
a grandfathered parcel, who owns the grandfathered parcel on the date
of enactment of this chapter, subsequently sells, transfers or otherwise
conveys ownership of the grandfathered parcel, through whatever means,
to another individual or entity, the grandfathered parcel shall forfeit its
exempt status, and the new owner shall be required to comply with all
provisions of this chapter, including §§ 123-3 through 123-5 above.
§ 123-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to all
rights and remedies available to the Borough as provided by law, including
the right of the Borough to seek an order from a court of appropriate
jurisdiction requiring compliance with this chapter. The Borough may also
seek collection of costs and attorneys' fees associated with such
enforcement action. Any violation of this chapter is a public nuisance,
subject to abatement, and any well in violation of this chapter shall be
immediately taken out of service and lawfully abandoned in compliance with
applicable legal requirements. A court of competent jurisdiction may order
any person violating any provision of this chapter to properly and lawfully
remove or abandon a well.
§ 123-9. Building and zoning permits.
No permit for the construction or alteration of a building or structure, nor
any permit for any zoning approval, shall be issued for any improvement
on a parcel which has, or proposes, a water supply for domestic use and/or
agricultural use from a well in violation of this chapter.
§ 123-10. Notification to water suppliers.
The Borough Secretary, or his/her designee, shall provide a copy of this
chapter to all water suppliers that operate a public water system in any
§ 123-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-10
1:133
portion of the Borough, whether the public water system services a
development or services Borough residents, generally.
§ 123-11. Notification to DEP.
Prior to the enactment of any modification, amendment or repeal of this
chapter, the Borough shall give to DEP notice of its intent to modify, amend
or repeal this chapter. Such notice shall be provided at least 30 days prior
to the date of the meeting at which the modification, amendment or repeal
of this chapter will be presented to the Borough for consideration and vote.
§ 123-12. Repealer.
Any portion of the Code of the Borough of Danville that is in conflict with
any provision of this chapter is hereby repealed solely to the extent of such
conflict.
§ 123-13. Severability.
Should any sentence, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase or section of
this chapter be adjudged or held to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid,
the same shall not effect the validity of this chapter as a whole, or any part
or provision thereof, other than the part decided to be unconstitutional,
illegal or invalid, and such shall not effect the validity of the Code of the
Borough of Danville.
§ 123-14. Legislative authority.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to, inter alia, the Uniform Environmental
Covenants Act, Act No. 68 of December 18, 2007, P.L. 450, 27 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 6501 et seq., and applicable regulations, and the Land Recycling and
Environmental Remediation Standards Act, Act No. 2 of May 19, 1995, P.L.
4, 35 P.S. § 6026.101 et seq., and applicable regulations.
Chapter 129
HISTORIC DISTRICT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
§ 129-1. Statutory authority.
In accordance with the provisions of Act 167, entitled "An Act Authorizing
Counties, Cities, Boroughs, Incorporated Towns and Townships to Create
Historic Districts Within Their Geographic Boundaries; Providing For the
Appointment of Boards of Historical Architectural Review; Empowering
Governing Bodies of Political Subdivisions to Protect the Distinctive
§ 123-10 DANVILLE CODE § 129-1
1:134
Historical Character of These Districts and to Regulate the Erection,
Reconstruction, Alteration, Restoration, Demolition or Razing of Buildings
within the Historic Districts," adopted by the General Assembly of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and approved by the Governor of
Pennsylvania on the 13th day of June 1961, and as amended,51 there is
hereby created in the Borough of Danville an historic district to be known
as the "Danville Historic District."
§ 129-2. Long title.
This chapter shall be entitled "An Ordinance to Control the Demolition,
Razing and the Structural and Nonstructural Changing, of Buildings or
Structures or Parts Thereof in the Danville Historic District."
§ 129-3. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Danville Borough
Historic Ordinance."
§ 129-4. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is as follows:
§ 129-5. Historic District limits.
For purposes of this chapter, the Historic District shall consist of the area as
shown on the accompanying map (Appendix A52) which shall be located in
the office of the Borough Code Officer. The map shall be the final authority
as to the current historic status of buildings and other structures in the
Borough of Danville. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of the
district as shown on the Official Historic Map, the following rules shall
apply:
A. To preserve historic buildings and structures located within the Historic
District.
B. To protect those portions of the Borough which reflect the cultural,
economical, social, political and architectural history of the Borough of
Danville.
C. To awaken an interest in our historic past.
D. To strengthen the Borough's economy.
E. To stabilize and improve property values in said district.
F. To promote the use of the buildings and structures in the Historic
District for the culture, education, pleasure and the general welfare of
the people of the Borough of Danville.
51.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 8001 et seq.
52.Editor's Note: A copy of the Official Historic Map may be found at the Municipal Building,
where it is available for public inspection during regular business hours.
§ 129-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 129-5
1:135
§ 129-6. Definitions. [Amended 12-8-1998 by Ord. No. 398]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPURTENANT ELEMENTS — Significant items subordinate to a building.
[NOTE: The intent is to exclude items such as doghouses, mailboxes, house
numbers and other insignificant items.]
BOARD OF HISTORICAL ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW (REVIEW BOARD)
— The agency that advises the Borough Council on any requests for
authorization to demolish, raze, construct or alter all or a part of any
building or structure within the Historic District.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The governing body of the Borough of Danville.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls,
used or intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals
or property.53
CODE OFFICER — The officer of the Borough designated by the Council as
the individual who issues the permit for the demolition, razing, construction
or alteration of all or a part of any building or structure in the Borough of
Danville.
DEMOLITION/RAZING — The dismantling or tearing down of all or a part
of any building or structure.
PERMIT — An approval statement signed by the Code Officer authorizing
the demolition, razing, construction or alteration of all or parts of any
building or structure.
PERMIT APPLICATION — The request filed by any person with the Code
Officer that seeks authorization to raze, demolish, construct or alter all or
parts of any building or structure.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached
to the ground, including but not limited to buildings, sheds, mobile homes
and other similar items.54
§ 129-7. Review Board; creation; composition; organization.
A. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such center
lines.
B. Where physical or cultural features exist on the ground at variance with
those shown on the official Map, the Borough Council shall interpret the
district boundaries.
A. A Board of Historical Architectural Review is hereby established to be
composed of seven members appointed by the Borough Council. The
53.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
54.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 129-5 DANVILLE CODE § 129-7
1:136
§ 129-8. Application procedures. [Amended 12-8-1998 by Ord. No.
398]
membership of the Board shall be as follows: one member shall be a
registered architect; one shall be a licensed real estate broker; one
shall be a Building Inspector; one shall be a Planning Commission
member; and three shall be persons with knowledge of and interest in
the preservation of the Historic District. The initial terms of the first
members shall be as follows: two shall serve until the organizational
meeting of the Borough Council in 1990, three until the organizational
meeting in 1992 and two until the organizational meeting in 1994.
Their successors shall thereafter serve for terms of five years. An
appointment by the Borough Council to fill any vacancy that may exist
shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term.
B. The Board shall elect from its own membership its officers, who shall
serve annual terms as such and may succeed themselves. For the
conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum shall be
not less than a majority of all the members of the Board. The Board may
make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its procedure, consistent
with ordinances of the Borough and laws of the commonwealth. The
Board shall keep full public records of its business and shall submit a
report of its activities to the Borough Council once a year.
A. Certificate of appropriateness for building and structural changes.
[Amended 11-14-2000 by Ord. No. 416]
(1) The Board of Historical and Architectural Review shall review
requests for the following demolition, building construction or
alteration of all or parts of any contributing building located in the
Danville Borough Historic District. The contributing structures are
identified on the Danville Borough Historic District Map.
(a) Changes to rooflines.
(b) Changes in the size, style, shape or number of doors, windows,
or other openings.
(c) Demolition and/or construction of porches, fences and walls
and the demolition and/or construction of appurtenant
elements.
(d) Structural enlargement (or demolition) of principle or
secondary buildings, or parts thereof.
(e) All new building construction in the Historic District.
(2) The Board of Historical and Architectural Review shall review
requests for the demolition of 50% or more of an entire
contributing or noncontributing building or structure located
within the Historic District.
§ 129-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 129-8
1:137
(3) The Review Board shall review all applications to the above listed
changes to buildings and shall forward their recommendation(s) to
the Danville Borough Council for final consideration. [NOTE: The
intent of Subsection A(1)(c) is to require HARB review prior to the
demolition and/or construction of all porches, fences and walls,
including fences and walls associated with a building, as well as
fences and walls not associated with a building. In other words, no
fence or wall is excluded/exempt from HARB review.]
B. Review of nonstructural building changes. [Amended 11-14-2000 by
Ord. No. 416]
(1) The Review Board shall review requests for the following
nonstructural changes to principle and secondary contributing
buildings and structures located in the Historic District.
(a) Changes in exterior surface materials.
(b) Cleaning of masonry.
(2) Subsection A(1) and (2) mandate the obtaining of a certificate of
appropriateness for the changes covered by that subsection.
Subsection B(1) requires consultation with the Review Board for
advisory purposes only, but does not mandate compliance with any
recommendations made by the Review Board for the changes
covered by that subsection.
C. Procedures of the Code Officer; applications for permits. When the
Code Officer receives an application requiring the issuance of a permit
for a property in the Historic District, procedures for the officer, at that
time, shall be followed. The Code Officer shall also verify that the type
of work to be done requires either: a certificate of appropriateness as
referenced in Subsection A(1); review as referenced in Subsection B(1);
or no review by Review Board or Borough Council. If the proposed work
requires Review Board and/or Borough Council review and approval, no
permit(s) shall be issued by the Code Officer until the proper reviews
and actions have been rendered by the Review Board and/or Borough
Council as described in this chapter. All applications requiring review
must be received at least seven days prior to a scheduled Review Board
meeting to be considered.
D. Within seven days of receipt of an application requiring review, the
Code Officer shall notify the Board of Historical and Architectural
Review of said application. Upon receipt of the notice from the Code
Officer that an application requiring review has been filed, the Review
Board shall, within 30 days of receipt of such notice, schedule meetings
to consider the recommendation which it will present to the Borough
Council. The Borough Council will then make a final decision based on
information obtained from the Review Board.
E. In the event that the Review Board fails to hold its required meeting
within 30 days from the date it receives notice from the Code Officer
§ 129-8 DANVILLE CODE § 129-8
1:138
§ 129-9. Permit application review. [Amended 12-8-1998 by Ord. No.
398]
In determining the recommendation to be presented to the Borough Council
concerning the issuing of a certificate of appropriateness authorizing the
issuance of a permit, the Review Board shall consider the following matters:
§ 129-10. Enforcement.
The Code Officer shall have the power to institute any proceedings at law
or in equity necessary for the enforcement of this chapter.
§ 129-11. Hazardous structures.55
If a building presents a clear and present danger to the public or has
been rendered unfit for habitation because of fire, explosion or similar
cause, the terms of this chapter may be temporarily waived to the extent
that the applicant can render interim, short-term repairs to ensure the
that an application requiring review has been filed or thereafter fails
to submit its written report to the Borough Council within 30 days of
its meeting or in the event that the Borough Council fails to hold its
required meeting and to render its decision within 45 days from the
date it receives the written report of the Review Board, the decision
shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant, unless
the applicant had agreed in writing to an extension of time.
A. The effect of the proposed change upon the general historic and
architectural nature of the district shall be considered.
B. The building should possess a high degree of integrity and quality with
a minimum of nonarchitecturally significant intrusions.
C. The building should possess a sense of cohesiveness through
characteristics of architectural style, such as height, proportion, scale,
rhythm and detail.
D. The building should possess a special character or special historical and
aesthetic atmosphere, which distinguishes it from the surrounding
area.
E. The building should be readily definable by either man-made or natural
boundaries with a major focal point or points within it.
F. The building should be significant in the historical or cultural life of the
Borough, the commonwealth or the nation.
G. The Borough need not represent a particular architectural style and
may, in fact, contain a wide variety of styles, provided that they are in
harmonious relationship.
55.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 129-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 129-11
1:139
property is safe and habitable under the terms of the Pennsylvania Uniform
Construction Code.56 Any changes made to the building other than
emergency repairs, and any permanent alterations, shall be subject to the
requirements of this chapter.
§ 129-12. Violations and penalties.57
Any person, firm or corporation who shall fail to comply with the
requirements of this chapter or violate the terms hereof shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000, plus
costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, be
imprisoned for a period not in excess 90 days; provided, however, that each
day's continuance of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall
constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 133
HOUSING, FAIR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
§ 133-1. Acts prohibited.
No person, firm, corporation, partnership or other entity which receives or
expects to receive pecuniary gain from the advertising, rental or sale of real
property within the Borough of Danville shall:
A. Influence or attempt to influence any other person who purports or
represents himself to be a prospective purchaser, occupant or tenant of
real property to refrain from purchasing or renting real property by
referring to race, sex, color, religion or national origin of occupants or
prospective occupants of other real property in the neighborhood.
B. Influence or attempt to influence by any words, acts or failure to act any
person to purports or represents himself to be a prospective seller,
purchaser, occupant, landlord or tenant of real property, in connection
with the sale or rental of real property, so as to promote or tend to
promote the continuance or maintenance of racially segregated housing
or so as to retard, obstruct or discourage tenancy of racially segregated
housing or so to retard, obstruct or discourage racially integrated
housing on or in any street, block or neighborhood.
C. Discriminate against any person who purports or represents himself to
be a prospective seller, purchaser, occupant, landlord or tenant of real
56.Editor's Note: See Ch. 102, Construction Codes, Uniform.
57.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 129-11 DANVILLE CODE § 133-1
1:140
§ 133-2. Creation of Equal Housing Opportunity Committee.
§ 133-3. Duties of Equal Housing Opportunity Committee.
The Danville Borough Equal Housing Opportunity Committee shall:
property by any influence, suggestion, act or failure to act, or accord
any differential treatment among such persons in connection with the
sale or rental of real property or in the furnishing of information,
services or facilities relative thereto because of race, sex, color, religion
or national origin of any person.
A. There is hereby created a Danville Borough Equal Housing Opportunity
Committee consisting of:
(1) One member of the Danville Borough Council, to be chosen by the
Council.
(2) One member of the Danville Borough Police Department.
(3) One resident of the Borough, not employed or serving in an office in
the Borough.
B. All members of said Committee shall serve for the balance of the
calendar year and shall be appointed thereafter for one-year terms on a
calendar-year basis.
A. Provide a means of communication and exchange of information
between real estate brokers and salesmen doing business in Danville
Borough, officials of the Borough, the Montour County Housing
Authority and community organizations.
B. Confer and cooperate with real estate brokers and salesmen, public
officials and such associations designed to eliminate any unfair,
discriminatory or differential practices in connection with the
advertising, sale or leasing of real estate.
C. If deemed necessary, periodically make studies, prepare and
disseminate educational material and make recommendations to the
local realtors, Montour County Housing Authority, Council and other
groups to the methods of eliminating discriminating practices in
connection with the advertising, sale or leasing of real estate in the
Borough.
D. Receive, investigate and seek to adjust all complaints of discriminatory
practices in connection with the advertising, sale or leasing of real
estate and make recommendations to and assist the Montour County
District Attorney in connection with any such violations.
E. Furnish the Council with an annual report of the Committee's activities,
due no later than the 30th day of January of each year.
§ 133-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-4
1:141
§ 133-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more than $300 and costs
of such proceedings or, upon default of payment of such fines and costs,
by imprisonment in the county jail for a term of not more than 30 days.
The continuation of such violation for each successive day shall constitute
a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or permitting the
continuation of the violation may be punished as provided above for each
separate offense.
§ 133-5. Date enacted; when effective.
This ordinance was enacted into law this 23rd day of January 1981, to be
effective immediately.
Chapter 138
INSURANCE
§ 133-4 DANVILLE CODE § 133-5
1:142
ARTICLE I
Fire Insurance Proceeds
[Adopted 2-14-1995 by Ord. No. 377 (Ch. 65 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 138-1. Adoption of standard.
Pursuant to the Act of July 9, 1992, (P.L. 678. No. 98) Section 1, as amended
in October 1994, the Fire Insurance Escrow Law,58 the Borough of Danville
hereby adopts the procedure prescribed in that Act, which amends Section
508 of the Insurance Company Law of 1921, Act of May 17, 1921 (P.L.
682, No. 284),59 to provide for payment of certain fire loss claims to
municipalities.
§ 138-2. Designation of officer.
The Secretary of the Borough of Danville is hereby appointed as the
designated officer who is authorized to carry out the duties of this chapter.
§ 138-3. Obligation of Fire Insurance Company.
No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter the "insuring
agent") doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a
claim of a named insured for fire damage to a structure located within
the Borough of Danville (hereinafter the "municipality") where the amount
recoverable for the fire loss to the structure under all policies exceeds
$7,500, unless the insuring agent is furnished by the Municipal Treasurer
with a municipal certificate pursuant to Section 508(b)60 of the Insurance
Company Law of 1921, as amended by Act No. 98 of 1992, and as amended
in October 1994 and unless there is compliance with Section 508(c) and
(d),61 as amended by Act No. 98 of 1992, and amended in October 1994 and
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 138-4. Procedure for payment of fire insurance proceeds to the
municipality; obligation of municipality.
Where, pursuant to Section 508(b)(1)(i),62 as amended, the Municipal
Treasurer issues to the insuring agent a certificate or, at the discretion of
the municipality, a verbal notification which shall be confirmed in writing by
the insurer to the effect that, as of the date specified in the request, there
are no delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user charges against
real property, including delinquencies to the municipality, the County of
Montour, the Danville Area School District and the Danville Municipal
Authority and that, as of the date of the Treasurer's certificate or verbal
notification, no municipality has certified any amount as total costs incurred
58.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638.
59.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 341 et seq.
60.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638(b).
61.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638(c) and (d).
62.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638(b)(1)(i).
§ 138-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-4
1:143
by the municipality for the removal, repair or securing of a building or
other structure on the property. The insuring agent shall pay the claim
of the named insured; provided, however, that if the loss agreed upon
by the named insured and the insuring agent equals or exceeds 60% of
the aggregate limits of liability on all fire policies covering the building
restructure, the following procedures must be followed:
A. The insuring agent shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to the
designated officer of the municipality in the aggregate of $2,000 for
each $15,000 of a claim and for each fraction of that amount of a claim,
or, if at the time of a loss report the named insured has submitted a
contractor's signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or
securing the building or other structure in an amount less than the
amount calculated under the foregoing transfer formula, the insurance
company, association or exchange shall transfer from the insurance
proceeds the amount specified in the estimate.
B. If at the time of a proof of loss agreed to between the named insured
and the insuring agent, the named insured has submitted a contractor's
signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or securing the
building or other structure, the insuring agent shall transfer to the
municipality from the insurance proceeds the amount specified in the
estimate.
C. The transfer of proceeds shall be on pro rata basis by all companies,
associations or exchanges insuring the building or other structure.
D. After the transfer, the named insured may submit a contractor's signed
estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or securing the building or
other structure, and the designated officer shall return the amount of
the funds transferred to the municipality in excess of the estimate to the
named insured, if the municipality has not commenced to remove,
repair or secure the building of other structure.
E. Upon receipt of proceeds under this section, the municipality shall do
the following:
(1) The designated officer shall place the proceeds in a separate fund
to be used solely as security against the total costs of removing,
repairing or securing the building or structure which are incurred
by the municipality. Such costs shall include, without limitation,
any engineering, legal or administrative costs incurred by the
municipality in connection with such removal, repair or securing of
the building or any proceedings related thereto;
(2) It is the obligation of the insuring agent when transferring the
proceeds to provide the municipality with the name and address of
the named insured. Upon receipt of transferred funds and the name
and address of the named insured, the designated officer shall
contact the named insured, certify that the proceeds have been
received by the municipality and notify the named insured that the
procedures under this subsection shall be followed;
§ 138-4 DANVILLE CODE § 138-4
1:144
§ 138-5. Adoption of regulations by municipality.
The Borough Council may by resolution adopt procedures and regulations to
implement Act 98 of 1992, as amended in October 1994,63 and this chapter
and may, by resolution, fix reasonable fees to be charged for municipal
activities or services provided pursuant to Act 98 of 1992, as amended in
October 1994, and this chapter, including but not limited to issuance of
certificates and bills, performance of inspections and opening separate fund
accounts.
§ 138-6. Violations and penalties.
Any owner of property, any named insured or any insuring agent who
violates this chapter shall be subject to a penalty of up to $1,000 per
violation.
(3) When repairs, removal or securing of the building or other
structure have been completed in accordance with all applicable
regulations and orders of the municipality and the required proof of
such completion received by the designated officer, and if the
municipality has not incurred any costs for repairs, removal or
securing, the fund shall be returned to the named insured. If the
municipality has incurred costs for repairs, removal or securing of
the building or other structure, the costs shall be paid from the
funds, and if excess funds remain, the municipality shall transfer
the remaining funds to the named insured; and
(4) To the extent that interest is earned on proceeds held by the
municipality pursuant to this section, and not returned to the
named insured, such interest shall belong to the municipality. To
the extent that proceeds are returned to the named insured,
interest earned on such proceeds shall be distributed to the named
insured at the time that the proceeds are returned.
F. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of the
municipality to recover any deficiency. Furthermore, nothing in this
section shall be construed to prohibit the municipality and the named
insured from entering into an agreement that permits the transfer of
funds to the named insured if some other reasonable disposition of the
damaged property has been negotiated.
63.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638.
§ 138-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-6
1:145
Chapter 141
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL REGISTRATION
§ 141-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the Borough of Danville "Residential Rental
Registration Ordinance."
§ 141-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter and the policy of the Council of the Borough
of Danville, in order to protect and promote the public health, safety and
welfare of its citizens, to establish rights and obligations of owners and
occupants relating to the rental of residential rental units in the Borough of
Danville and to encourage owners and occupants to maintain and improve
the quality of rental housing within the community. It is also the policy of
the Borough that owners, managers and occupants share responsibilities
to obey the various codes adopted to protect and promote public health,
safety and welfare. As a means to those ends, this chapter provides for a
system of inspections, issuance and renewal of rental occupancy licenses
and sets penalties for violations. This chapter shall be liberally construed
and applied to promote its purposes and policies.
§ 141-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CODE — Any code or ordinance adopted, enacted and/or in effect in and
for the Borough of Danville concerning fitness for habitation or the
construction, maintenance, operation, occupancy, use or appearance of any
premises or residential rental unit. Included within, but not limited by,
this definition are the following which are in effect as of the date of the
enactment of this chapter: the Uniform Construction Code (hereinafter
"UCC") the International Property Maintenance Code, International
Plumbing Code, International Fire Prevention Code, International Electrical
Code, Zoning Ordinance, the International Building Code and any duly
enacted amendment or supplement to any of the above and any new
enactment falling within this definition.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The duly appointed Code Enforcement
Officer(s) having charge of the Office of Code Enforcement of the Borough
of Danville and any assistants or agents.
COMMON AREA — Any area within a structure shared by occupants of
separate residential rental units that the occupants of such separate units
have the right in common to use or share, including, but not limited to,
kitchens, bathrooms, attics, basements, social rooms, hallways, yards,
porches, and entrance ways.
DISORDERLY CONDUCT — Shall be defined under this chapter as:
§ 138-6 DANVILLE CODE § 141-3
1:146
DISORDERLY CONDUCT REPORT — A written report of disorderly conduct
to be completed by the police.
GUEST — A person on the premises with the actual or implied consent of an
occupant.
LANDLORD — One or more persons, jointly or severally, in whom is vested
all or part of the legal title to the premises or all or part of the beneficial
ownership and a right to the present use and enjoyment of the premises,
including a mortgage holder in possession of the residential rental unit
(same as "owner").
LANDLORD-TENANT ACT — The Landlord and Tenant Act of 1951, 68 P.S.
§ 250.101 et seq.
MANAGER — An adult individual designated by the owner of a residential
rental unit.
OCCUPANT — Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having
possession of a space within a building.
OWNER — Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal
or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records
of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or
otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the
estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate
of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
Engaging in fighting, threatening or other violent or tumultuous
behavior.
A.
B. Making unreasonable noise.
C. Using obscene language or obscene gestures.
Creating a hazardous or physically offensive condition by any act which
serves no legitimate purpose of the actor.
D.
Any activities declared illegal under the Pennsylvania Crimes Code
(18 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.) or Liquor Code (47 P.S. § 1-101 et seq.),
or the Controlled Substance, Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act (35 P.S.
§ 780-101 et seq.).
E.
Any form of conduct, action, incident or behavior perpetrated, caused
or permitted by any occupant or visitor of a residential rental unit
that disturbs other persons of reasonable sensibility in their peaceful
enjoyment of their premises such that a report is made to the police.
It is not necessary that such conduct, action, incident, or behavior
constitute a criminal offense, nor that criminal charges be filed against
any person in order for a person to have perpetrated, caused or
permitted the commission of disorderly conduct, as defined herein;
provided, however, that no disorderly conduct shall be deemed to have
occurred unless the police investigate and make a determination that
such did occur, and keep written records, including a disorderly
conduct report, of such occurrence.
F.
§ 141-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-3
1:147
OWNER-OCCUPIED RENTAL UNIT — A rental unit in which the owner
resides on a regular, permanent basis.
PERSON(S) — Any individual, partnership, company, association, society,
trust, corporation or other group or entity, whether an owner or lessee of
residences or commercial or institutional establishments.
POLICE — The Police Department of the Borough of Danville or any
properly authorized member or officer thereof or any other law enforcement
agency having jurisdiction within the Borough of Danville.
PREMISES — The area occupied by a rental unit, business or other
enterprise. When more than one rental unit, business or enterprise occupies
a single building on the ground floor, each business area shall be considered
a separate premises. Rental units, businesses or other enterprises which
occupy other floors shall be considered separate premises.
RENTAL AGREEMENT — A written agreement between owner/landlord and
occupant/tenant supplemented by the addendum required under § 141-4E,
embodying the terms and conditions concerning the use and occupancy of a
specified residential rental unit or premises.
RENTAL OCCUPANCY LICENSE — The license issued to the owner of
residential rental units under this chapter, which is required for the lawful
rental and occupancy of residential rental units.
RENTER — Occupant or tenant who is listed on the rental agreement.
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT — Any residential structure within the
Borough of Danville which is occupied by someone other than the owner
of the real estate as determined by the most current deed and for which
the owner of the said parcel of real estate received any value, including but
not limited to money or the exchange of services. Each apartment within a
building is a separate structure requiring inspection and a license.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached
to the ground, including but not limited to buildings, sheds, mobile homes
and other similar items.
TENANT — An individual who resides in a rental unit, whether or not he
or she is the owner thereof, with whom a legal relationship with the owner/
landlord is established by a rental agreement and/or a lease or by the laws
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (same as "occupant").
§ 141-4. Duties of owner.
A. General. It shall be the duty of every owner to keep and maintain all
rental units in compliance with all applicable state laws and regulations
and local ordinances and to keep such property in good and safe
condition. The owner shall be responsible for all property maintenance,
including lawn mowing and ice and snow removal, and for making any
and all repairs in and around the premises. As provided for in this
chapter, every owner shall be responsible for regulating the proper and
lawful use and maintenance of every rental unit which he or she owns.
§ 141-3 DANVILLE CODE § 141-4
1:148
This section shall not be construed as diminishing or relieving, in
any way, the responsibility of occupants or guests for their conduct
or activity; nor shall it be construed as an assignment, transfer or
projection over or onto any owner of any responsibility or liability which
occupants or their guests may have as a result of their conduct or
activity under any private cause of action, civil or criminal enforcement
proceeding, or criminal law; nor shall this section be construed so as
to require an owner to indemnify or defend occupants or their guests
when any such action or proceeding is brought against the occupant
based on the occupant's conduct or activity. Nothing herein is intended
to impose any additional civil/criminal liability upon owners other than
that which is imposed by existing law. This chapter is not intended, nor
shall its effects be, to limit any other enforcement remedies which may
be available to the Borough of Danville against an owner, occupant or
guest thereof.
B. Designation of manager.
(1) Every owner who is not a full-time resident of the Borough of
Danville, and/or who does not live within 20 miles of the Borough of
Danville, and/or who is not employed within 20 miles of the
Borough of Danville, shall designate a manager who shall reside
within 20 miles from the Borough of Danville or be employed within
20 miles of the Borough of Danville.
(2) If the owner is a corporation, a manager shall be required if an
officer of the corporation does not reside within the abovereferenced
area. The officer shall perform the same function as a
manager.
(3) If the owner is a partnership, a manager shall be required if a
partner does not reside within the above-referenced area. Said
partner shall perform the same function as a manager.
(4) The manager shall be the agent of the owner for service of process
and receiving of notices and demands, as well as for performing the
obligations of the owner under this chapter and under rental
agreements with occupants. The identity, address and telephone
number(s) of a person who is designated as manager hereunder
shall be provided by the owner or manager to the Borough, and
such information shall be kept current and updated as it changes.
Designation of a manager shall not prohibit other authorized
agents by the owner.
(5) It shall be presumed, for the purposes of this chapter, any
communication with a properly identified manager shall serve as a
communication with the owner.
C. Disclosure and records.
(1) Before an occupant initially enters into or renews a rental
agreement for a rental unit, the owner or manager shall furnish the
§ 141-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-4
1:149
occupant with the most recent inspection report relating to the
property.
(2) The owner or manager shall disclose to the occupant, in writing, on
or before the commencement of the tenancy, a copy of the rental
registration agreement.
(3) Provision of summary of ordinance to occupant. Following the
effective date of this chapter, a summary hereof in substantially the
form set forth in Appendix A,64 shall be provided to the tenant at or
before the commencement of the landlord-tenant relationship. If a
summary has been provided at or before the commencement of the
landlord-tenant relationship, a summary does not have to be
provided upon renewal. Where a rental agreement has been
entered into prior to the effective date of this chapter, the owner
shall provide the occupants with a copy of the summary within 45
days after enactment of this chapter.
(4) The owner shall maintain the rental agreement, current license and
current inspection report issued by the Code Enforcement Office of
the Borough of Danville.
(5) Changes in ownership or occupancy. It shall be the duty of each
owner of a residential rental unit to notify the Code Enforcement
Officer, in writing, of any change in ownership of the premises or of
the number of residential rental units on the premises. It shall also
be the duty of the owner to notify the Code Enforcement Officer, in
writing, of the changing of a rental unit from owner-occupied to
non-owner-occupied, which thereby transforms the dwelling into a
residential rental unit for purposes of this chapter.
D. Maintenance of premises.
(1) The owner shall maintain the premises in compliance with the
applicable codes of the Borough of Danville and shall regularly
perform or contract all routine maintenance, including lawn
mowing and ice and snow removal, and shall promptly make any
and all repairs necessary to fulfill this obligation.
(2) The owner and tenant may agree that the tenant or occupants are
to perform specified repairs, maintenance tasks, alterations or
remodeling. In such case, however, such agreement between the
owner and tenant must be in writing. Such an agreement may be
entered into between the owner and tenant only if:
(a) The agreement of the parties is entered into in good faith and
not for the purpose of evading the obligations of the owner or
tenant and occupants.
64.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 141-4 DANVILLE CODE § 141-4
1:150
(b) The agreement does not diminish or affect the obligation of the
owner to other occupants in the premises.
(3) In no case shall the existence of any agreement between the owner
and tenant relieve an owner of any responsibility under this
chapter or other ordinances or codes for maintenance of the
premises.
E. Rental agreement.
(1) Terms and conditions. The owner and tenant may include in a
rental agreement terms and conditions not prohibited by this
chapter or other applicable ordinances, regulations and laws,
including rent, term of the agreement and other provisions
governing the rights and obligations of the parties.
(2) Prohibited provisions. Except as otherwise provided by this
chapter, no rental agreement may provide that a tenant, occupant
or owner agrees to waive or to forgo rights or remedies under this
chapter. A provision prohibited by this subsection included in a
rental agreement is unenforceable.
(3) The owner shall secure a written acknowledgment from tenant that
the tenant has received the disclosures and information required
by this chapter.
(4) The rental agreement must be signed prior to occupancy and shall
contain but not be limited to the following:
(a) The address of the residential rental unit.
(b) The residential rental unit license number.
(c) The name, address and phone number of the property owner.
(d) The name, address and phone number of the property manager
(where applicable).
(e) The name of the tenant.
(f) Lease period (start and end date).
(g) Schedule and due date of payment.
(h) A list of available utilities and maintenance responsibilities at
the property shall be identified and indicated as either a
responsibility of the tenant or provided by the owner as part of
the rental agreement. This list shall include but not be limited
to the following:
[1] Natural gas or propane (where applicable).
[2] Furnace oil (where applicable).
[3] Electricity.
§ 141-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-4
1:151
[4] Municipal water service.
[5] Municipal sewer service.
[6] Recycling.
[7] Trash containers.
[8] Trash collection.
[9] Lawn and landscaping maintenance.
[10] Snow removal from public sidewalks.
(i) The location of available parking provisions (where
applicable).
(j) A statement that the tenant acknowledges noncompliance with
this chapter on the part of the occupants or the owner may be
cause for the municipality to direct eviction of the occupants by
the owner.
(5) Upon request by the Borough of Danville, the owner, within 10 days
of the request, shall furnish to the Borough of Danville a copy of the
completed and executed rental registration agreement, in a form
provided by the Borough of Danville, which form of agreement shall
include, in part, acknowledgment that the tenant has received the
disclosures and information required by this chapter. Such request
shall only be made if the current rental registration agreement for
the rental unit is not provided to the Code Enforcement Officer.
(6) A copy of the current rental agreement shall be available at the
time of inspection.
F. Registration. Every owner of a residential rental unit must register the
unit with the Code Enforcement Officer and obtain a license in
accordance with the following schedule:
(1) All owners of residential rental units must register the units with
the Code Enforcement Officer beginning with the calendar year
2012.
(2) Any individual, entity or firm which converts any structure to a
residential rental unit or units shall register the residential rental
unit or units with the Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of
Danville and obtain a rental occupancy license prior to entering
into a lease or rental agreement with a tenant.
(3) It shall be the responsibility of the grantee and the grantee's agent
in the purchase of the said real estate, including the grantee's
attorney or title company, to notify Danville Borough City Hall
within 72 hours of any purchase or transfer of a rental unit.
§ 141-4 DANVILLE CODE § 141-4
1:152
§ 141-5. Authority and responsibility of Danville Borough.
(4) The owner of a residential rental unit must update the registration
information on record with the Code Enforcement Officer within 10
days of any changes of the information required to be reported by
this chapter.
(5) In the event of a change of tenant during the registration period,
the owner shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer and have the
new tenant sign a rental registration agreement. Such agreement
shall then be provided to the Code Enforcement Officer within 10
days. If the rental unit is in compliance as of its most recent
inspection, no new inspection is required at the time of change of
tenant. The owner shall provide the most recent inspection report
for the rental unit to the new tenant.
G. Landlord-Tenant Act. The owner shall comply with all provisions of the
Landlord-Tenant Act.
H. Common areas. Where an owner of a residential rental unit does not
regulate the use of common areas and the behavior of occupants and
guests in the common areas, the owner shall be directly responsible for
the behavior of occupants and guests in the common areas as if the
owner were an occupant. The failure of the owner to regulate behavior
of occupants and guests in the common areas that results in the
following shall be a violation of this chapter:
(1) Engaging in fighting, threatening or other violent or tumultuous
behavior;
(2) Making unreasonable noise;
(3) Creating a hazardous or physically offensive condition by any act
which serves no legitimate purpose of the actor;
(4) Any activities declared illegal under the Pennsylvania Crimes Code
(18 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.), or Liquor Code (47 P.S. § 1-101 et seq.),
or the Controlled Substance, Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act (35
P.S. § 780-101 et seq.).
I. Disorderly conduct. The Code Enforcement Officer shall provide
disorderly conduct reports to the owner by regular mail to the address
provided at the most recent registration of the residential rental unit.
Such reports shall be mailed within 10 days of receipt of the report by
the Code Enforcement Officer from the police.
A. Borough can make repairs. In case the owner of a premises shall
neglect, fail or refuse to comply with any notice from the Borough or its
Code Enforcement Officer to correct a violation relating to maintenance
and repair of the premises under any code in effect in the Borough of
Danville within the period of time stated in such notice, the Borough
may cause the violation to be corrected. There shall be imposed upon
§ 141-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-5
1:153
the owner a charge of the actual costs involved, plus 10% of said costs
for each time the Borough shall cause a violation to be corrected,
and the owner of the premises shall be billed after same has been
completed. Any such bill which remains unpaid and outstanding after
the time specified therein for payment shall be grounds for the
imposition of a municipal lien upon the premises as provided by law.
Such a lien may be reduced to judgment and enforced and collected
as provided by law, together with interest at the legal rate and court
costs. The remedies provided by this subsection are not exclusive,
and the Borough and its Code Enforcement Officer may invoke such
other remedies available under this chapter or the applicable codes,
ordinances or statutes, including, where appropriate, condemnation
proceedings or declaration of premises as unfit for habitation; or
suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of the license issued hereunder.
B. Inspections. Failure by the property owner to schedule an inspection
during the license term shall be a violation of this chapter. The
inspections shall be completed as follows:
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of Danville shall
inspect all units once a year and record the inspection on a written
inspection report. The inspection report shall be signed and dated
by the owner of the residential rental unit or his or her manager.
Inspections may be made by the Code Officer anytime within the
said year.
(2) A copy of the report shall be provided to the owner, and the owner
shall provide a copy to any tenant named on the lease at the time of
the inspection.
(3) Findings of violations.
(a) The owner of any parcel of real estate containing a residential
rental unit which has been found to be in noncompliance with
this chapter shall be subject to a notice of violation with a time
frame for corrective actions.
(b) Any residential rental unit which has been found to be in
noncompliance with this chapter shall be subject to
reinspection by the Code Enforcement Officer.
(c) Vacant properties with an open violation shall not be occupied
unless and until the violation has been corrected and the unit is
approved as meeting the criteria of this chapter and any other
applicable codes of the Borough of Danville.
(4) The Code Enforcement Officer may reinspect any property, subject
to a notice of violation upon expiration of the corrective action
deadline or upon notice from the owner that the violations have
been rectified.
§ 141-5 DANVILLE CODE § 141-5
1:154
§ 141-6. Duties of occupant.
(5) If a rental unit has remained in full compliance for a period of two
years, then the property's routine inspection interval may be
extended to two years. This extension will automatically be revoked
upon discovery of violations by inspection or complaint.
(6) The owner of any property containing or upon which is erected a
residential rental unit shall pay a fee for each and every
reinspection to cover the cost of a reinspection each time a
reinspection is required under the terms of this chapter or each
time a reinspection is requested by the Code Enforcement Officer
to determine compliance with this chapter or any other applicable
ordinances of the Borough of Danville. The fee set forth herein shall
be set, increased or decreased by a resolution of Danville Borough
Council.65
(7) Search warrant. Upon a showing of probable cause that a violation
of this chapter or any other ordinance of the Borough of Danville
has occurred, or is ongoing, the Code Enforcement Officer may
apply to the issuing authority having jurisdiction for a search
warrant to enter and inspect the premises. In the event the
residential rental unit is unoccupied, the requested search warrant
shall be directed to the owner or manager of the unit. In the event
the residential rental unit is occupied, the requested search
warrant shall be directed to the occupant of the unit.
A. General. The occupant shall comply with all obligations imposed upon
occupants by this chapter, all applicable codes and ordinances of the
Borough of Danville and all applicable provisions of state law.
B. Health and safety regulations.
(1) Occupants shall keep that part of the structure which they occupy
or control in a sanitary condition.
(2) Occupants shall deposit in containers and dispose of all rubbish,
garbage and other waste and recyclable materials in accordance
with applicable ordinances, laws and regulations.
C. Residential use. The occupant shall, unless otherwise permitted by
applicable law or ordinance, occupy or use his or her rental unit for no
other purpose than as a residence.
D. Compliance with rental agreement. The occupant shall comply with all
lawful provisions of the rental agreement entered into between the
owner and the occupant.
E. Damage to premises. The occupant shall not intentionally cause, nor
permit or tolerate others to cause, damage to the premises. Conduct
65.Editor's Note: The current Fee Resolution is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 141-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-6
1:155
§ 141-7. Licenses and inspection.
which results in damages in excess of $500 shall be considered a
violation of this chapter.
F. Inspection of premises. The occupant shall permit inspections of any
premises by the Code Enforcement Officer at reasonable times, and
upon 48 hours' notice from the owner. Refusal to allow entry of the
residential rental unit by the Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough
of Danville to inspect the said unit shall be a violation of this chapter.
G. Peaceful enjoyment. The occupant shall conduct himself or herself and
require other persons, including, but not limited to, guests on the
premises and within his or her rental unit with his or her consent, to
conduct themselves in a manner that will not disturb the peaceful
enjoyment of the premises by others, and that will not disturb the
peaceful enjoyment of adjacent or nearby dwellings by the persons
occupying same.
H. Reporting of violation or eviction. All tenants who have been evicted
due to violations of § 141-6, Duties of occupant, or otherwise found
guilty of violations of § 141-6, if asked, shall answer truthfully and shall
advise their new landlord if they have been evicted from a residence for
violating the terms and conditions of this chapter.
A. License requirement.
(1) As a prerequisite to entering into a rental agreement or permitting
the occupancy of any rental unit [except as provided in Subsection
A(3) below], the owner of every such rental unit shall be required to
apply for and obtain a rental occupancy license for each rental unit.
An inspection must also be done on each rental unit as prescribed
in this chapter.
(2) A rental occupancy license shall be required for all residential
rental units.
(3) The following categories of rental properties shall not require
licenses, and shall not, therefore, be subject to the permitting
provisions of this chapter:
(a) Owner-occupied dwelling units, provided that not more than
two unrelated individuals, in addition to the immediate
members of the owner's family, occupy the dwelling unit at any
given time.
(b) Hotels and motels.
(c) Hospitals and nursing homes.
(d) Bed-and-breakfast units as defined in the Borough's Zoning
Ordinance.66
§ 141-6 DANVILLE CODE § 141-7
1:156
§ 141-8. Enforcement; disciplinary actions.
(e) Federally subsidized housing maintained by the Montour
County Housing Authority.
(4) The application for the rental occupancy license shall be in a form
as determined by the Borough.
(5) In the event a rental occupancy license is denied by the Code
Office, the owner shall have the right to appeal to the Rental
Registration and Property Maintenance Hearing Board of the
Borough of Danville within 30 days of mailing of the notice of denial
of the application. The hearing before the Rental Registration and
Property Maintenance Hearing Board shall be governed by the
Local Agency Law.67
B. Annual license term, fee and occupancy limit.
(1) Each rental occupancy license shall have an annual term running
from January 1 of a particular year through December 31 of that
year.
(2) Upon application for a rental occupancy license and prior to
issuance or renewal thereof, each owner/applicant shall pay to the
Borough an annual license fee, in an amount to be established,
from time to time, by resolution of the Council of the Borough of
Danville.
(a) Rental units remaining in full compliance for a period of two
years as stated in § 141-5B(5) are subject to only the annual
license fee on noninspection years.
(b) Fees received January 1 to March 31 will be set at face value.
From April 1 to May 30, a late fee of $10 will be assessed. From
June 1 to July 31, a late fee of $25 will be assessed. After July
31, except for the year of 2012, nonregistration will be deemed
a violation of this chapter, at which time a citation will be filed,
including the cost of the license and late fees.
(3) The rental occupancy license shall indicate thereon the maximum
number of occupants in each rental unit.
(4) No rental occupancy license shall be issued if the owner has any
unpaid fines and costs arising from enforcement of this chapter or
any other ordinance of the Borough of Danville or if the owner is
delinquent in payment of any other fees to the Borough of Danville
pertaining to the rental unit.
66.Editor's Note: See Ch. 260, Zoning.
67.Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 551 et seq.
§ 141-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-8
1:157
A. General. The Code Enforcement Officer may initiate disciplinary action
against an owner resulting in a formal warning, nonrenewal,
suspension or revocation of the owner's license and/or fines for
violating any provision of this chapter that imposes a duty upon the
owner and/or for failing to regulate the breach by occupants as
provided for herein.
B. Grounds for imposing discipline. Any of the following may subject an
owner or occupant to discipline as provided for in this chapter:
(1) Operating a rental unit without a rental agreement and/or a rental
occupancy license.
(2) Failure to maintain a property in accordance with this chapter and
other codes and ordinances of the Borough of Danville.
(3) Failure to abate a violation of Borough codes and ordinances that
apply to the premises within the time directed by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
(4) Refusal to permit the inspection of the premises by the Code
Enforcement Officer as required by this chapter.
(5) Failure to take steps to remedy and prevent violations of this
chapter by occupants of residential rental units as required by this
chapter.
(6) Failure to regulate the conduct of tenants, occupants and guests as
required by this chapter.
(7) Failure to evict occupants after having been directed to do so by
the Code Enforcement Officer as provided for in this chapter.
C. Criteria for applying discipline.
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer, when recommending or applying
discipline, and the Rental Registration and Property Maintenance
Hearing Board, when applying discipline, shall consider the
following:
(a) The effect of the violation on the health, safety and welfare the
occupants of the residential rental unit and other residents of
the premises.
(b) The effect of the violation on the neighborhood.
(c) Whether the owner has prior violations of this chapter and
other ordinances of the Borough or has received notices of
violations as provided for in this chapter.
(d) Whether the owner has previously been subject to disciplinary
proceedings under this chapter.
(e) The effect of disciplinary action on the occupants.
§ 141-8 DANVILLE CODE § 141-8
1:158
(f) The action taken by the owner to remedy the violation and to
prevent future violations, including any written plan submitted
by the owner.
(g) The policies and lease language employed by the owner to
manage the rental unit to enable the owner to comply with the
provisions of this chapter.
(2) In addition to applying discipline as set forth above, the Code
Enforcement Officer may recommend, and the Rental Registration
and Property Maintenance Hearing Board may impose upon the
existing or subsequent licenses, reasonable conditions related to
fulfilling the purposes of this chapter.
D. Abatement of violations. Upon receiving notice of any code violations
from the Code Enforcement Officer, or receiving any disorderly conduct
report, the owner shall promptly take action, or cause the necessary
action to be taken, to abate any offending condition and eliminate the
violation within the time specified in the notice, and in the event of a
disorderly conduct report, to correct the situation which resulted in the
disorderly conduct report.
(1) Each day during which any owner, landlord or tenant of a
residential rental unit violates any provision of this chapter shall
constitute a separate offense.
(2) First occurrence of an offending condition, failure to correct the
offending condition or recurrence of the offending condition shall
be subject to the following:
(a) First offense. The owner will receive a notice of violation,
which will serve as a formal warning.
(b) Second offense within one year. The owner will receive a
follow-up notice of violation and shall be subject to fines as set
forth in this chapter.
(c) Third and subsequent offenses within one year of the previous
occurrence. The owner shall be subject to additional fines as
set forth in this chapter, and the owner shall be subject to
nonrenewal, suspension or revocation of the rental unit
license.
Exception: If a landlord can demonstrate that the third offense
was under a lease agreement with a new tenant, it will be
treated under the provisions of a second offense, except for
violations of the disorderly conduct regulations outlined in
§ 141-8B(6), Failure to regulate the conduct of tenants,
occupants, and guests as required by this chapter. Fines may
still be doubled under this exception.
§ 141-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-8
1:159
(d) A violation of § 141-6H, Reporting of violation or eviction, shall
render a defendant subject to fines as set forth in this chapter
on the first offense.
(3) Definition of options.
(a) Notice of Violation/Formal Warning: formal written notification
of at least one violation of this chapter.
(b) Nonrenewal: the denial of the privilege to apply for license
renewal after expiration of the license term. The Borough will
permit the owner to maintain occupants in the premises until
the end of the license term but will not accept applications for
renewal of the license until a time set by the Code Enforcement
Officer or by the Rental Registration and Property
Maintenance Hearing Board.
(c) Suspension: the immediate loss of the privilege to rent a
residential rental unit for a period of time set by the Code
Enforcement Officer or the Rental Registration and Property
Maintenance Hearing Board. The owner, after the expiration of
the suspension period, may apply for license renewal without
the need to show cause why the owner's privilege to apply for a
license should be reinstated. Within five days of suspension,
the owner shall take steps to evict the occupants.
(d) Revocation: the immediate loss of the privilege to rent a
residential rental unit for a period of time set by the Code
Enforcement Officer or the Rental Registration and Property
Maintenance Hearing Board and the loss of the privilege to
apply for renewal of the license at the expiration of the time
period. Within five days of the loss of the privilege to rent, the
owner shall take steps to evict the occupants.
(e) Penalties. Any owner, landlord or tenant of a residential unit
which violates any provision of this chapter shall upon
conviction thereof be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than
$100 and not to exceed $300 and costs of prosecution or, in
default of payment of such fines and costs, to undergo
imprisonment for not more than 30 days. Each day that a
violation continues after due notice has been served shall be
deemed a separate offense. [Amended 11-4-2014 by Ord.
No. 521]
(4) Fines as imposed through this chapter shall be collected as
allowable by law.
(5) In addition to the fines set forth herein, the Borough of Danville
shall be entitled to reasonable attorney's fees incurred in enforcing
this chapter. The said fees shall be added to any penalties set forth
above.
§ 141-8 DANVILLE CODE § 141-8
1:160
(6) In the event that a second violation of disruptive conduct occurs
within a twelve-month period, involving the same occupant or
occupants, the Code Enforcement Officer may direct the owner to
evict the occupant or occupants who have violated this chapter of
the Borough of Danville Code and to not permit the occupant to
occupy the premises during any subsequent period.
E. Notice of violation. A notice of violation shall, at a minimum, set forth
the following:
(1) Street address of the property.
(2) Date of the inspection.
(3) Name of the inspector.
(4) List of violations.
(5) Time frame/deadline for corrective action.
(6) Potential or actual penalties.
(7) Right of the owner to appeal the Code Enforcement Officer's
findings.
(8) Transfer of ownership clause.
F. Appeals.
(1) Any owner shall have the right to appeal the decision of the Code
Enforcement Officer by submitting in writing to the Borough
Secretary or Borough Manager, within 20 days from the date
printed on the notice, a detailed statement of the appeal, including
the grounds therefor and the reason(s) alleged as to why the
determination of the Code Enforcement Officer is incorrect or
should be overturned, and a statement of relief requested by the
appellant. Such notice of appeal shall be required to be submitted
on a form to be prescribed therefor by the Borough Council, and
signed by the appellant. There is hereby imposed a fee for filing of
such appeals, the amount of which shall be determined and
established, from time to time, by resolution of the Borough
Council.
(2) Upon receipt of such an appeal in proper form, accompanied with
the requisite filing fee, the Borough Secretary or Borough Manager
shall schedule a hearing within 20 days.
(3) The appellant, the Code Enforcement Officer and the owners of
properties within a radius of 300 feet from the premises for which
the license is at issue shall receive written notice of the hearing on
the appeal.
(4) The Rental Registration and Property Maintenance Hearing Board
shall hold a hearing on the appeal, which shall be conducted in
§ 141-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-8
1:161
§ 141-9. Miscellaneous provisions.
accordance with the Local Agency Law, 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 551 et seq.
A decision on the appeal shall be rendered either immediately
following the appeal hearing or within 30 days thereafter. The
decision shall be reduced to writing within 45 days of the date
of the appeal hearing. Appeals from any decision of the Rental
Registration and Property Maintenance Hearing Board shall be to
the Court of Common Pleas of Montour County, Pennsylvania.
(5) The Property Maintenance Hearing Board of the Borough of
Danville shall hereafter be known as the Rental Registration and
Property Maintenance Hearing Board.
G. Delivery of notification.
(1) All notices shall be sent to the owner and manager, if applicable, by
certified mail or have receipt otherwise verified. In the event that
the notice is returned by the postal authorities marked "unclaimed"
or "refused," then the Code Enforcement Officer shall attempt
delivery by personal service on the owner or manager, if applicable.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall also post the notice at a
conspicuous place on the premises.
(2) If personal service cannot be accomplished after a reasonable
attempt to do so, the notice may be sent to the owner or manager at
the address stated on the most current license application for the
premises in question, by regular first-class mail, postage prepaid. If
such notice is not returned by the postal authorities within five
days of its deposit in the United States Mail, then it shall be
deemed to have been delivered to and received by the addressee on
the fifth day following its deposit in the United States Mail, and all
time periods set forth above shall thereupon be calculated from
said fifth day.
H. Transfer of ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any
dwelling unit or structure who has received a compliance order or upon
whom a notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage or
otherwise dispose of such dwelling unit or structure to another until the
provisions of the compliance order or notice of violation have been
complied with, or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee,
transferee or mortgagee a true copy of any compliance order or notice
of violation issued by the code official and shall furnish to the code
official a signed and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee
or mortgagee acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or
notice of violation and fully accepting the responsibility without
condition for making the corrections or repairs required by such
compliance order or notice of violation.
A. Owners severally responsible. If any rental unit is owned by more than
one person, in any form of joint tenancy, as a partnership or otherwise,
§ 141-8 DANVILLE CODE § 141-9
1:162
Chapter 155
MARKET, CURBSTONE
§ 155-1. Time and location of market. [Amended 9-8-1998 by Ord.
No. 397; 4-10-2001 by Ord. No. 426]
The curbstone market shall be held on both sides of Mill Street, from
Mahoning Street to Bloom Street, on Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and
Saturday of each and every week. The market shall close at 1:00 p.m. and
all vendors must vacate the market by 1:30 p.m. No vendor shall occupy
any portion of the street herein set apart for market purposes in such a
manner as to obstruct public travel. The times and location of market may
be changed by Council for special occasions.
§ 155-2. Vehicle location regulations. [Amended 4-10-2001 by Ord.
No. 426]
No car, truck or other vehicle containing articles for market shall be
permitted to occupy the street in any other position than being legally
parked. No person attending market shall be permitted to occupy by a table,
each person shall be jointly and severally responsible for the duties
imposed under the terms of this chapter and shall be severally subject
to prosecution for the violation of this chapter.
B. Nonexclusive remedies. The penalty provisions of this chapter and the
license nonrenewal, suspension and revocation procedures provided in
this chapter shall be independent, nonmutually exclusive separate
remedies, all of which shall be available to the Borough as may be
deemed appropriate for carrying out the purposes of this chapter. The
remedies and procedures provided in this chapter for violation hereof
are not intended to supplant or replace to any degree the remedies and
procedures available to the Borough in the case of a violation of any
other code or ordinance of the Borough, whether or not such other code
or ordinance is referenced in this chapter and whether or not an
ongoing violation of such other code or ordinance is cited as the
underlying grounds for a finding of a violation of this chapter.
C. Confidentiality. All registration and contact information shall be
maintained in a confidential manner by the Code Enforcement Officer
and shall only be utilized for the purpose of enforcement of this chapter
by the Code Enforcement Officer and Rental Registration and Property
Maintenance Hearing Board.
D. Severability. If any section or provision of this chapter is adjudged by a
court of competent jurisdiction to be unlawful, void, or unenforceable,
all the remaining sections and provisions of this chapter shall remain in
full force and effect.
§ 141-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-2
1:163
bench, box or otherwise more than 1/2 the width of the sidewalk, measuring
from the sidewalk curb inward.
§ 155-3. Payment of parking meter fees required.
There shall be no fee for any person attending the market for the purpose
of selling such commodities as come within the meaning of this chapter, but
such person must pay the parking meter fees for the parking stalls occupied
by his or her market stand.
§ 155-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more than $300 and costs
of such proceedings or, upon default of payment of such fines and costs,
by imprisonment in the county jail for a term of not more than 30 days.
The continuation of such violation for each successive day shall constitute
a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or permitting the
continuation of the violation may be punished as provided above for each
separate offense.
§ 155-5. Enforcement. [Added 4-10-2001 by Ord. No. 426]
It shall be the duty of the Danville Borough Police Department and the
Danville Borough Health Officer to enforce the terms of this chapter.
Chapter 161
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 81. Peace and good order — See Ch. 167.
§ 161-1. Unnecessary noises prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make or continue, or cause to be made
or continued, any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which
either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health,
peace or safety of others, or to create any unreasonably loud, disturbing and
unnecessary noise of such character, intensity or duration as is detrimental
to the life or health of any individual or persons within the limits of the
Borough of Danville.
§ 155-2 DANVILLE CODE § 161-2
1:164
§ 161-2. Enumeration of prohibited noises. [Amended 7-14-1992 by
Ord. No. 353; 4-10-2001 by Ord. No. 427]
The following acts are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary
noises in violation of this chapter, but such enumeration shall not be
constructed to be a limitation or be deemed to be exclusive:
A. The use of a sound truck with sound amplification in operation.
B. The sounding of any horn or signaling devices on any vehicle except as
a danger warning, or the sounding of any horn or signaling device for
any unnecessary and unreasonable period of time in times of traffic
holdups, or the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by
engine exhaust.
C. The playing of any radio, phonograph, television, musical instrument or
other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in
such manner or volume as to unreasonably annoy or disturb others in
the vicinity, particularly during the hours between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m.
D. The use or permission to use on the public streets of the Borough any
loudspeaker, amplifier, radio, phonograph or other machine or device
for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of
the public.
E. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing in the public streets,
particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., so as to
annoy and disturb the quiet comfort or repose of persons in any office,
dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of any persons in the
vicinity.
F. Animals.
(1) The keeping of any animal or bird which causes frequent, long
continued or disturbing noises.
(2) For any person to suffer or permit any dog owned, kept, maintained
or in the custody or control of such person to disturb the peace and
quiet of the neighborhood by barking, howling, whining or making
other loud or unusual noises. A presumption of disturbance of the
peace and quiet of the neighborhood shall arise when barking,
howling, whining or making other loud or unusual noises occurs
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
G. The blowing of any locomotive whistle or whistle attached to any
stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work
or as a warning of distress, fire or danger or upon the request of proper
Borough authorities.
H. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine,
stationary internal-combustion engine, motor vehicle or motorboat
§ 161-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 161-2
1:165
§ 161-3. Noise measurement.
In residential or commercial districts, when measured at a point 25 feet
distant from an establishment wherein a noise originates, or at the lot line,
whichever is closer, and in manufacturing districts, when measured at any
point on the boundary of the nearest residential district:
engine, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively
prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
I. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so
loaded or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating,
grinding, rattling or other noise.
J. The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with the
loading or unloading of any vehicle or the opening and destruction of
bales, boxes, crates and containers.
K. The erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration or repair of
any building other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on
weekdays, except in cases of urgent necessity in the interest of public
health or safety; provided, however, that a permit therefor has been
obtained from the Building Inspector. Such permit may be granted
while the emergency continues for a period not to exceed three days,
and may be renewed for a period of three days or less.
L. The creation of any excessive or disturbing noise on any street adjacent
to any school, institution of learning, church or court, provided
conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating the proximity
of such institutions.
M. The operation, between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., of any pile
driver, well driller, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or
electric hoist or other appliances, the use of which is attended by loud
or unusual noise.
N. The operation of any blower, fan or any internal-combustion engine
resulting in noise from the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless
such blower, fan or engine is equipped with a sound-deadening muffler.
O. The use of any drum, loudspeaker, bell or other instrument to attract
attention to any performance or any sale or display of merchandise.
A. The sound-pressure level radiated continuously from a facility between
the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. shall not exceed the following in
any octave band of frequency:
§ 161-2 DANVILLE CODE § 161-3
1:166
§ 161-4. Exclusions.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to apply to church bells or
chimes.
Frequency Band
(cycles per second)
Sound Pressure Level
(in decibels re 0.0002
microbar)
20 to 75 69
75 to 150 54
150 to 300 47
300 to 600 41
600 to 1,200 37
1,200 to 2,400 34
2,400 to 4,800 31
4,800 to 9,600 28
B. If the noise is not smooth and continuous and is not radiated at
nighttime, one or more of the following corrections shall be added to or
subtracted from each of the decibel levels given above:
Types of Operation or Character of
Noise
Correction
(in decibels)
Daytime operation only +5
Noise source operates less than 20%
of the time
+5*
Noise source operates less than 5% of
the time
+10*
Noise source operates less than 1% of
the time
+15*
Noise of impulsive character
(hammering, etc.)
-5
Noise of periodic character (hum,
screech, etc.)
-5
* NOTE: Apply one of these corrections only.
C. The sound-pressure level shall be measured with a sound-level meter
and an octave-band analyzer that conforms to the specifications
published by the American Standards Association, New York, New York.
§ 161-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 161-5
1:167
§ 161-5. Violations and penalties.68
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more than $600 and costs
of such proceedings or, upon default of payment of such fines and costs,
by imprisonment in the county jail for a term of not more than 30 days.
The continuation of such violation for each successive day shall constitute
a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or permitting the
continuation of the violation may be punished as provided above for each
separate offense.
§ 161-6. Enforcement. [Added 4-10-2001 by Ord. No. 427]
It shall be the duty of the Danville Borough Police Department to enforce
the terms of the chapter and secure compliance with the requirements
thereof.
Chapter 167
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 161. Reckless driving — See Ch. 188.
§ 167-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the certain "Ordinance of the
Borough of Danville Promoting Public Peace, Order, Safety and Health and
Protecting Property."
§ 167-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and
words in the singular number include the plural. The word "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Danville.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
§ 167-3. Prohibited acts.
No person shall commit any of the following acts:
68.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 161-5 DANVILLE CODE § 167-3
1:168
A. Disorderly conduct. No person in the Borough shall disturb, engage in
any activity which tends to disturb or aid and abet in disturbing the
peace of the general public by loud, unruly, boisterous, profane, violent,
tumultuous, offensive or obstreperous language or conduct, and no
person shall knowingly permit such conduct upon any premises owned
or possessed by him or under his control.
B. Assault and battery. No person in the Borough shall beat, strike, wound
or inflict violence on another or fight another, except in properly
licensed boxing exhibitions, or assault another with a lethal weapon,
instrument or thing with the intent to commit upon the person of
another any bodily injury.
C. Motor vehicle operation. No person shall operate a motor vehicle in
such condition or in such manner so as to cause any excessive, unusual
or avoidable noise, such as acceleration and braking to cause tires
thereof to squeal.
D. Vagrancy.
(1) No person in the Borough shall have the status or condition of a
"vagrant." The following persons shall be deemed vagrants and,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to penalties provided herein.
(a) Loitering. Any person found idling, lingering, standing,
strolling or loitering in, about or upon any street, alley or other
public way or public place or at any public gathering or
assembly or in or around any store, shop or business or
commercial establishment or on any property or place without
lawful business thereon or therein, and conducting himself in a
lewd, wanton or lascivious manner in speech or behavior or
conducting himself in such a manner as to provoke a
disturbance or to annoy others or to disturb others nearby in
their peaceful use and enjoyment of said street, alley or other
public way or public place or any store, shop or business or
commercial establishment or any private property or place.
(b) Burglars' tools. Any person upon whose person or in whose
possession shall be found any instrument, tool or other
implement for picking locks or pockets or any implement that
is usually employed or that reasonably may be inferred to have
been designed to be employed in the commission of any felony,
misdemeanor or the violation of any ordinance and who shall
fail to account satisfactorily for the possession of same.
(c) Unlawful occupancy. Any person occupying, lodging or
sleeping in any vacant or unoccupied barn, garage, shed, shop
or other building or structure or in any vacant lot or in any
automobile, truck, railroad car or other vehicle, without
owning the same or without the permission of the owner or
person entitled to the possession of the same.
§ 167-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-3
1:169
(d) About at unusual hours. Any person who wanders about or who
is found about the streets, alleys or other public ways or places
at late or unusual hours in the night without any visible or
lawful business and not giving a satisfactory account of
himself.
(e) Illegal association. Any person who keeps, operates, frequents,
lives in or is employed in any house or other establishment of ill
fame or who (whether married or single) engages in or
commits acts of fornication, or perversion, for hire.
(f) Illegal employment. Any person who frequents or loafs or idles
in or around or is the occupant of or is employed in any
gambling establishment or establishment where intoxicating
liquor is sold without a license.
(g) Fraudulent schemes. Any person who shall engage in any
fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain money or other
valuable thing from others, or any person who aids or assists
such trick, device or scheme.
(h) Concealing stolen property. Any person who keeps a place
where lost or stolen property is concealed.
(i) All persons who by the common law are vagrants, whether
embraced in any of the foregoing classifications or not.
(2) No person shall loiter, congregate, park, stop or use private or
public property properly posted by the owner thereof, except for
the specific purposes of said property and during the times posted.
E. Unlawful to disturb religious worship. No person in the Borough shall
disquiet or disturb any congregation or assembly for religious worship
by making a noise, or by rude or indecent behavior or profane
discourse, within their place of worship or so near the same as to
disturb the order or solemnity of the meeting.
F. Drinking of intoxicating beverages.
(1) No person in any park or on any street or on any public area or
private area not owned by the person involved, in the Borough,
shall have in his possession alcoholic beverages in open containers
for consumption, nor shall any person drink alcoholic beverages at
any time in any park, on any street, in any public area or on any
private property not owned by the person or persons charged.
[Amended 5-12-2009 by Ord. No. 497]
(a) The above prohibition shall not be applicable to the possession
of alcoholic beverages in sealed containers.
(b) The above prohibition shall not be applicable to the
transportation of alcoholic beverages within the Borough in
sealed containers or the transportation by proper persons of
§ 167-3 DANVILLE CODE § 167-3
1:170
§ 167-4. Offenses against public safety.
§ 167-5. Offenses against property.
alcoholic beverages in open containers from one location in the
Borough to another.
(c) The above prohibition shall not be applicable to the possession
and consumption of alcoholic beverages by patrons of outdoor
dining areas located along public sidewalks of the Borough,
provided such possession and consumption of alcoholic
beverages is occurring within a designated dining area
permitted by the Borough of Danville.
(2) Possession and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages by juveniles.
(a) It shall be unlawful for a minor to purchase, possess and/or
consume alcoholic beverages on or about any private property
within the Borough or on any street, walkway, club or public
property.
(b) Possession of an alcoholic beverage by a juvenile or by an adult
in a group of two or more persons on said street, walkway, club
or public property, in open containers, shall be presumed to be
in the possession of all.
(c) A minor or juvenile within the Borough having consumed
alcoholic beverages shall be presumed to have consumed
alcoholic beverages within the Borough.
A. Possession of burglars' tools. No person in the Borough shall possess
any nippers known as burglars' nippers, any picklock, skeleton key, key
to be used with bit or bits, jimmy or any other burglars' instruments or
tools of whatever kind or description, unless it be shown that such
possession is innocent or for lawful purposes.
B. Throwing of missiles. No person in the Borough shall throw any stones,
snowball, cans, bottles or other missiles upon or at any vehicle.
A. Against public and private property.
(1) Injury or removal. No person in the Borough shall willfully,
maliciously or wantonly injure, deface, destroy or remove real
property or improvements thereto or movable or personal property
belonging to the Borough or to any citizen or person in the
Borough.
(2) Scattering rubbish. No person in the Borough shall throw or permit
to be deposited or scattered upon any sidewalk, alley, street, bridge
or public passageway or upon any private property any paper,
waste, trash, refuse or other material of a like kind.
§ 167-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-5
1:171
§ 167-6. Violations and penalties.69
Chapter 170
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
§ 170-1. Definitions; word usage.
(3) Posting notices. No person in the Borough shall fasten in any way
any show card, poster or advertising device upon public property in
the Borough unless authorized to do so by Borough Council.
B. Against public property.
(1) Tampering. No person in the Borough shall tamper with, injure,
deface, destroy or remove any sign, notice, marker, fire alarm box,
fireplug, topographical survey monument or any other personal
property erected or placed by the Borough.
(2) Obstructing passageways. No person in the Borough shall place or
erect upon public way or passageway to any building an
obstruction of any type, provided that this prohibition shall not
prevent the duly authorized or required placing of temporary
barriers of warning signs for the purpose of safeguarding the
public.
(3) Removal of earth. No person in the Borough shall move, disturb or
take any earth, stone or other material from any public street, alley,
park or other public ground.
A. Any person violating any provision of § 167-3A through F of this chapter
shall, upon conviction therefor before the Magisterial District Judge, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300 restitution for damages
caused and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment thereof,
shall undergo imprisonment for not more than 90 days for the first
offense and a fine of not more than $300 and costs of prosecution for
the second and subsequent offenses and, in default thereof, to undergo
imprisonment for not more than 90 days.
B. Any person violating any provisions of § 167-4A and B and § 167-5A and
B of this chapter shall, upon conviction therefor before the Magisterial
District Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300 and
costs of prosecution for the first offense and a fine of not more than
$300 and costs of prosecution for the second and each subsequent
offense and, in default of payment thereof, shall undergo imprisonment
for not more than 90 days.
A. Words and terms defined. As used in this chapter, the following terms
shall have the meanings indicated:
69.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 167-5 DANVILLE CODE § 170-1
1:172
§ 170-2. License required.
No person shall engage in peddling in the Borough of Danville without first
acquiring a license as herein provided.
§ 170-3. Application for license; transfer prohibited.
NO SOLICITATION LIST — A list of residential properties located
within the Borough of Danville indicating that the owner/occupant of
that address does not wish to have a person or persons peddling at
that location. This list does not apply to Subsection (1)(a) through (f) of
the definition of "peddling." This list will be organized alphabetically by
street name and will be updated when new addresses are added. A copy
of this list will be provided to the peddler when he or she acquires a
Danville Borough solicitation permit. A copy of this list will be available
at the Danville Police Department.
PEDDLER — Any person who shall engage in peddling, as defined
below.
PEDDLING — Engaging in selling, peddling, canvassing, soliciting or
taking of orders, either by sample or otherwise, for any goods, wares
or merchandise, upon any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks, public or
private parking lots or from house to house within the Borough of
Danville.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, firm, associate or
corporation.
The word "peddling" shall not apply to:
(a) Farmers selling their own produce and/or goods;
The sale of goods, wares, and merchandise, donated by the
owners thereof, or the proceeds of which sale are to be applied
to a local charitable or philanthropic purpose;
(b)
Any manufacturer or producer in the sale of bread and bakery
products, meat and meat products or milk or milk products;
(c)
Children residing within the Danville Area School District
under the age of 18 years of age who take orders for and
deliver newspapers, greeting cards, candy, bakery products,
and the like, or who represent the Boy Scouts or Girl Scouts;
(d)
(e) Civic organizations located within Danville, Pennsylvania;
(f) Local businesses located within Danville, Pennsylvania.
(1)
B. Word usage. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, and
the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
A. Each and every person desiring to engage in selling, canvassing,
soliciting or peddling in the Borough of Danville must apply in person to
§ 170-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-3
1:173
the Danville Borough Police Department for said license. Each
applicant, as well as any supervisor/manager accompanying said
applicant, will be required to personally produce the following:
(1) A valid state-issued driver's license or valid state-issued
identification card, which must be in their possession. If the
applicant is unable to produce a valid state-issued driver's license
or valid state-issued identification card, a permit will not be issued
to that individual.
(2) Valid state-issued registration cards for any and all vehicles
soliciting in the Borough of Danville and a description of said
vehicles.
(3) Such individual must provide a current address and phone number
of their residence. If the applicant or supervisor is temporarily
staying at a hotel or motel while soliciting in the Borough of
Danville, they must provide the following: the name of the hotel or
motel, the room number, and the location of the hotel/motel. They
must also provide a cellular phone number for the applicant in the
event Danville Police Department personnel need to speak with the
applicant and/or supervisor in regards to their permit.
(4) Such individual must complete and sign a form indicating if they
have ever been convicted of a crime. If yes, please list.
(5) Such individual must provide the name, address and phone number
of the last two communities who issued them a permit.
(6) Such individual must indicate if they have ever had a solicitation
permit canceled or revoked and the reason why the permit was
canceled or revoked and the location of where the permit was
canceled or revoked.
(7) Such individual must provide a list of the type of goods, wares and
merchandise he/she wishes to peddle; the name of the business
which they represent; the address and phone number for the
business; the name of their immediate supervisor and his/her
contact information.
(8) A photograph will be taken of the individual; one copy of the photo
will be attached to the solicitation permit and a copy will be
retained at Danville Police Department.
B. Once the application is completed, the Danville Police Department shall
conduct a criminal record check of each applicant prior to the issuance
of any permits. Permits will not be issued to any individual who has an
active arrest warrant. A permit may be denied if the applicant has a
criminal arrest history involving violent crimes such as, but not limited
to: rape, robbery, assault, sexual assault or offenses against property
such as, but not limited to, burglary or theft.
§ 170-3 DANVILLE CODE § 170-4
1:174
§ 170-4. License fees.
No license shall be issued under this chapter until a nonrefundable fee of
$25 (per person) has been paid to the Borough of Danville. Each license
shall be good for a period of five business days (defined as Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday) from the date of issue and shall be
renewable upon application to the issuing agent, as long as no complaints
have been filed with the Police Department regarding their permit.
§ 170-5. Issuance of license; exhibition required; license
restrictions.
Upon making application therefor and paying the proper fee, as herein
specified, a license shall be issued to each and every peddler. Such license
shall contain all of the required information. The peddler shall, at all times
while engaged in peddling in the Borough of Danville, carry such license
upon his person and shall exhibit such license, upon request, to all police
officers, Borough Officials, or citizens within the Borough of Danville. No
license under this chapter shall be transferable from one person to another.
No peddler shall engage in selling any product not mentioned upon such
license. No peddler shall solicit any residence on the No Solicitation List.
§ 170-6. Prohibited days and hours of sale.
No person licensed as a peddler under this chapter shall engage in peddling
at any time on Saturday or Sunday or upon any other day of the week before
9:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. Furthermore, no person licensed as a peddler
under this chapter shall engage in peddling on any street, alley, sidewalk
or public or private parking lot when the street is closed by the order of
Danville Borough Council or during any special events approved by the
Borough of Danville, such as, but not limited to, parades, conventions, or
street fairs.
§ 170-7. Prohibited acts by peddlers.
A. No person shall engage in door-to-door solicitation without first
obtaining a Danville Borough solicitation permit. [This does not apply to
persons listed in Subsection (1)(a) through (f) of the definition of
"peddling."]
B. No person shall direct, supervise, or allow any person to engage in
door-to-door solicitation without that person first obtaining a Danville
Borough solicitation permit. [This does not apply to persons listed in
Subsection (1)(a) through (f) of the definition of "peddling."]
C. No peddler shall enter within the perimeter of any residential property
in the Borough of Danville who is listed on the No Solicitation List,
which will be provided to the applicant during the application process.
A copy will also be available at the Danville Police Department, 235 Mill
Street, Danville, Pennsylvania.
§ 170-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-7
1:175
§ 170-8. Record of licenses; supervision of licensees.
Danville Police Department shall keep a record of all licenses issued under
this chapter and shall supervise the activities of all holders of such licenses.
§ 170-9. Suspension of license.
The Chief of Police or his/her designee is hereby authorized to suspend any
and all licenses issued under this chapter to a person or a group of persons
when they deem such suspension to be beneficial to the public health, safety
or morals, or for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or for
giving false information upon any application for a license hereunder.
§ 170-10. Appeals from license suspension.
Any person whose license has been suspended shall be entitled to appear
before the Borough Council at the next regular or special meeting and be
heard in behalf of a request for reinstatement of his license. The Borough
Council shall hear the licensee at that time, if the licensee has given the
Council at least five days' notice in writing of his/her desire for a hearing.
Otherwise, the Council may hear the licensee at that time or may decline
to hear the licensee at that time, in which case it shall schedule a hearing
within five days from that date. Following the hearing, the Council may
reinstate, revoke or continue the suspension of the license for a period not
to exceed five years. No person shall be denied a license or have his license
suspended or revoked except by procedures consistent with due process of
law.
§ 170-11. Violations and penalties.
D. No person licensed as a peddler under this chapter shall hawk or cry his
wares upon any street, alley or sidewalk, or public or private parking lot
in the Borough of Danville, nor shall he/she use any loudspeaker or horn
or any other device for announcing his/her presence by which the
public is annoyed.
E. No person licensed as a peddler under this chapter shall park any
vehicle upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or public or private parking lot
of the Borough in order to sort, rearrange, or clean any of his goods,
wares or merchandise, place or deposit any refuse, or maintain or keep
a street or curbstone market.
F. No person licensed as a peddler under this chapter shall occupy any
fixed location upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or public or private
parking lot in the Borough of Danville for the purpose of peddling, with
or without any stand or counter.
A. Any person violating § 170-7C shall be in violation of the Pennsylvania
Crimes Code, 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 3503(b)(1)(i), regarding criminal
trespassers (defiant trespassers).
§ 170-7 DANVILLE CODE § 170-11
1:176
§ 170-12. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Danville Borough Police Department to enforce
the terms of this chapter and secure compliance with the requirements
thereof.
Chapter 176
POLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets, sidewalks and driveways — See Ch.
216.
§ 176-1. License required.
From and after the passage of this chapter, it shall not be lawful for
any telegraph, telephone, electric light or cable television company, firm,
corporation, person or persons to erect or cause to be erected any
telegraph, telephone, electric light or cable pole or poles in or upon any
public street, lane or alley within the present limits of the Borough of
Danville unless such company, firm, corporation, person or persons seeking
to erect such pole or poles shall first make application to the Borough for
permission to erect the same.
§ 176-2. Application for license; compliance with conditions.
It shall be the duty of said company, firm, corporation, person or persons
to submit to the Borough a written statement specifying the number and
location of the pole or poles, and if permission shall be granted by the
Borough to erect the pole or poles, said company, firms, corporation, person
or persons shall cause the pole or poles to be erected either in accordance
with the statement, or subject to such conditions and modifications as the
Borough may direct.
B. Any person violating any provision of this chapter except § 170-7C shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more than $300
and the cost of such proceedings or, upon default of payment of such
fines and costs, by imprisonment in the county jail for a term of not
more than 30 days. The continuation of such violation for each
successive day shall constitute a separate offense, and the person or
persons allowing or permitting the continuance of the violation may be
punished as provided above for each separate offense.
C. This section is not the exclusive remedy for violation of this chapter. The
penalties of this section are in addition to any other civil or criminal
remedy provided by law.
§ 170-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-3
1:177
§ 176-3. Reporting and correction of violations.
If any company, firm, corporation, person or person shall by the erection
of any pole or poles violate any of the foregoing provisions of this chapter,
it shall be the duty of the Secretary of the said Borough to report such
violation to the Council of the said Borough, who shall thereupon notify
said company, firm, corporation, person or persons to remove said pole or
poles within 10 days from said notice or they shall be subject to the penalty
provided in § 176-7 hereof for the every day the said pole or poles are
allowed to remain after the expiration of the notice.
§ 176-4. Labeling of poles required; effect of noncompliance.
All telegraph, telephone, electric light or cable television poles now or
hereafter erected within the present limits of the said Borough of Danville
shall be designated by the names of initials of the owner or owners of such
poles and each of such poles shall bear a distinctive number, upon which
said names, initial and numbers be legibly marked. Upon the neglect or
refusal of any owner or owners to do so designate and mark such poles
within 30 days after notice to do so, it shall be lawful for the Borough to
order the work to be done and the cost thereof shall be collected from the
owner or owners of such poles.
§ 176-5. Previous privileges not affected; revocation of privileges.
Upon complying with the provisions and requirements of this chapter, the
privileges heretofore granted to such companies, firms, corporations,
person or persons by resolution or ordinance shall not be in any way
affected. The Council of said Borough of Danville, however, reserves the
right to revoke by ordinance any of the privileges mentioned in this chapter
or any other ordinance or resolution.
§ 176-6. Repeal of conflicting privileges.
Any privilege heretofore granted by resolution or ordinance for the erection
and maintenance poles for telegraph, telephone, light or cable television
purposes conflicting herewith is and the same is hereby repealed.
§ 176-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provisions of the chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more than $300 and costs
of such proceedings or, upon default of payment of such fines and costs,
by imprisonment in the county jail for a term of not more than 30 days.
The continuation of such violation for each successive day shall constitute
a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or permitting the
continuation of the violation may be punished as provided above for each
separate offense.
Chapter 180
§ 176-3 DANVILLE CODE § 176-7
1:178
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 102.
Historic District — See Ch. 129.
Snow and ice removal — See Ch. 203.
Streets, sidewalks and driveways — See Ch.
216.
Trees — See Ch. 231.
§ 180-1. Adoption of Property Maintenance Code.70
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of
the Secretary of the Borough of Danville, being marked and designed as
"The International Property Maintenance Code, First Edition, 2009" as
published by the International Code Council be and is hereby adopted
as the Property Maintenance Code of the Borough of Danville, County
of Montour, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania; for the control of buildings
and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said International Property
Maintenance Code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof,
as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed in § 180-4 of this chapter.
§ 180-2. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
Ordinance Number 374 of the Borough of Danville, entitled "Property
Maintenance," and all other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict
herewith are hereby repealed.
§ 180-3. Habitual violation.
The Borough may adopt policies and procedures regarding habitual
violation of the Property Maintenance Code. Such policies and procedures
may include, but not be limited to, provisions for the Borough to abate
violations, bill the habitual violator for the abatement costs incurred by the
Borough, and enter municipal liens against the property where the violation
occurs.
§ 180-4. Additions, insertions and changes.71
The 2009 International Property Maintenance Code is amended and revised
in the following respects:
A. Section 101.1. Insert: "Borough of Danville."
B. Section 102.6. Delete the definition of "Historic buildings" and replace
with: "Historic Buildings. The provisions of this code may not be
70.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
71.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 176-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-4
1:179
mandatory for existing buildings or structures designated as historic
buildings or structures if in the opinion of the Code Official that the
strict interpretation of this code would significantly alter or change the
historic characteristics or features of the buildings or structures and
by not applying the strict interpretation of this code the buildings and
structures would be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and
welfare."
C. Section 103.5, Fees. Delete entire section.
D. Section 106.3, first sentence. Delete "misdemeanor" and replace with
"summary offense."
E. Section 301.2, third sentence. Delete "Occupants of a dwelling unit,
rooming unit or housekeeping unit are responsible for keeping in a
clean, safe and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling unit,
rooming unit, housekeeping unit or premises which they occupy and
control."
F. Section 302.1. Delete and replace with the following: "All owner(s) of all
premises and property in Danville Borough are responsible to keep the
exterior property and premises maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary
condition. The owner(s) shall keep that part of the exterior property in a
clean and sanitary condition. Upon failure of the owner(s) of a property
to keep the exterior property and premises maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition and after service of notice of violation(s), they shall
be subject to prosecution in accordance with Section 106.3 and as
prescribed by the authority having jurisdiction."
G. Section 302.4. Insert "10 inches."
H. Section 302.8. Delete entire selection along with exception.
I. Section 302, Exterior Property Areas, is hereby amended to add Section
302.10, to read as follows:
302.10. Prohibited Furniture. Furniture, appliances and cabinetry,
intended for interior use only, which may be adversely affected by
outdoor weather elements, or which may be susceptible to infestation
by insects or vermin, are prohibited from use or storage in areas where
they may be subject to such conditions. Such prohibited furniture shall
include, but may not be limited to, upholstered couches, chairs and
other fabric-covered articles or surfaces not protected or designed for
exterior use.
J. Section 304.14. Insert: "April 1 to December."
K. Section 308.1. Delete entire the section and replace with the following:
"All owner(s) of properties and premises in Danville Borough shall keep
the exterior property and premises and the interior of all structures free
from accumulation of rubbish or garbage. Upon failure of the owner(s)
to remove the rubbish and garbage from the exterior and interior
§ 180-4 DANVILLE CODE § 180-4
1:180
§ 180-5. Right to do own work.
Nothing contained in said Property Maintenance Code shall prevent an
individual from doing his own work so long as said workmanship conforms
to all aspects of this chapter.
§ 180-6. Saving clause.
Nothing in this chapter or in the Property Maintenance Code hereby
adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding pending in any
court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of
action acquired or existing under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as
cited in § 180-2 of this chapter; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of
any character be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
Chapter 183
QUALITY OF LIFE TICKETING
§ 183-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Quality of Life
Ticketing Ordinance of the Borough of Danville."
§ 183-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a mechanism by means of
issuance of tickets rather than citation to permit a citizen who believes he
may have been in violation to pay the ticket rather than cause the issuance
of a citation and a costly and protracted legal hearing before a judge and
unnecessary appeals. The resolution in this manner is beneficial from a
twofold perspective in that it permits the Borough to maintain and enforce
its laws and permits a citizen so accused to resolve the dispute in a manner
that does not unduly burden the resident by requiring the issuance of a
citation and a court hearing. It also does not deprive the citizen the right to
property and after service of a notice of violation(s), they shall be
subject to prosecution in accordance with Section 106.3 and as
prescribed by the authority having jurisdiction."
L. Section 308.2. Delete "occupant" and replace with "owner."
M. Section 308.3. Delete entire section and replace with the following: "All
owner(s) of all properties in Danville Borough shall dispose of garbage
in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such garbage in an approved
garbage disposal facility or approved garbage containers."
N. Section 602.3. Insert: October 1 to May 15.
O. Section 602.4. Insert: October 1 to May 15.
§ 180-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-2
1:181
dispute the ticket and receive the full benefit of procedural and substantive
due process of law.
§ 183-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OWNER — Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal
or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records
of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or
otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the
estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate
of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group
acting as a unit.
VIOLATOR — See "owner."
§ 183-4. Enforcement.
A. The provisions of any chapter/article/section so enumerated shall be
enforced by police officers and Code Enforcement Officers who are
sworn to uphold and enforce the law of the municipality.
B. The Council may change those sections to be covered under this Quality
of Life Ticketing chapter from time to time by resolution; however, at
the time of the adoption of this chapter, the following chapters/articles/
sections are hereby deemed and ordained to be under the jurisdiction of
this process:
(1) Article II, Garbage and Rubbish Collection, within Chapter 207,
entitled "Solid Waste."
(2) Section 302.4 of Chapter 180, entitled "Property Maintenance
Code, First Edition, 2009, as adopted by reference by Ch. 180,
Property Maintenance."72
(3) Chapter 203, entitled "Snow and Ice Removal."
C. Any violation of the provisions of any chapter/article/section as
enumerated in this chapter may be cause for a violation ticket to be
issued to the violator.
D. A violation ticket shall be served upon the violator in the following
manner:
(1) By handing the ticket or notice of violation to the violator.
(2) By handing it to an adult resident of the subject property.
72.Editor's Note: Refers to Section 302.4 of the International Property Maintenance.
§ 183-2 DANVILLE CODE § 183-4
1:182
§ 183-5. Violation ticket disposition.
A person in receipt of a violation ticket shall have 10 days within which time
to pay the amount of the ticket. In the event the ticket is not paid within 10
days, such failure to pay shall result in the issuance of a nontraffic citation
for the offense as enumerated on the ticket.
§ 183-6. Fines and penalties.
Chapter 185
RAILROADS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 86. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 116.
§ 185-1. Speed at crossings.
No locomotive, train, car or cars shall run over any crossing or on any street
on any railroad within the limits of the Borough of Danville at a greater rate
of speed than 20 miles per hour.
(3) By leaving or affixing the notice or violation ticket to the property
where the violation exists.
(4) By mailing the notice or violation ticket to the violator's address of
record by first-class mail, with a certificate of mailing.
E. Each day after the issuance of a ticket that a violation continues or is
permitted to continue constitutes a separate offense for which a
separate fine may be imposed.
F. If the Borough has corrected a violation, the cost thereof shall be
charged to the owner of the property by whatever means is available to
the municipality.
A. For the first offense of the violation of this chapter within a twelvemonth
period, the tickets shall be issued in the amount of $25.
B. For the second offense of the violation of this chapter within a twelvemonth
period, the tickets shall be issued in the amount of $50.
C. For the third offense of the violation of this chapter within a twelvemonth
period, the tickets shall be issued in the amount of $100.
D. For the fourth offense and all subsequent offenses of the violation of this
chapter within a twelve-month period, the tickets shall be issued in the
amount of $300.
§ 183-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-2
1:183
§ 185-2. Blowing of whistle.
No whistle shall be blown within the limits of the Borough of Danville except
in cases of imminent danger to life or limb or for the purpose of calling
in the flagman, but the bell on any engine moving through the Borough
shall be rung regularly or constantly. Whenever any train is moving with the
engine located in any other part of the train than the front thereof, a person
shall be placed upon the forward end of the car which is placed in front,
who shall ring a bell of sufficient size to warn the traveling public of the
approach of said train.
§ 185-3. Obstructing crossings.
No train shall be stopped or be left standing for a period exceeding five
minutes so as to interfere with the free and uninterrupted use of all the
highways crossing any railroad in said Borough.
§ 185-4. Violations and penalties.
Any railroad company whose conductor, engineer or other person having
charge of any locomotive, train or car violates any of the foregoing
provisions, or any company, conductor, engineer, employee or other person
or persons having the control of any locomotive, train or car who violates
any of the foregoing provisions, shall, upon conviction thereof, or who is
adjudged guilty of the violation thereof, be punishable by a fine of not
more than $300, and costs of such proceedings or, upon default of payment
of such fines and costs, by imprisonment in the county jail for a term of
not more than 30 days. Where the judgment for the penalty is against
the railroad company, the same, together with costs, may be collected by
execution or other legal process as is now or shall be provided by law.
§ 185-5. Orders to clear crossings; complaints and prosecutions.
When any police officer shall find any locomotive, train or car standing on
any street or public crossing longer than five minutes to the interruption
and obstruction of public travel, it shall be his duty to direct the person in
charge of said locomotive, train or car to immediately clear said street or
public crossing, and in case he refuses or unreasonably neglects to clear
said street or public crossing, it shall be the duty of said officer forthwith
to prefer a complaint against the person so offending for a violation of the
provisions of this chapter. Any police officer or any person authorized may
bring the prosecutions or suits for violation of this chapter.
Chapter 188
RECKLESS DRIVING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 167. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 237.
§ 185-2 DANVILLE CODE § 185-5
1:184
§ 188-1. Reckless driving on private property.
Any person who drives any vehicle or tractor on private property without
the consent of the owner or other person in control or possession thereof,
carelessly disregarding the rights or safety of others or in a manner so as
to endanger any person or property, shall be guilty of the charge of reckless
driving on private property.
§ 188-2. Violations and penalties.73
Any person charged with reckless driving on private property shall, upon
conviction before a Magisterial District Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine of
not more than $300 and costs of prosecution and, in default of the payment
thereof, shall undergo imprisonment for not more than 10 days.
Chapter 191
SCHOOL ZONE
§ 191-1. School Zone area.
The area defined as the School Zone shall be at the five-way intersection
beginning at SR011, segment 0070, from Jacobs Alley to Pine Street,
SR2010, segment 0010, from Ferry Street to Pine Street, and Ferry Street,
63 feet south of the crosswalk to Church Alley.
§ 191-2. Speed limit.
There shall be a reduction of the speed limit to 15 miles per hour in this
designated school area from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to 3:15
p.m. on school days.
§ 191-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more than $500 and costs
of such proceedings; or upon default of payment of such fines and costs, by
imprisonment in the county jail for a term of not more than 30 days.
§ 191-4. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Danville Borough Police Department to enforce
the terms of this chapter and secure compliance with the requirement
thereof.
73.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 185-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 191-5
1:185
§ 191-5. When effective.
Effective at such time as the proper signs have been erected, a School Zone
shall be established at the five-way intersection of SR 11, SR2010, and Ferry
Street with a reduced speed limit established at 15 miles per hour.
Chapter 194
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 102.
Streets, sidewalks and driveways — See Ch.
216.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
220.
§ 191-5 DANVILLE CODE § 191-5
1:186
ARTICLE I
Sewer Connections
[Adopted 12-22-1970 by Ord. No. 221 (Ch. 108, Art. I, of the 1975
Code)]
§ 194-1. Definitions and word usage.
A. As used in this article and elsewhere in Article I and Article II of this
chapter, unless otherwise specifically provided, the following terms
shall have the meanings indicated: [Amended 6-13-1984 by Ord. No.
301; 9-12-1989 by Ord. No. 326; 10-9-1990 by Ord. No. 335]
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the "Clean Water Act," as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The Director, in a National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System state with an approved state
pretreatment program, and the Administrator of the Environmental
Protection Agency in a non-National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System state or a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
state without an approved state pretreatment program.
AUTHORITY — The Danville Municipal Authority, a Pennsylvania
municipal authority.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Danville, Montour County, Pennsylvania,
a municipality of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, acting by and
through its Council or, in appropriate cases, acting by and through its
authorized representatives.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the sewage drainage system
of any structure to the lateral of a sewer.
CATEGORICAL STANDARDS — National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards or pretreatment standard.
CONTROL AUTHORITY — The term "control authority" shall refer to
the "approval authority," defined hereinabove, or the superintendent,
if the Borough has an approved pretreatment program under the
provisions of 40 CFR 403.11.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA) — The United States
Environmental Protection Agency, or, where appropriate, the term may
also be used as a designation for the Administrator or other duly
authorized officer of said agency.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that prevents the percolation of
water into the ground. The coverage of land by buildings and other
impervious materials such as asphalt.74
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property upon which there is erected
a structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy
74.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 194-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-1
1:187
or use by human beings or animals and from which structure sanitary
sewage and/or industrial wastes shall be or may be discharged.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any room, group of rooms, building
or other enclosure used or intended for use in the operation of one
business enterprise for manufacturing, processing, cleaning,
laundering or assembling any product, commodity or article or from
which any process waste, as distinct from sanitary sewage, shall be
discharged.
INDUSTRIAL USER — A source of indirect discharge which does not
constitute a discharge of pollutants under regulations issued pursuant
to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342).
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Any and all wastes discharged from an
industrial establishment, other than sanitary sewage.
INTERFERENCE — The inhibition or disruption of the publicly owned
treatment works treatment processes or operations which contribute
to a violation of any requirement of the Borough's National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System permit. The term includes prevention
of sewage sludge use or disposal by the publicly owned treatment
works in accordance with Section 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1345) or
any criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid
Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances
Control Act or more stringent state criteria (including those contained
in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of
SWDA) applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the
publicly owned treatment works.
LATERAL — That part of the sewer system extending from a sewer to
the curbline or, if there shall be no curbline, to the property line, or if no
such lateral shall be provided, then "lateral" shall mean that portion of
or place in a sewer which is provided for the connection of any building
sewer.
LOCAL LIMITS — Limitations on concentrations or mass of specific
pollutants applied to discharges of industrial users, developed under
the authority of 40 CFR 403.8(f).
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or
PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any regulation containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency
in accordance with Section 307(b) and (e) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317)
which applies to a specific category of industrial users.
NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM or
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM PERMIT
— A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342).
NEW SOURCE — Any building, structure, facility or installation from
which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction
of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment
standards under Section 307(c) of the Clean Water Act of 1977, as
§ 194-1 DANVILLE CODE § 194-1
1:188
amended (33 U.S.C. § 1317), which will be applicable to such source if
such pretreatment standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance
with that section.
OWNER — Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a
legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official
records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the
property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the
guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or
administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession
of real property by a court.75
PERSON(S) — Any individual, partnership, company, association,
society, trust, corporation or other group or entity, whether an owner or
lessee of residences, commercial or institutional establishments.76
POLLUTANT — Any substance, including but not limited to dredged
spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage
sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive
materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar
dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste which, when
discharged into water, results in pollution or increases pollution.77
POTW — A publicly owned treatment works as defined by Section 212
of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292). The term includes the sewage collection
system and the sewage treatment plant.78
PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature
of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to
or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into
a publicly owned treatment works. The reduction or alteration can
be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes or process
changes by other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d).
PRIVATE — Not available or used by the public and restricted to one's
personal or family use.[Added 1-6-1992 by Ord. No. 349]
PUBLIC — Any person or group of persons including people from the
general population or employees or customers.[Added 1-6-1992 by
Ord. No. 349]
SANITARY SEWAGE — Normal water-carried household and toilet
wastes from any improved property.
SEWER — Any pipe or conduit, constituting a part of the sewer system,
used or usable for sewage collection purposes.
75.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
76.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
77.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
78.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 194-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-1
1:189
§ 194-2. Use of public sewers required.
SEWER SYSTEM — All facilities, as of any particular time, for
collecting, pumping, transporting and disposing of sanitary sewage and
industrial wastes, owned or operated by the Borough.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER — Any industrial user of the
Borough sewer system who has a discharge flow of 25,000 gallons or
more per average work day or has a flow greater than 5% of the flow
in the Borough's sewer system or has in his wastes toxic pollutants as
defined pursuant to Section 307 of the Act of Pennsylvania Statutes
and rules or is found by the Borough, the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection or the United States Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) to have significant impact, either singly or
in combination with other contributing industries, on the wastewater
treatment system, the quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality or
air emissions generated by the system.
SLUG LOAD — The discharge of pollutants at a rate or concentration
exceeding five times the daily average rate or concentration for a
period exceeding 15 minutes.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget,
1972.
STATE — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
STREET — Any street, road, lane, court, cul-de-sac, alley, public way or
public square.
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed
as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the
Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of Section
307(a) of the Clean Water Act79 or other acts.
USER — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the
contribution of wastewater into the Borough's publicly owned
treatment works.
B. Word usage. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive. [Added
6-13-1984 by Ord. No. 301]
A. The owner of any improved property benefited, improved or
accommodated by a sewer shall connect such improved property with
such sewer, in such manner as this Borough may require, within 45
days after such notice to such owner from this Borough to make such
connection, for the purpose of discharge of all sanitary sewage and
industrial wastes from such improved property, subject to such
limitations and restrictions as shall be established herein or otherwise
shall be established by this Borough from time to time.
79.Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1317.
§ 194-1 DANVILLE CODE § 194-2
1:190
§ 194-3. Building sewers and connections.
B. All sanitary sewage and industrial wastes from any improved property,
after connection of such improved property with a sewer as is required
under Subsection A, shall be conducted into a sewer, subject to such
limitations and restrictions as shall be established herein or otherwise
shall be established by this Borough from time to time.
C. No person shall place or deposit, or permit to be placed or deposited,
upon public or private property within this Borough any sanitary
sewage or industrial wastes in violation of Subsection A. No person
shall discharge or permit to be discharged to any natural outlet within
this Borough any sanitary sewage or industrial wastes in violation of
Subsection A, except where suitable treatment has been provided
which is satisfactory to this Borough.
D. No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle
shall be used and maintained at any time upon any improved property
which has been connected to a sewer or which shall be required under
Subsection A to be connected to a sewer. Every such privy vault,
cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle in existence shall
be abandoned and, at the discretion of this Borough, shall be cleansed
and filled at the expense of the owner of such improved property under
the direction and supervision of this Borough. Any such privy vault,
cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle not so abandoned
and, if required by this Borough, cleansed and filled, shall constitute a
nuisance, and such nuisance may be abated as provided by law, at the
expense of the owner of such improved property.
E. No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle at
any time shall be connected with a sewer.
F. The notice by this Borough to make a connection to a sewer, referred to
in Subsection A, shall consist of a copy of this article, including any
amendments and/or supplements at the time in effect, or a summary of
each section thereof and a written or printed document requiring the
connection in accordance with the provisions of this article and
specifying that such connection shall be made within 45 days from the
date such notice is given. Such notice may be given at any time after a
sewer is in place which can receive and convey sanitary sewage and
industrial wastes for treatment and disposal from the particular
improved property. Such notice shall be served upon the owner in
accordance with law.
A. No person shall uncover, connect with, make any opening into or use,
alter or disturb, in any manner, any sewer or any part of the sewer
system without first obtaining a permit, in writing, from this Borough.
B. Application for a permit required under Subsection A shall be made by
the owner of the improved property served or to be served or by his
duly authorized agent.
§ 194-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-3
1:191
§ 194-4. Rules and regulations governing building sewers and
connections to sewers.
C. No person shall make or cause to be made a connection of any improved
property with a sewer until such person shall have fulfilled each of the
following conditions:
(1) Such person shall have notified the Secretary of this Borough of the
desire and intention to connect such improved property to a sewer.
(2) Such person shall have applied for and obtained a permit as
required by Subsection A.
(3) Such person shall have given the Secretary of this Borough at least
24 hours' notice of the time when such connection will be made, so
that this Borough may supervise and inspect the work of
connection and necessary testing.
D. Except as otherwise provided in this Subsection D, each improved
property shall be connected separately and independently with a sewer
through a building sewer. Grouping of more than one improved
property on one building sewer shall not be permitted, except under
special circumstances and for good sanitary reasons or other good
cause shown, but then only after special permission of this Borough, in
writing, shall have been secured and subject to such rules, regulations
and conditions as may be prescribed by this Borough.
E. All costs and expenses of construction of a building sewer and all costs
and expenses of connection of a building sewer to a sewer shall be
borne by the owner of the improved property to be connected, and such
owner shall indemnify and save harmless this Borough and the
Authority from all loss or damage that may be occasioned, directly or
indirectly, as a result of construction of a building sewer or of
connection of a building sewer to a sewer.
F. A building sewer shall be connected to a sewer at the place designated
by this Borough or the Authority and where the lateral is provided. The
invert of a building sewer at the point of connection, shall be at the
same or a higher elevation than the invert of the sewer. A smooth, neat
joint shall be made, and the connection of a building sewer to the lateral
shall be made secure and watertight.
G. If the owner of any improved property benefited, improved or
accommodated by a sewer, after 45 days' notice from this Borough
requiring the connection of such improved property with a sewer, in
accordance with § 194-2A, shall fail to connect such improved property,
as required, this Borough may make such connection and may collect
from such owner the costs and expenses thereof by a municipal claim,
an action in assumpsit or such other legal proceeding as may be
permitted by law.
§ 194-3 DANVILLE CODE § 194-4
1:192
§ 194-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-14-1975 by Ord. No.
25880]
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more than $600 and costs
of such proceedings or, upon default of payment of such fines and costs,
by imprisonment in the county jail for a term of not more than 30 days.
The continuation of such violation for each successive day shall constitute
a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or permitting the
continuation of the violation may be punished as provided above for each
separate offense.
A. Where an improved property, at the time the connection to a sewer is
required, shall be served by its own sewage disposal system or device,
the existing house sewer line shall be broken on the structure side of
such sewage disposal system or device and attachment shall be made,
with proper fittings, to continue such house sewer line as a building
sewer.
B. No building sewer shall be covered until it has been inspected and
approved by this Borough. If any part of a building sewer is covered
before so being inspected and approved, it shall be uncovered for
inspection at the cost and expense of the owner of the improved
property to be connected to a sewer.
C. Every building sewer of any improved property shall be maintained in a
sanitary and safe operating condition by the owner of such improved
property.
D. Every excavation for a building sewer shall be guarded adequately with
barricades and lights to protect all persons from damage and injury.
Streets, sidewalks and other public property disturbed in the course of
installation of a building sewer shall be restored, at the cost and
expense of the owner of the improved property being connected, in a
manner satisfactory to this Borough.
E. If any person shall fail or refuse, upon receipt of a notice of this
Borough or the Authority, in writing, to remedy any unsatisfactory
condition with respect to a building sewer, within 45 days of receipt of
such notice, this Borough may refuse to permit such person to
discharge sewage and industrial wastes into the sewer system until
such unsatisfactory condition shall have been remedied to the
satisfaction of this Borough.
F. The Borough Council may, from time to time, promulgate such
additional rules and regulations relating to connection with the sewer
system as it shall deem necessary and proper. [Amended 5-14-1975
by Ord. No. 258]
80.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 194-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-6
1:193
§ 194-6. Declaration of purpose.
It is declared that enactment of this article is necessary for the protection,
benefit and preservation of the health, safety and welfare of inhabitants of
this Borough.
§ 194-6 DANVILLE CODE § 194-6
1:194
ARTICLE II
Sewer Rents and Use
[Adopted 12-22-1970 by Ord. No. 222 (Ch. 108, Art. II, of the 1975
Code)]
§ 194-7. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORITY — The Danville Municipal Authority, a Pennsylvania
municipality authority.
BOD (denotes "biochemical oxygen demand") — The quantity of oxygen,
expressed in parts per million, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of
organic matter under standard laboratory procedure for five days at 20°
C. The standard laboratory procedure shall be that found in the latest
edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater,
published by the American Public Health Association, Inc.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Danville, Montour County, Pennsylvania, a
municipality of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, acting by and through
its Council or, in appropriate cases, acting by and through its authorized
representatives.[Amended 10-9-1990 by Ord. No. 335]
DWELLING UNIT — Any room, group of rooms, house trailer or other
enclosure occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters by
a family, other group of persons living together or by persons living alone,
excluding, however, institutional dormitories.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that prevents the percolation of water
into the ground. The coverage of land by buildings and other impervious
materials such as asphalt.81
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property upon which there is erected a
structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use
by human beings or animals and from which structure sanitary sewage and/
or industrial wastes shall be or may be discharged.[Amended 10-9-1990
by Ord. No. 335]
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any room, group of rooms, building or
other enclosure used or intended for use in the operation of one business
enterprise for manufacturing, processing, cleaning, laundering or
assembling any product, commodity or article or from which any process
waste, as distinct from sanitary sewage, shall be discharged.[Amended
10-9-1990 by Ord. No. 335]
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Any and all wastes discharged from an industrial
establishment, other than sanitary sewage.[Amended 10-9-1990 by Ord.
No. 335]
81.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 194-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-7
1:195
LOCAL LIMITS — Limitations on concentrations or mass of specific
pollutants applied to discharges of industrial users, developed under the
authority of 40 CFR 403.8(f).[Added 10-9-1990 by Ord. No. 335]
OWNER — Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal
or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records
of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or
otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the
estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate
of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court.82
PERSON(S) — Any individual, partnership, company, association, society,
trust, corporation or other group or entity, whether an owner or lessee
of residences, commercial or institutional establishments.[Amended
10-9-1990 by Ord. No. 33583]
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions,
expressed in moles per liter of solution, indicating the degree of acidity or
alkalinity of a substance.
POTW — A publicly owned treatment works as defined by Section 212 of the
Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292). The term includes the sewage collection system and
the sewage treatment plant.[Added 10-9-1990 by Ord. No. 33584]
ppm — Parts per million by weight.
PRIVATE — Not available or used by the public and restricted to one's
personal or family use.[Added 6-8-1999 by Ord. No. 402]
PUBLIC — Any person or group of persons, including people from the
general population or employees or customers.[Added 6-8-1999 by Ord.
No. 40285]
SEWAGE — Normal water-carried household and toilet wastes from any
improved property.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — The sewage treatment plant and related
facilities owned by the Authority and operated for the purpose of treatment
of sewage and other permitted wastes, and all additions, modifications,
alterations and improvements thereto.
SEWER — Any pipe or conduit, constituting a part of the sewer system, used
or usable for sewage collection purposes.
SEWER SYSTEM — All facilities, as of any particular time, for collecting,
pumping, transporting and disposing of sanitary sewage and industrial
wastes, owned or operated by the Borough.[Amended 10-9-1990 by Ord.
No. 335]
82.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
83.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
84.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
85.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 194-7 DANVILLE CODE § 194-7
1:196
SLUG LOAD — Discharge of pollutants at a rate or concentration exceeding
five times the daily average rate or concentration for a period exceeding 15
minutes.[Added 10-9-1990 by Ord. No. 335]
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Suspended solids as determined pursuant to the
procedure set forth in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public
Health Association, Inc.
§ 194-8. Imposition of sewer rentals or charges; amounts of
charges. [Amended 1-10-1978 by Ord. No. 279; 1-6-1992 by Ord. No.
349; 6-8-1999 by Ord. No. 402; 3-9-2004 by Ord. No. 454; 6-9-2009
by Ord. No. 498]
Sewer rentals or charges are imposed upon and shall be collected from
the owner of each improved property which is or shall be connected with
the sewer system, for use of the sewer system, whether such use shall be
direct or indirect, which sewer rental or charges shall commence and shall
be effective as of July 1, 2009, and shall be payable as provided herein, in
accordance with the following schedule of rates and classifications:
A. Improved properties furnished unmetered water service.
(1) Residences.
Item
Quarterly Sewer Rental
or Charge
Single-family residence (including
condominiums, townhouses, mobile
homes and trailers)
$45
Apartments (each unit) $39
Rooms (each unit) $21
(2) Commercial establishments.
Item
Quarterly Sewer Rental
or Charge
All commercial establishments except
as listed below
$45
Bank (including credit unions, savings
and loans and other similar financial
institutions)
$2.70 per employee or
$69, whichever is greater
Medical office (including dentist,
veterinarian, chiropractic, etc.)
$2.70 per employee or
$69, whichever is greater
Restaurant $90
Hotel and motel (each room) $12
Preschool and day care (per person,
including employees)
$2.70 per person or $45,
whichever is greater
§ 194-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-8
1:197
Item
Quarterly Sewer Rental
or Charge
Nursing homes, personal care and
assisted living facilities (each
employee and guest)
$12 per person or $45,
whichever is greater
(3) Public facilities.
Item
Quarterly Sewer Rental
or Charge
All public facilities $180
(4) Other.
Item
Quarterly Sewer Rental
or Charge
Industrial/manufacturing operations $5.70 per employee or
$69, whichever is greater
Professional offices and services with
more than 17 employees (including
but not limited to attorney office,
insurance office, real estate office,
engineering/design office,
telecommunications office, and other
similar offices)
$2.70 per employee
(5) Owners of improved properties furnished unmetered water service
by the Borough not falling under the foregoing descriptions shall
pay a minimum sewer rental or charge for any dwelling unit and/or
nonresidential establishment of $45 per quarter annum.
B. Improved properties furnished metered water service.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this article, sewer rentals or
charges for sewage and/or industrial wastes discharged into the
sewer system from any dwelling unit and/or improved property
shall be based upon volume of water usage, adjusted, if
appropriate, as provided in this article, where the volume of water
usage shall be metered, whether by this Borough or otherwise.
(2) Sewer rentals or charges for sewage and/or industrial wastes
discharged into the sewer system from an industrial establishment
may be based upon actual metered volume of discharge, as
permitted in this article.
(3) In either of the foregoing cases, such sewer rentals or charges shall
be computed in accordance with the following metered rate
schedule; subject, however to any minimum rentals or charges
provided in this article:
§ 194-8 DANVILLE CODE § 194-8
1:198
Metered Rate Schedule
Gallons per Quarter Annum
Dollars per Thousand
Gallons per Quarter Annum
Each gallon $1.65
(4) Notwithstanding the foregoing metered rate schedule, the
minimum sewer rental or charge for any dwelling unit and/or
improved property where the volume of water usage shall be
metered shall be as follows:
Water Meter Size
(inches) Minimum Quarterly Rental or Charge
Less than 1 $45
1 $54
1 1/4 $60
1 1/2 $69
2 $87
4 $135
6 $210
8 $342
Or such rental or charge as
would be computed through
the descriptions for
improved properties
furnished unmetered water
service, whichever is
greater.
C. For service periods of less or more than one quarter annum, the sewer
rental or charge and the computation of the volume of water consumed
or the volume or discharge to the sewer system, as applicable, shall be
proportionately adjusted.
D. Whether or not served by private or common facilities, where more
than one residential and/or nonresidential establishment, including
institutional dormitories, is located in one building, house or other
structure and such building, house or other structure is served by one
sewer connection, multiple charges shall be computed as if each had
separate connections and facilities.
E. Where more than one dwelling unit and/or nonresidential establishment
is served water from a common meter, the sewer rental or charge shall
be determined by dividing the total quarterly water consumption by the
number of dwelling units and/or nonresidential establishments being
served from the common water meter and by computing separate
billings by applying the rates set forth in Subsection B to the resulting
water consumption quotient, subject to the minimum of $45 per quarter
annum for each such dwelling and/or nonresidential establishment.
F. Notwithstanding the foregoing, sewer rentals or charges to each
industrial establishment which shall discharge sewage and/or industrial
wastes to the sewer system shall be not less than $3.66 per employee
per quarter annum or its adjusted equivalent for sewer services periods
of less or more than one quarter annum based upon the average
§ 194-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-8
1:199
number of persons employed per working day during the service period
for which the billing is rendered. The total billing to industrial
establishments for any service period shall be not less than 50% of
the maximum billing of any one of the three consecutive preceding
quarters.86
G. Notwithstanding any of foregoing, the minimum sewer rentals or
charges shall be $2.70 per student per quarter to each elementary and
secondary school. Bills shall be due and payable for four quarters per
year. The school district shall provide the Borough with a census of the
number of pupils enrolled during the full school term beginning in
September of each year, which shall be the basis for the subsequent
four quarterly billings. Teachers and employees of the school shall be
classified as pupils for sewer rental purposes.
H. Notwithstanding any of the forgoing, the minimum sewer rentals or
charges to hospitals shall be not less than $9.22 per person occupying
the premises, per quarter annum. Such persons shall include resident
and nonresident employees, doctors, nurses and bed patients. The
number of persons for which billings shall be made was established on
or before July 1, 1970, and adjustments will be made at least every two
years for billing purposes.
I. Notwithstanding any of the foregoing, the minimum sewer rentals or
charges to nursing homes, assisted living facilities, personal care
facilities and other similar facilities shall be not less than $12 per
person occupying the premises, per quarter annum, based upon the
average number of persons occupying the premises per day during the
service period for which the billing is rendered. Such persons shall
include resident and nonresident employees, doctors and nurses.
J. Industrial establishments discharging sewage and industrial wastes to
the sewer system having an average five-day BOD greater than 200
parts per million and a suspended solids content greater than 250 parts
per million shall pay a strength-of-waste surcharge, in addition to
applicable charges, equal to 0.1% for each part per million by which the
BOD exceeds 200 parts per million, plus 0.1% for each part per million
by which the suspended solids exceed 250 parts per million. Surcharges
shall be applicable to billings for sewer rentals computed in accordance
with other provisions of this article. The strength of sewage and
industrial wastes to be used for establishing the amount of surcharge
shall be determined at least once annually either by suitable sampling
and analysis of the wastes for a three-day consecutive period during a
period of normal plant operations, from estimates made by this Borough
or from known relationships of products produced to strengths of
wastes for those industries where such factors have been established.
In establishing waste strengths for surcharge purposes by analysis,
analysis shall be made in accordance with procedures outlined in the
86.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 194-8 DANVILLE CODE § 194-8
1:200
§ 194-9. Time and method of payment.
latest editions of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association, Inc.
K. If the owner of any nonresidential improved property, including any
school, shall fail to provide this Borough with complete information
required to compute the sewer rental or charge to such nonresidential
improved property, this Borough may estimate a reasonable applicable
sewer rental or charge for such nonresidential improved property, and
such estimated sewer rental or charge shall be the actual sewer rental
or charge payable until the required information is filed; provided,
however, that no rebates will be paid by this Borough if the information
filed reveals a lower indicated sewer rental or charge than that
estimated by this Borough.
L. Additional classifications and sewer rentals or charges or modifications
of the preceding schedule of sewer rentals or charges may be
established by this Borough from time to time as deemed necessary.
M. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit this Borough
from entering into separate agreements with owners with respect to
sewer rentals or charges to be imposed in those cases where, due to
seasonal fluctuations, contributions toward construction by owners or
other unusual circumstances, the sewer rentals or charges set forth
herein shall be deemed by this Borough to be unfair or inequitable.
A. In the case of an owner of improved property whose bill for sewer
rentals or charges shall be computed, in whole or in part, upon the basis
of water volume usage metered by this Borough, the billing shall be
based upon the water consumption for the immediately preceding
quarter annum. In the case of an owner of improved property whose
quarterly bill for sewer rentals or charges shall be computed on any
basis completely independent of water volume usage metered by this
Borough, the quarterly billing dates shall be the first days of January,
April, July and October, respectively, in each year, or on such other
dates as this Borough by resolution or ordinance shall specify, and shall
cover a quarterly billing period consisting of the immediately
succeeding three complete calendar months.
B. Sewer rentals or charges shall be due and payable upon the applicable
billing date set forth on the bill, and the appropriate amount computed
in accordance with this article shall constitute the net bill. If sewer
rentals and charges are not paid within 30 calendar days after each
billing date, an additional sum of 5% shall be added to such net bill,
which net bill, plus such additional sum, shall constitute the gross bill.
Payment made or mailed and postmarked on or before the last day of
such thirty-calendar-day period shall constitute payment within such
period. If the end of such thirty-calendar-day period shall fall on a legal
holiday or on a Sunday, payment made on or mailed and postmarked on
§ 194-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-9
1:201
§ 194-10. Filing and collection of liens.
Sewer rentals or charges imposed by this article shall be a lien on the
improved property connected to and served by the sewer system and any
such sewer rentals or charges which are delinquent shall be filed as a lien
against the improved property so connected to and served by the sewer
system, which lien shall be filed in the office of the Prothonotary of Montour
County, Pennsylvania, and shall be collected in the manner provided by law
for the filing and collecting of municipal claims.
§ 194-11. Measuring volume for computation of sewer rentals or
charges.
the next succeeding weekday which is not a legal holiday shall
constitute payment within such period.
C. Every owner of improved property which is connected to the sewer
system initially shall provide this Borough with and thereafter shall
keep this Borough advised of his correct address. Failure of any person
to receive bills for sewer rentals or charges shall not be considered an
excuse for nonpayment nor shall such failure result in an extension of
the period of time during which the net bill shall be payable.
A. Methods of measuring volume.
(1) Whenever the entire water supply of an improved property
discharging sewage and/or industrial wastes into the sewer system
is supplied by this Borough, the volume of water furnished, as
determined from meter readings of this Borough, shall be used as
the volume of water consumed in computing sewer rentals or
charges, subject to adjustment, if appropriate, as provided in this
article.
(2) Whenever an improved property discharging sewage and/or
industrial wastes into the sewer system shall have a source or
sources of water supply in addition to or other than this Borough,
the owner of such improved property shall provide a meter on such
additional or other source or sources of water supply. The total
volume of water consumed, as determined from the meter readings
of this Borough and the meter readings of the meter or meters on
such additional source or sources of water supply, or the meter
readings of the meter or meters on such other source or sources of
water supply, as appropriate, shall be used as the volume of water
consumed in computing the sewer rentals or charges, subject to
adjustment, if appropriate, as provided in this article.
(3) The volume of water consumed to be used for computation of sewer
rentals or charges, as provided in this article, may be established
by estimates or other methods of measurement approved by this
Borough, where this Borough considers metering to be impractical.
§ 194-9 DANVILLE CODE § 194-11
1:202
(4) This Borough may require an industrial establishment, or the
industrial establishment may elect, to install, pay for and maintain
a meter approved by this Borough for measuring wastes
discharged to the sewer system, in which case sewer rentals or
charges shall be based upon the actual volume of wastes so
metered as being discharged to the sewer system. The sewer
rentals shall be computed at the rates set forth under § 194-8B.
(5) Exclusion from the sewer system of noncontaminated wastewaters
and waters used for cooling purposes may be required by this
Borough, or such exclusion may be optional with the owner of an
industrial establishment, if not required by this Borough. When
such waters are excluded, the volume of water or other measure to
be used for computation of sewer rentals or charges shall be
computed in one of the following methods:
(a) By installing a meter or other measuring device on the
connection to the sewer system. The readings from such meter
or measuring device shall be used as the measure of discharge
of sewage and/or industrial wastes in computing sewer rentals
or charges in accordance with the volume rate schedule set
forth in § 194-8B.
(b) By installing a meter or other measuring device to measure the
volume of water not being discharged into the sewer system.
The readings from such meter or measuring device shall be
deducted from the total water meter readings and the
remainder shall be the volume of water to be used in
computing sewer rentals and charges in accordance with the
volume rate schedule set forth in § 194-8B.
(c) If it is not practical, in the opinion of this Borough, to install a
meter or other measuring device to determine continuously the
volume of water not discharged into the sewer system, this
Borough shall determine, in such manner and by such method
as it may prescribe, the percentage of metered water which is
being discharged into the sewer system. The volume of water
to be used in computing sewer rentals or charges in
accordance with the volume rate schedule set forth in § 194-8B
shall be the percentage so determined of the volume of water
measured by the water meter or meters. Any dispute as to such
estimated percentage shall be submitted to this Borough after
notice of such estimate. The decision of this Borough with
respect to the matter shall be final for the then-current
calendar year.
B. Measuring devices. The furnishing and installation of meters or other
measuring devices which shall not be owned by the Authority or this
Borough, but which shall be required or permitted under provisions of
this article, shall be the sole responsibility of the owner. The installation
or use of such meters or other measuring devices at all times shall be
§ 194-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-11
1:203
§ 194-12. Fees. [Added 6-13-1984 by Ord. No. 301]
subject to the approval of this Borough and may be tested and inspected
by this Borough whenever necessary. The owner shall be responsible
for the maintenance, safekeeping and repair of any such meter, whether
such repairs shall be made necessary by ordinary wear and tear or
other causes.
C. Meter readings. This Borough shall be responsible for the reading of all
meters or other measuring devices, and the same shall be available to
employees and agents of this Borough at all reasonable times.87
A. It is the purpose of this section to provide for the recovery of costs from
users of the Borough sewer system for the implementation of the
program established herein. The applicable charges or fees shall be set
forth in the Borough's Schedule of Charges and Fees.88
B. Enumeration of charges.
(1) The Borough may adopt charges and fees which may include:
(a) Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating
the Borough's pretreatment program.
(b) Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures.
(c) Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and
construction.
(d) Fees for permit applications.
(e) Fees for filing appeals.
(f) Fees for consistent removal by the Borough of pollutants
otherwise subject to federal pretreatment standards.
(g) Other fees as the Borough may deem necessary to carry out
the requirements contained herein.
(2) These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and
are separate from all other fees chargeable by the Borough.
87.Editor's Note: Former §§ 108-12, 108-13, 108-14, 108-15 and 108-16, regarding wastes and
discharges of waste, as amended, which previously followed this section, were repealed
1-6-1992 by Ord. No. 350.
88.Editor's Note: The Schedule of Charges and Fees is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 194-11 DANVILLE CODE § 194-12
1:204
ARTICLE III
Holding Tanks
[Adopted 5-8-1984 by Ord. No. 299 (Ch. 108, Art. III, of the 1975
Code)]
§ 194-13. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for and regulate the use,
maintenance and removal of holding tanks to prevent the residents and
inhabitants of the Borough of Danville from danger and harm due to
inadequate or malfunctioning on-site septic systems; to permit the
development of lands with the use of holding tanks under carefully
controlled and regulated circumstances; to regulate the use and
maintenance of holding tanks in conformity with the law, statutes and
regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the Department
of Environmental Protection; and to provide a temporary alternative to
discontinuing otherwise lawful land use by the inhabitants and residents of
the Borough of Danville.
§ 194-14. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACT — The Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, 35 P.S. § 750.1 through
750.20, as from time to time amended.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Danville, Montour County, Pennsylvania.
COUNCIL — The Council of the Borough of Danville.
DEPARTMENT — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection or its successor state agency.
DISPOSAL SITE — A suitable facility for the final disposition of human
and animal sewage and wastes, which facility shall have been and remains
approved for such purposes by the Department.
HOLDING TANK — A watertight receptacle which receives and retains
sewage and is designed and constructed to facilitate ultimate disposal of the
sewage at another site. The term shall include:
HOLDING TANK CLEANER — A municipality, county, municipal authority
or person, natural or a legal entity, including the holding tank owner, who
CHEMICAL TOILET — A toilet using chemicals that discharge to a
holding tank.
A.
RETENTION TANK — A holding tank to which sewage is conveyed by a
water-carrying system.
B.
PRIVY — A holding tank designed to receive sewage where water under
pressure is not available.
C.
§ 194-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-14
1:205
removes the contents of a holding tank for the purpose of disposing of the
sewage at another site.
LANDOWNER — The natural person or persons, partnership, corporation or
legally existing organization who owns legal and equitable title to the land
for which a holding tank permit is sought or issued.
LOT — A parcel of land under single ownership regardless of acreage. In
the event that the subject lands are a portion of a larger parcel of ground,
the larger parcel of ground shall be considered as the lot.
OFFICER — The duly appointed Sewage Enforcement Officer of the
Borough of Danville.
REGULATIONS — The regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, Pa. Code Title 25, Subpart C, Chapters 71 and
73, as adopted; and all future regulations of the Department pertaining to
holding tanks.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products,
excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals
and noxious or deleterious substances being harmful or inimical to the
public health or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of water for domestic
water supply or for recreation or which constitutes pollution under the
Clean Streams Law.89
§ 194-15. Use of holding tanks.
Holding tanks may be used, subject to the provisions of this article, to
serve as temporary sewage disposal from existing structures within the
Borough of Danville, where the municipal sanitary sewage system is not
available and where on-lot sewage disposal facilities are not feasible due
to unsuitability of soils; for a temporary sewage disposal from existing
structures, where a malfunction in the presently installed on-site sewage
treatment system cannot be suitably repaired or replaced due to
unsuitability of soils; or temporarily serve as sewage disposal for new
construction in any area of the Borough for which a revision to the
Borough's official sewage facilities plan has been approved by the
Department.
§ 194-16. Permit required; application.
A. Any landowner seeking to use a holding tank for sewage disposal on any
lot situated in the Borough shall first obtain a permit.
B. Permit application shall be made upon a form to be supplied by the
Borough Secretary to any landowner upon such landowner's request.
C. The landowner shall file the completed and executed application for a
permit with the Borough Secretary and shall pay to the Secretary such
89.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 194-14 DANVILLE CODE § 194-16
1:206
§ 194-17. Term of permit; renewal.
§ 194-18. Removal of holding tank.
application fees as the Council may from time to time prescribe by
resolution.
D. The landowner shall cooperate with the Borough's officer at all stages
of the application process.
E. A permit shall be issued to the landowner upon proper application after
the Council has amended its official sewage facilities plan and after
approval by the Department.
F. Prior to the grant of permit, the landowner shall obtain and file with the
Borough Secretary a certified copy of each of the following documents:
(1) A completed application.
(2) A written contract between the landowner and a qualified and
responsible holding tank cleaner for the term of the holding tank
permit, which contract shall provide for the timely and regular
removal of the contents of the holding tank by the holding tank
cleaner and for the removal of said contents to an approved
disposal site for final disposition.
(3) A certified copy of a written contract between the holding tank
cleaner and the disposal site providing the holding tank cleaner
with the right to dispose of the holding tank contents for a time at
least until the end of the period for which the holding tank permit is
requested, which contract shall conform to 25 Pa. Code Chapter 71.
(4) Fees as established by resolution of the Board.
(5) An agreement to reimburse and indemnify the Borough for any
liability, costs and expenses which shall or may be incurred by the
Borough in actions to enforce compliance by the landowner; or to
remove the contents of the holding tank, or the holding tank, upon
default or failure of the landowner to perform; or for any fines
incurred by the Borough by reason of the landowner's failure to
comply with this article, any properly enacted amendment hereto
or the laws and regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
The agreement shall be in the form required by the Council.
A. Each permit shall be issued for the term of one year.
B. Permits may be renewed annually upon proper application to the
Council in the manner set forth in this Article III of this chapter.
C. In the event that a landowner holding a valid permit shall violate this
article during the term of the permit, no renewal permit shall thereafter
be issued to such landowner.
§ 194-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-18
1:207
§ 194-19. Regulations governing holding tanks.
§ 194-20. Inspections.
A. Absent the grant of a renewal permit prior to the lapse of an existing
permit, the landowner shall remove or cause the removal of the holding
tank within 20 days of the end of the term for which a permit has been
issued.
B. In the event that a holding tank permit has been issued for new
construction pending the installation of an off-site sewage disposal
system, the landowner shall remove or cause the removal of the holding
tank within 20 days after the use of the off-site sewage disposal system
is made available to the landowner and shall connect with the off-site
disposal system in the same time.
C. The Borough, at its election, shall have the right to enter upon the
premises of a landowner for the purpose of removing or causing the
removal of any holding tank which remains in place in violation of this
article. "Borough," as used herein, shall mean the Borough, its
employees or third parties contracted by the Borough for the purpose of
removing the holding tank. All costs and expenses of removal shall be
borne by the landowner.
A. Any holding tank installed or maintained pursuant to a permit issued
under this article shall comply in all respects to the specification set
forth in the Regulations of the Department, 25 Pa. Code Chapter 73,
inclusive.
B. The landowner shall cause the holding tank and all lines, pipes or
conduits to the same to be maintained in a good, watertight condition at
all times.
C. All holding tanks shall be installed on a firm and stable soil or subsoil
and in such manner as to prevent settlement or movement.
D. No holding tank or lines to the holding tank shall be covered until the
Borough's officer shall have first inspected and approved the
installation and authorized covering the same. The landowner shall be
responsible for furnishing the officer with reasonable notice of the
installation.
E. The landowner shall cause a holding tank to be cleaned as frequently as
may be required to maintain the contents at a level of less than 75% of
the tank capacity.
F. Holding tanks shall be installed at least 50 feet downgrade from any
source of water supply.
A. Any landowner who applies for and receives a permit for holding tanks
shall be deemed to have granted his consent for inspections of the
holding tank and facilities used in connection with the holding tank by
§ 194-18 DANVILLE CODE § 194-20
1:208
§ 194-21. Appeals.
§ 194-22. Violations and penalties.
the Sewage Enforcement Officer of the Borough. At reasonable times
during the hours of 8:00 a.m. until 8:00 p.m., the landowner would
grant the Sewage Enforcement Officer access to the premises for the
purpose of making such inspections, upon request of the Sewage
Enforcement Officer, either verbally or in writing.
B. Any landowner receiving a holding tank permit shall furnish to the
Borough a true and corrected copy of all pumping receipts for cleaning
or removing the contents of the holding tanks. Such reports shall be
made to the Borough's Secretary within 10 days after the contents of
the holding tank are pumped out.
C. The failure of a landowner to permit inspection of holding tanks or
equipment or facilities used in connection with the holding tanks or the
failure of the landowner to have the holding tanks properly maintained
and pumped out or the failure of the landowner to furnish pumping
receipts to the Borough in a timely fashion shall be grounds for
immediate revocation of permit.
A. Any landowner aggrieved by the denial of a permit application shall
first appeal to the Council.
B. The procedure for appeal shall in all respects conform to the procedure
for appeal from the denial of a sewage permit by the officer of the
Borough, as provided by law.
A. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
article or who fails to act in compliance with this article shall, upon
being found guilty thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$600 for each offense and, in default of payment of said fine, be
imprisoned in the Montour County Prison for a period not exceeding 30
days for each offense.90
B. Where the violation continues from day to day and the landowner fails
to correct or cease such violation, each day's continuance shall
constitute a separate violation.
90.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 194-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-22
1:209

ARTICLE IV
Sewer Usage and Discharge Regulation
[Adopted 1-6-1992 by Ord. No. 350 (Ch. 108, Art. IV, of the 1975
Code)]
§ 194-23. Definitions and word usage.
A. The following words, terms and phrases will hereinafter have the
meanings set forth in this section, unless the context clearly requires a
different meaning:
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the "Clean Water Act," as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The Administrator or the Regional
Administrator of Region III of the EPA.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER — An
authorized representative of an industrial user may be:
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure, five days at 20° C., expressed in terms of weight
and concentration [milligrams per liter (mg/l)].
BOROUGH — The Borough of Danville, Montour County, Pennsylvania,
a municipal corporation existing under the laws of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
BUILDING SEWER — A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises
of a user to the sewer system.
BYPASS — The intentional diversion of wastewater from any portion of
an industrial user's pretreatment facility through which the wastewater
normally passes.
CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER — An industrial user subject to
categorical standards.
A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice president,
if the industrial user is a corporation.
(1)
A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a
partnership or proprietorship, respectively.
(2)
A principal executive officer or director having responsibility for
the overall operation of the discharging facility if the industrial
user is a governmental entity, charitable organization or other such
unincorporated entity.
(3)
A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above
if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the
facilities from which the discharge originates.
(4)
§ 194-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-23
1:211
CATEGORICAL STANDARDS — National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards.
CERTIFIED PROFESSIONAL — A registered professional engineer
under the laws of the state.
CHAIN OF CUSTODY — A record of sample collection indicating the
place and time of collection and the person collecting the sample. It
shall also include a record of each person involved in possession of the
sample, including the laboratory person who takes final possession of
the sample for the purpose of analysis.
CLEAN STREAMS LAW — The Act of June 22, 1937, P.L. 1987, as
amended and reenacted by the Act of October 10, 1980, P.L. 894, 35
P.S. §§ 691.1 to 691.702.
COLOR — Color of light transmitted through a waste after removal
of all suspended matter, including pseudo-colloidal particles, and
measured in platinum-cobalt units.
COMBINED WASTE FORMULA — A procedure for calculating
discharge concentrations of constituents of industrial waste, as defined
in 40 CFR § 403.6(e).
COMPLIANCE — Adherence to conditions or requirements of this
article or the industrial pretreatment program, any written directions
issued by the Borough or any wastewater discharge permit or other
permit issued under the provisions of this article.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — A sample composed of individual subsamples
taken at regular intervals over a specified period of time. Subsamples
may be proportioned by time interval or size according to flow (flowproportioned
composite sample), or be of equal size and taken at equal
time intervals (equal-time composite sample).
COOLING WATER — The water from any use such as air conditioning,
cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat.
DISCHARGE — The conveyance of any water or wastewater into the
sewer system.
DOMESTIC WASTES — Normal household wastes from kitchens, water
closets, lavatories and laundries, or any waste from a similar source and
possessing the same characteristics.
ENFORCEMENT RESPONSE PLAN — A plan and guide developed
pursuant to 40 CFR 403.8(f)(5) providing for the enforcement of the
industrial pretreatment program.
EPA — The United States Environmental Protection Agency, or, where
appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the
Administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency.
GARBAGE — The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.91
§ 194-23 DANVILLE CODE § 194-23
1:212
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream on
a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and
without consideration of time.
GROUNDWATER — Water which is contained in or passing through the
ground.
HOLDING TANK WASTE — Any waste from holding tanks, such as
vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuumpump
tank trucks.
INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT PROGRAM — The sum of the provisions
of this article, amendments thereto and any activities authorized by this
article as regards the regulation and control of industrial users.
INDUSTRIAL USER — Any person who discharges industrial waste into
the sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance, or form
of energy, which is produced as a result, whether directly or indirectly,
of any industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process or activity,
or in the course of developing, recovering or processing of natural
resources; but not sanitary sewage.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with
discharges from other sources:
LOCAL LIMITS — Numerical limitations on the concentration, mass
or other characteristics of wastes or pollutants discharged, or likely
to be discharged, by industrial users, and which are developed by the
Borough.
Inhibits or disrupts the processes or operations of the sewage
treatment plant or the sewage collection system, or sludge
processes, use or disposal; or
(1)
Is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the Borough's
NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration
of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal
in compliance with the following statutory provisions and
regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state
or local regulations): Article 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid
Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) [including Title II, more commonly
referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
(RCRA), and including state regulations contained in any state
sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the
SWDA], the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act and the
Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act; or which results
in or increases the severity of a violation of other state or national
environmental statutes, rules or regulations.
(2)
91.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 194-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-23
1:213
MANHOLE — A structure allowing access from the surface of the
ground to a sewer.
mg/l — Milligrams per liter; a measure of concentration of waterborne
substances.
MONTHLY AVERAGE — The arithmetic mean of all daily
determinations of concentration made during a calendar month.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the
EPA in accordance with § 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317)
which applies to a specific category of industrial users. National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards are enumerated in 40 CFR,
Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471.
NEW SOURCE — Any building, structure, facility or installation for
which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction
of which commenced after the publication of proposed categorical
standards under § 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such
source if such categorical standards are thereafter promulgated in
accordance with that section. Determination of the applicability of new
source standards shall be made as provided in the Act and 40 CFR
403.3.
NONCOMPLIANCE — Not in compliance.
NPDES PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act
(33 U.S.C. § 1342).
OPERATOR — Any person having charge, care, control or management
of a pretreatment facility for industrial wastes or of truck or trucks used
in the removal, transport or disposal of sewage or industrial wastes.
OWNER — Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a
legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official
records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the
property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the
guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or
administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession
of real property by a court.92
PASS-THROUGH — Discharge of pollutants to the waters of the state
either untreated or insufficiently treated so as to cause pollution or a
violation of the Borough's NPDES permit; or concentration of pollutants
in the sludge so that the end use of the sludge results in pollution, harm
to the environment or a violation of any state or federal sludge disposal
regulation, guideline or standard.
PERSON(S) — Any individual, partnership, company, association,
society, trust, corporation or other group or entity, whether an owner or
lessee of residences, commercial or institutional establishments.93
92.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
93.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 194-23 DANVILLE CODE § 194-23
1:214
pH — The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of
hydrogen ions expressed in moles per liter of solution.
POLLUTANT — Any substance, including but not limited to dredged
spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage
sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive
materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar
dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste which, when
discharged into water, results in pollution or increases pollution.
POLLUTION — The contamination of any waters of the state such as
will create or is likely to create a nuisance or to render such waters
harmful, detrimental or injurious to public health, safety or welfare,
or to domestic, municipal, commercial, industrial, agricultural,
recreational or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild
animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life; or contamination of the air, soil
or of the environment so as to produce or is likely to produce similar
deleterious effects.
POTW — A publicly owned treatment works as defined by Section 212
of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292). The term includes the sewage collection
system and the sewage treatment plant.
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
alteration of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu
of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a sewer
system. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical,
chemical or biological processes, or by means of other process changes
except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d).
PRETREATMENT COORDINATOR — Agent of the Borough designated
to administer the provisions of the industrial pretreatment program.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement, other than a categorical standard, imposed on an
industrial user by § 303(b) and (c) of the Act, the state or the industrial
pretreatment program.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any wastewater resulting from the direct
contact of water with any raw material, intermediate product, finish
product, by-product or waste during any manufacturing process, or
water other than cooling water which results from a manufacturing
process.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGE — Any discharge which is prohibited under
§ 194-24 of the Borough Code.
PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD — Any regulation developed
under Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) and 40 CFR
403.5.
QUALIFIED ANALYST — Any person who has demonstrated
competency in the analysis of wastewater by submission of their
generally recognized documentation of competency to the Borough.
§ 194-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-23
1:215
REFRIGERATION — Maintenance of temperature for storage,
preservation of food, or as a process of manufacturing.
SANITARY SEWAGE — The normal watered domestic wastes from any
improved property, but excluding effluent from septic tanks or
cesspools; rain, snow or stormwater; groundwater; or other collected
water from roofs, drains or basements.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer carrying only sanitary sewage or
industrial wastes, and to which storm, surface or ground waters are not
intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE CORRECTION SYSTEM — All facilities of the Borough or any
municipality party to a service agreement with the Borough, as of any
particular time, used or usable for collecting, transporting, pumping
and disposing of wastewater, which facilities are connected to and
served by the sewage treatment plant.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — That portion of the sewer system
owned and operated by the Borough, which is designed to provide
treatment of wastewater and discharge of treated effluent to the
environment.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for conveying wastewater.
SEWER SYSTEM — The sewage collection system, sewage treatment
plant and any sewers that convey wastewater to the sewage treatment
plant. For the purposes of this article, "sewer system" shall also include
any sewers that convey wastewater to the sewage treatment plant from
persons who are, by contract or agreement with the Borough, users of
the sewer system.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER — An industrial user who:
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE — A noncompliance which meets or
exceeds standards of significant noncompliance as set forth in § 194-27
of the Borough Code.
SIGNIFICANT VIOLATOR — Any industrial user in significant
noncompliance.
SLUG or SLUG LOAD — Any discharge of water, wastewater or
industrial waste in which the concentration of any constituent or the
Has a discharge flow of 25,000 gallons or more of process
wastewater per average workday;
(1)
Discharges an organic load, in pounds of BOD per average
workday, of 5% or more of the average daily organic loading of the
sewage treatment plant;
(2)
(3) Is regulated by categorical standards; or
Is determined by the Borough to have the potential of adversely
affecting the operation of the POTW, causing interference or passthrough,
or of violating any pretreatment requirement.
(4)
§ 194-23 DANVILLE CODE § 194-23
1:216
rate of flow exceeds, for any period of time longer than 15 minutes, five
times the average concentration or flow rate from that source during a
normal working day.
SPCC PLAN — A spill prevention, control and countermeasure plan
prepared by an industrial user to minimize the likelihood and intensity
of a slug load or spill and to expedite control and cleanup activities
should a slug load or spill occur.
SPILL — Any discharge of pollutants resulting from the spilling,
overflowing, rupture or leakage of any storage, process or transfer
container, or the control or cleanup activities associated with such an
occurrence.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
executive office of the President, Office of Management and Budget,
1972.
STANDARD METHODS — The latest edition of Standard Methods for
the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the Water
Pollution Control Federation, the American Public Health Association
and the American Waterworks Association.
STATE — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.
SUPERINTENDENT — The person designated by the Borough to
supervise the operation of the sewage treatment plant and monitor
flows in the sewage collection system, or his duly authorized
representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and
which is removable by laboratory filtering.
TOTAL SOLIDS — The sum of the dissolved and undissolved solid
constituents of water or wastewater.
TOTAL TOXIC ORGANICS — The sum of all quantifiable values of
various organic pollutants as determined by the Borough or, for certain
categorical industrial users, as defined in the applicable categorical
standard.
TOXIC ORGANIC MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan submitted in lieu
of testing for total toxic organics in which an industrial user specifies
methods of control to assure that total toxic organics do not routinely
enter the sewer system.
TOXIC POLLUTANTS — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants
listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the
Environmental Protection Agency under the provision of Section 307(a)
of the Act, or other acts, or is present in sufficient quantity, either
singly or in combination with other wastewater, so as to present risk of
§ 194-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-23
1:217
§ 194-24. Prohibited wastes and pollutant limitations.
causing interference or pass-through, causing harm to humans, animals
or plants or creating a hazard to persons or property, either in the
sewage collection system, the sewage treatment plant or the
environment into which it is released.
UNAUTHORIZED DISCHARGE — Discharge of an unauthorized waste,
or a discharge which otherwise is not in compliance with the
requirements of the industrial pretreatment program or other rules or
regulations of the Borough.
UNAUTHORIZED WASTE — Any substance which is discharged into
the sewage collection system which is not in compliance with the
provisions of the industrial pretreatment program, or which is
discharged by a person in violation of any of the provisions of this
article.
USER — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the discharge
of wastewater into the sewer system.
WASTEWATER — Industrial wastes or domestic wastes from dwellings,
commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions, together
with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be
present, whether treated or untreated, which enters the sewer system.
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — As set forth in § 194-26 of the
Borough Code.
WATERS OF THE STATE — All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of
water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private,
which are contained within, flow through or border upon the state or
any portion thereof.
B. Word usage. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
A. Discharge of stormwaters. No person shall discharge or cause or permit
to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater,
roofwater, subsurface drainage or building foundation drainage into
any sanitary sewer.
B. Prohibited discharges. No user shall discharge or cause to be
discharged, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which
will interfere with the operation or performance of the sewer system.
These general prohibitions apply to all users, whether or not the users
are subject to categorical standards or any other pretreatment
requirements. A user may not discharge the following substances to the
sewer system:
(1) Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or
quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction
with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in
§ 194-23 DANVILLE CODE § 194-24
1:218
any other way to the sewer system or to the operation of the sewer
system. At no time shall two successive readings on an explosion
hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any
point in the system), be more than 5% nor any single reading over
10% of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. At no time
shall the closed-cup flashpoint of the wastewater be less than 140°
F. Prohibited materials include but are not limited to the following
substances in concentrations which cause exceedance of the above
standard: gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, ethers, alcohols,
peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates and carbides.
(2) Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the
flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the
sewer system, such as but not limited to grease, garbage with
particles greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension, animal guts or
tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails,
whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or
marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags,
spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, gas, tar,
asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or
lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes.
(3) Any wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 or higher than 10.0, or
wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment and/or personnel of the
sewer system.
(4) Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other constituents of the
wastewater, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic
effect in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant or to
exceed the limitation set forth in an applicable categorical
standard.
(5) Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which either
singly or by interaction with other substances normally present in
the sewer system are sufficient to create a public nuisance or
hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewer
system for maintenance and repair.
(6) Any substance which results in the formation or release of toxic
gasses, vapors or fumes in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems.
(7) Any petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of
mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or passthrough,
but in no case exceeding 20 milligrams per liter.
(8) Fats, oils, greases or waxes of animal or vegetable origin in
amounts which exceed 100 milligrams per liter.
§ 194-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-24
1:219
(9) Any substance which may cause the sewage treatment plant's
effluent or any other product of the sewage treatment plant, such
as residues, sludges or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and
reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall
a substance discharged to the sewer system cause the sewage
treatment plant to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal
criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal
developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air
Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or state criteria applicable to
the sludge management method being used.
(10) Any substance which will cause the Borough to violate its NPDES
and/or state collection system permit or applicable receiving water
quality standards.
(11) Any wastewater with objectionable color which will pass through
the treatment plant, such as but not limited to dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions.
(12) Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological
activity in the sewage treatment plant resulting in interference, but
in no case wastewater with a temperature at the discharge into the
sewer system which exceeds 40° C. (104° F.).
(13) Any pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will
cause interference to the sewage treatment plant or interfere with
the operation of the sewer system. In no case shall a slug load be
discharged.
(14) Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of
such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by
the Borough or applicable state or federal regulations.
(15) Any trucked or hauled wastewater or pollutants except those
discharged at points designated by the Borough.
(16) Any wastewater which is incompatible with treatment processes in
use at the sewage treatment plant so as to cause interference or
pass-through.
(17) Any wastewater containing any compounds or salts of aldrin,
dieldrin, endrin, lindane, methoxychlor, toxaphene,
dichlorophenoxyacetic acid, trichlorophenoxyproprionic acid or
other persistent herbicides, pesticides or rodenticides.
C. Unauthorized discharges. Discharge of any prohibited substance listed
under Subsection B of this section shall be considered an unauthorized
discharge, and the Borough may take whatever steps are necessary to
halt such a discharge, as set forth in §§ 194-27 and 194-28 of the
Borough Code.
§ 194-24 DANVILLE CODE § 194-24
1:220
D. Categorical standards. If the categorical standards for a particular
industrial user are more stringent than local limits or other
requirements imposed under the industrial pretreatment program, then
the categorical standards shall apply. The Borough shall notify all
affected industrial users of the applicable reporting requirements
under 40 CFR 403.12. The National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards are hereby incorporated into the industrial pretreatment
program as program requirements for those industrial users subject to
such categorical standards.
E. Removal credits. Where the sewage treatment plant achieves constant
removal of pollutants limited by categorical standards, the Borough
may apply to the approval authority for modification of specific limits in
the categorical standards. If the requirements contained in 40 CFR
403.7 are fulfilled and prior approval from the approval authority is
obtained, the Borough may modify pollutant discharge limits in the
categorical standards.
F. State requirements. State requirements and limitations on discharges
shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal
requirements and limitations or those established under the industrial
pretreatment program.
G. Local limits. The Borough may establish local limits regulating the
discharge of specific pollutants by industrial users.
(1) Local limits may be established for any substance which is
discharged, or is likely to be discharged, to the sewer system.
(2) Local limits may limit concentration, mass or a combination of the
two.
(3) The procedure for the calculation of limits should be as
recommended by the approval authority. Whenever possible, the
calculation of local limits shall be technically based, using all
available information.
(4) Local limits shall be calculated to prevent interference; passthrough;
the discharge of toxic materials in toxic amounts; threats
to worker health and safety; and physical, chemical or biological
damage to the sewer system.
(5) Local limits shall be applied to all significant industrial users and
shall be included in all wastewater discharge permits. Local limits
may be applied to other industrial users if deemed appropriate by
the Borough.
(6) Discharging any pollutant in excess of a local limit established for
that pollutant shall constitute an unauthorized discharge. Such a
discharge is subject to the actions and penalties set forth herein.
§ 194-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-24
1:221
H. Prohibition on dilution. No industrial user shall, in any way, attempt to
dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
pretreatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in
applicable categorical standards or in any other pollutant-specific
limitation, including local limits, developed by the Borough or state.
I. Slug loads and spills. Each industrial user shall provide protection from
spills resulting from prohibited discharges and slug load discharges.
Facilities to prevent spills and slug loads shall be provided and
maintained at the owner or industrial user's own cost and expense.
(1) SPCC plans. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating
procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the
Borough for review and shall be approved by the Borough before
construction of the facility. All existing industrial users shall
complete a spill prevention control and countermeasure (SPCC)
plan or provide evidence that such a plan is not necessary for their
facility. No industrial user who commences discharge to the sewer
system after the effective date of this article shall be permitted to
introduce pollutants into the sewer system until this requirement
has been fulfilled. Review and approval of such plans and operating
procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the
responsibility to modify its facility as necessary to meet the
requirements of the industrial pretreatment program. In the case of
a spill, it is the responsibility of the industrial user to immediately
telephone and notify the Borough of the incident. The notification
shall include location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration
and volume, corrective actions being taken or planned and
expected duration.
(2) Written notice. Within five days following a spill, slug load or other
accidental discharge, the industrial user shall submit to the
Borough a detailed written report describing the cause of the
discharge and the measures to be taken by the industrial user to
prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not
relieve the industrial user of any expense, loss, damage or other
liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the sewer
system, fish kills or any other damage to person or property; nor
shall such notification relieve the industrial user of any fines, civil
penalties or other liability which may be imposed by this article or
applicable law.
(3) Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the
industrial user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising
employees whom to call in the event of a spill or other accidental
discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may
cause or suffer such a discharge to occur are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.
J. Drainage of water filtration systems. Discharge of filter backwash water
to the sewer system shall be regulated as follows:
§ 194-24 DANVILLE CODE § 194-24
1:222
(1) Granular media filter backwash water may be discharged to the
sewer system, subject to all of the applicable provisions of the
industrial pretreatment program.
(2) Diatomaceous earth filter backwash, if discharged to the sewer
system, shall be connected to the sewer system through settling
tanks with no less than three months' storage capacity of spent
diatomaceous earth, which shall be accessible for removing solid
waste for disposal.
K. Trucked and hauled wastes.
(1) Discharge of trucked or hauled wastes shall be made at a point
designated by the Borough.
(2) Such wastes shall conform to all requirements of the industrial
pretreatment program regarding prohibited discharges, regulated
characteristics, local limits or other requirements as to nature and
concentration.
(3) No trucked or hauled wastes shall be discharged except as
specifically approved by the Borough. The Borough may require
testing, reporting or other specific information to be presented by
the operator or owner prior to discharge.
(4) In order to implement the provisions of Subsection K(3) of this
section, the Borough may establish a permit system or other means
of control and may set rate, frequency, volume or other controls on
the discharges from such vehicles.
L. Grease and sand traps. Grease, oil and sand interceptors or traps shall
be provided by a user when the Borough determines that such devices
are necessary for the proper handling of wastewaters containing
greases, oils or settleable solids. Interceptors and traps shall be
installed, operated, maintained and cleaned properly, so that they will
consistently remove the grease, oil or settleable solids. Interceptors
and traps shall be properly designed to accommodate the maximum
flow rate expected to occur and shall be located as to be readily and
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
M. Garbage grinders. The use of mechanical garbage grinders producing a
finely divided mass, properly flushed with an ample amount of water,
shall be permitted, upon the condition that no such mechanical garbage
grinder used for commercial or business purposes shall be installed
until permission for such use has been obtained from the Borough.
N. Notification requirements; hazardous wastes and hazardous
substances.
(1) All industrial users shall notify the Borough, the EPA Regional
Waste Management Division Director and the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection, Bureau of Waste
§ 194-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-24
1:223
Management, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a
substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous
waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification shall include the
name of the hazardous waste, as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261,
the EPA hazardous waste number and the type of discharge
(continuous, batch or other). If the industrial user discharges more
than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month, the
notification shall also include the following information, to the
extent that it is known and readily available to the industrial user:
(a) An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the
waste;
(b) An estimation of the mass and concentration in the wastewater
of all such constituents discharged in the most recent month;
and
(c) An estimate of the mass and concentration of such constituents
expected to be discharged during the following 12 months.
(2) Industrial users that commence discharge after the effective date
of this article shall submit the report within 180 days of first
discharge of the hazardous waste, except as provided in Subsection
N(4) of this section.
(3) The required report need be submitted only once for each
hazardous waste discharged. Industrial users regulated under
categorical standards which have already submitted such
information in baseline monitoring reports or periodic compliance
reports do not have to report this information again.
(4) Industrial users that discharge less than 15 kilograms of hazardous
wastes in a calendar month do not have to comply with these
reporting requirements. This exemption does not apply to acute
hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e).
(5) An industrial user shall notify the Borough within five days of
becoming aware of any discharges of reportable quantities of listed
or unlisted hazardous substances, as defined at 40 CFR 302.4
(CERCLA Hazardous Substances). This notification shall include
the time of release; the name of the substance; the identifying CAS
number, if known; and the approximate quantity discharged. If the
discharge constitutes a spill, change in wastewater constituents or
slug load, other reporting requirements of the industrial
pretreatment program may also apply.
(6) Each notification required by this section shall include a statement
certifying that the industrial user has a program in place to reduce
the volume and/or toxicity of the discharged wastes to the extent
that it is economically practical. This statement shall be signed by
the authorized representative of the industrial user.
§ 194-24 DANVILLE CODE § 194-25
1:224
§ 194-25. Fees.
§ 194-26. Permits and reports for industrial waste discharged into
sewer system.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to provide for the recovery of
costs from industrial users of the sewer system for the implementation
of the industrial pretreatment program established herein. The
applicable charges or fees shall be set forth in the Borough's Schedule
of Charges and Fees.94
B. Fees that may be charged.
(1) The Borough may adopt charges and fees which may include:
(a) Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating
the industrial pretreatment program;
(b) Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures;
(c) Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and
construction;
(d) Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications;
(e) Fees for filing appeals;
(f) Fees for consistent removal (by the sewage treatment plant) of
pollutants otherwise subject to categorical standards; and
(g) Other fees as the Borough may deem necessary to carry out
the requirements contained herein.
(2) These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and
are separate from all other fees chargeable by the Borough.
A. Requirement for wastewater discharge permits. Discharge of any
industrial waste to the sewer system without a wastewater discharge
permit, except as authorized by the Borough in accordance with the
provisions of the industrial pretreatment program, is an unauthorized
discharge and subject to the penalties provided herein.
B. Significant industrial users. All significant industrial users proposing to
connect to or to discharge to the sewer system shall obtain a
wastewater discharge permit before connecting to or discharging to the
sewer system.
C. Other industrial users. Industrial users which are not significant
industrial users do not require a wastewater discharge permit, but are
required to comply with all other provisions of the industrial
pretreatment program. If an industrial user makes changes to
processes, flow, wastewater concentration, wastewater characteristics
94.Editor's Note: The Schedule of Charges and Fees is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 194-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-26
1:225
or other changes which result in the industrial user meeting the
definition of significant industrial user, the industrial user shall
immediately, upon becoming aware that such a change has occurred or
90 days prior to such a change if it is planned, notify the Borough and
apply for a wastewater discharge permit.
D. Permit applications.
(1) Industrial users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit
shall complete and file with the Borough an application in the form
prescribed by the Borough and accompanied by the fee prescribed
in the Borough's schedule of fees, at least 90 days prior to
connecting to or discharging to the sewer system. In support of the
application, the industrial user shall submit, in units and terms
appropriate for evaluation, the following information:
(a) The name, address and location (if different from the address).
(b) SIC number or numbers according to the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as
amended.
(c) Wastewater constituents and characteristics as required by the
Borough, as determined by a qualified analyst; sampling and
analyses shall be performed in accordance with procedures
established by the EPA pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act
and contained in 40 CFR Part 136, as amended.
(d) Each product by type, amount, process or processes and rate
of production.
(e) The type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day).
(f) The number and type of employees and hours of operation of
the plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of the
pretreatment system.
(g) The time and duration of wastewater or industrial waste
contribution.
(h) The average daily and thirty-minute peak wastewater flow
rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variation, if any.
(i) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and
details to show all building sewers, sewer connections and
appurtenances by the size, location and elevation.
(j) Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises, including all materials which are or could be
discharged.
§ 194-26 DANVILLE CODE § 194-26
1:226
(k) The nature and concentration of any pollutants in the
discharge which are limited by any Borough, state or federal
pretreatment requirements (including local limits) or
categorical standards and a statement regarding whether or
not the categorical standard or pretreatment requirements are
being met on a consistent basis and, if not, how the industrial
user proposes to meet the categorical standards and/or
pretreatment requirements, including whether additional
operation and maintenance (O & M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required for the industrial user to meet the
applicable categorical standard or pretreatment requirements.
If the applicant is a categorical industrial user, this statement
shall be signed by a certified professional.
(l) If additional pretreatment and/or O & M will be required to
meet categorical standards or other pretreatment
requirements (including local limits), the shortest schedule by
which the industrial user will provide such additional facilities
or procedures shall be developed and submitted. The
completion date of this schedule shall not be later than the
compliance date established for any applicable categorical
standard. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule:
[1] The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the
form of dates for the commencement and completion of
major events leading to the construction and operation of
additional pretreatment required for the industrial user to
meet the applicable categorical standards or other
pretreatment requirements (e.g., hiring an engineer,
completing preliminary plans, completing final plans,
executing contract for major components, commencing
construction, completing construction, etc.).
[2] No increment referred to in Subsection D(1)(l)[1] above
shall exceed nine months.
[3] Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule
and the final date for compliance, the industrial user shall
submit a progress report to the Borough including, as a
minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment
of progress to be met on such date, and, if not, the date on
which it expects to comply with this increment of progress,
the reason for delay and the steps being taken by the
industrial user to return the construction to the schedule
established. In no event shall more than nine months
elapse between such progress reports to the Borough.
(m) Any other information as may be deemed by the Borough to be
necessary to evaluate the application.
§ 194-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-26
1:227
(n) The application shall be signed and attested to by an
authorized representative of the industrial user.
(2) The Borough will evaluate the data furnished by the industrial user
and may require additional information. After evaluation and
acceptance of the data furnished, the Borough may issue a
wastewater discharge permit subject to terms and conditions
provided herein.
E. Confidentiality of applications.
(1) All information required by the Borough in the permit application
shall be provided by the industrial user to the best of its ability.
(2) If information regarding raw materials, processes, production rates
or other manufacturing information is regarded as confidential by
the industrial user, such information shall be marked confidential
on the application form.
(3) Confidential shall not apply to information regarding the flow of or
the constituents in the industrial wastewater discharge.
(4) Information accepted by the Borough as confidential shall be
handled as detailed in Subsection S of this section.
F. Wastewater discharge permit conditions.
(1) Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all
provisions of the industrial pretreatment program and all other
applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the
Borough. Permits shall contain the following:
(a) Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents
and characteristics, including local limits and/or categorical
standards, as applicable;
(b) List of prohibited discharges, as presented in § 194-24 of the
Borough Code;
(c) Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge
reports, including the information to be contained and the
signatory requirements of these reports;
(d) Specifications for monitoring programs which may include
sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and
standards for tests and reporting schedule;
(e) Requirements for maintaining and retaining records relating to
industrial waste and wastewater discharges and
characteristics as specified by the Borough and affording the
Borough access thereto;
(f) Requirements for notification to the Borough of any new
introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial
§ 194-26 DANVILLE CODE § 194-26
1:228
change in the volume or character of the wastewater
constituents being discharged into the sewer system;
(g) Requirements for notification of slug loads as per § 194-24I;
(h) Statement of duration of the wastewater discharge permit;
(i) Notification of the rules regarding transferability, as stated in
Subsection G of this section;
(j) Notification of penalties provided for noncompliance as
contained in § 194-28 of the Borough Code; and
(k) Notification of right of appeal.
(2) Permits may also contain other information, including but not
limited to:
(a) Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
(b) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection
and sampling facilities;
(c) Requirements for installation and maintenance of
pretreatment facilities;
(d) Requirements for developing and implementing special plans
or practices such as toxic organic management plans, special
management or housekeeping practices or other such
procedures;
(e) Compliance schedules;
(f) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
wastewater to be discharged to the sewer system; and
(g) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Borough to
ensure compliance with this article or any other applicable
ordinance.
G. Transferability of permits. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to
a specific industrial user for a specific operation. A wastewater
discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new
person, new industrial user, different premises or a new or changed
operation without the approval of the Borough. Any succeeding
industrial user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the
existing wastewater discharge permit. The Borough may, at its
discretion, deny the transfer of a wastewater discharge permit and
require application for a new wastewater discharge permit under the
provisions of this section.
H. Duration of wastewater discharge permits. Wastewater discharge
permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five
§ 194-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-26
1:229
years. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period of
less than a year or may be dated to expire on a specific date. The
industrial user shall apply for reissuance of the wastewater discharge
permit a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of the industrial
user's existing wastewater discharge permit. The terms and conditions
of the wastewater discharge permit may be subject to modification by
the Borough during the term of the wastewater discharge permit as
limitations or requirements as identified in § 194-24 are modified or
other just cause exists. The industrial user shall be informed of any
proposed changes in its wastewater discharge permit at least 30 days
prior to the effective date of the change. Any changes or new conditions
in the wastewater discharge permit shall include a reasonable time
schedule for compliance.
I. Delayed permit renewal.
(1) If the industrial user has complied with the terms of the wastewater
discharge permit and the industrial pretreatment program and has
applied for renewal as provided for in Subsection H of this section
and the wastewater discharge permit is not renewed on or before
the expiration date through no fault of the industrial user, then the
existing wastewater discharge permit shall remain in effect until it
is reissued or rescinded by the Borough.
(2) If the wastewater discharge permit is not renewed because of a
failure of the industrial user to apply for renewal in a timely fashion
or through an act or omission of the industrial user, then discharge
of industrial waste by the industrial user without a wastewater
discharge permit is an unauthorized discharge and is subject to the
enforcement provisions of this article.
J. Appeal of wastewater discharge permits.
(1) Any industrial user that is issued a wastewater discharge permit
may appeal the permit conditions, in whole or in part. Appeal
procedures shall be as set forth in § 194-27G of the Borough Code.
(2) During the process of appeal, the wastewater discharge permit
shall remain in effect and shall be enforced with the exception of
those conditions specified in writing in the appeal. Conditions
imposed by federal or state regulations (e.g., categorical
standards) shall not be waived. Conditions which, in the opinion of
the Borough, would constitute a hazard or pose a potential threat of
pollution if waived shall not be waived during an appeal.
K. Baseline monitoring reports.
(1) As soon as possible following the promulgation of a categorical
standard, the wastewater discharge permit of industrial users
subject to such standards shall be revised, if necessary, to require
compliance with such categorical standard within the time frame
prescribed by the categorical standard.
§ 194-26 DANVILLE CODE § 194-26
1:230
(2) Where an industrial user, subject to a newly promulgated
categorical standard, has not previously submitted an application
for a wastewater discharge permit as required by Subsection D of
this section, the industrial user shall, within 180 days after the
promulgation of the applicable categorical standard:
(a) Apply for a wastewater discharge permit; and
(b) Provide the baseline monitoring information required by 40
CFR 403.12(b). This information may be incorporated into the
application for a wastewater discharge permit.
(3) An industrial user with an existing wastewater discharge permit
shall submit to the Borough within 180 days after the promulgation
of an applicable categorical standard the information required by
40 CFR 403.12(b).
(4) A new source or an industrial user that becomes a categorical
industrial user through a change in facilities or processes shall
submit a report containing the information required by 40 CFR
403.12(b) at least 90 days prior to commencement of discharge
from the regulated process or facility.
L. Categorical compliance report. Within 90 days following the date for
final compliance with applicable categorical standards or, in the case of
a new source, following commencement of the discharge of industrial
waste from processes regulated by categorical standards into the sewer
system, any industrial user subject to categorical standards shall
submit to the Borough a report indicating the nature and concentration
of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are
limited by categorical standards and the average and maximum daily
flow for those process units in the industrial user's facility which are
limited by such categorical standards. The report shall certify that the
information contained therein concerning wastewater constituents and
flows is representative of discharges during normal work cycles. The
report shall also state whether the applicable categorical standards are
being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional operation
and management practices and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring
the industrial user into compliance with the applicable categorical
standards, and including a schedule for completion of the required
actions in the form described in Subsection D(1)(l) of this section. This
statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the
industrial user and certified to by a certified professional.
M. Periodic compliance reports.
(1) All significant industrial users shall report to the Borough, at least
twice a year, the date of the report to be as determined by the
Borough and contained in the wastewater discharge permit.
Reports may be required more frequently, if deemed necessary by
the Borough.
§ 194-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-26
1:231
(2) The reports required under this section shall contain, at a
minimum, the measured concentrations of all pollutants regulated
by the wastewater discharge permit, a record of all measured daily
flows which exceeded the average daily flow value reported in
compliance with Subsection D(1)(h) of this section and a statement
of accuracy and completeness signed and certified by the
authorized representative of the significant industrial user.
(3) For significant industrial users subject to categorical standards, if
discharge limits are based on mass units per production unit, then
production information regarding the regulated processes during
the reporting period shall be included in the report, along with flow
and concentration values, so that a determination of compliance or
noncompliance with categorical standards can be made.
(4) For significant industrial users subject to categorical standards, the
report shall contain the certification of compliance with those
standards, signed by a certified professional.
N. Reporting and resulting of discharge limit violations.
(1) If, upon receipt of valid sampling and testing results, a significant
industrial user becomes aware that a violation of discharge limits
has occurred, the significant industrial user shall, within 24 hours
of becoming aware of the violation, notify the Borough of this fact.
Within 30 days of becoming aware of the violation, the significant
industrial user shall also sample and analyze its discharge(s) for
each parameter found to be in violation and report the results of
the resampling and analysis to the Borough.
(2) Each significant industrial user shall have a duty, on receipt of
validly obtained sampling and analysis results, of inspecting the
results and determining if any wastewater discharge permit
condition has been violated. Failure to examine and compare
testing results with wastewater discharge permit conditions shall
not be a valid defense for failure to comply with these reporting
conditions.
O. Sampling and analysis. All sampling and analysis performed in
compliance with wastewater discharge permit conditions or to prepare
the reports required in Subsections K, L, M and N of this section shall
be accomplished using techniques specified in 40 CFR Part 136, or
alternative procedures approved by the administrator or using
procedures described in standard methods if no EPA-approved
procedure exists.
P. Monitoring facilities.
(1) The Borough may require an industrial user to provide and operate,
at the industrial user's own expense, monitoring facilities to allow
inspection, sampling and flow measurement of the wastewater or
industrial waste discharge. The monitoring facility should normally
§ 194-26 DANVILLE CODE § 194-26
1:232
be situated on the industrial user's premises, but the Borough may,
when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship
on the industrial user, allow the facility to be constructed in the
public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be
obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.
(2) There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or
facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for
analysis. The facility, sampling and measuring equipment shall be
maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at
the expense of the industrial user.
(3) Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling
and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the
Borough's requirements and all applicable local construction
standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed
within 90 days following written notification by the Borough.
Q. Inspections. The Borough may inspect the facilities of any user to
ascertain whether the purposes of the industrial pretreatment program
are being met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or
occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall
allow the Borough or its representative ready access at all reasonable
times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection,
sampling, records examination and copying or in the performance of
any of their duties. The Borough, approval authority and EPA shall have
the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary
to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or
metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force
which would require proper identification and clearance before entry
onto their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with
its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification,
personnel from the Borough, approval authority and EPA will be
permitted to enter, without delay, for the purpose of performing their
specific responsibilities.
R. Pretreatment facilities. Industrial users shall provide necessary
wastewater pretreatment as required to comply with the industrial
pretreatment program and shall achieve compliance with all applicable
categorical standards within the time limitations as specified by the
applicable categorical standards. Any facilities required for
pretreatment shall be provided, operated and maintained at the
industrial user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment
facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the Borough
for review and shall be acceptable to the Borough before construction
of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in
no way relieve the industrial user from the responsibility of modifying
the facility as necessary to produce a discharge which complies with
the provisions of the industrial pretreatment program. Any subsequent
changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be
reported to and be acceptable to the Borough prior to the industrial
§ 194-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-26
1:233
user's initiation of the changes. The review and acceptance of plans
and procedures by the Borough shall not be considered as an approval
regarding their efficacy, safety or reliability; such considerations are
solely the responsibility of the industrial user.
S. Confidentiality.
(1) Information and data on an industrial user obtained from reports,
questionnaires, wastewater discharge permit applications and
monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the
public or any governmental agency without restriction unless the
industrial user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to
the satisfaction of the Borough that the release of such information,
processes or methods of production are entitled to protection as
trade secrets of the industrial user.
(2) When requested by the person showing a report and supported by
evidence acceptable to the Borough as to need for protection as
confidential material, the portion of a report which might disclose
trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for
inspection by the public but shall be made available upon written
request to governmental agencies for uses related to the industrial
pretreatment program, the Borough's NPDES permit, any state
permit and/or the industrial pretreatment program; provided,
however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by
the EPA, the state or any state agency in judicial review or
enforcement proceedings involving the person showing the report.
Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized
as confidential information.
(3) The Borough shall maintain a secure place to store records
containing confidential information and shall ensure that all
records marked as confidential are kept secure from casual or
public scrutiny.
(4) When information accepted by the Borough as confidential is
transmitted to any government agency, a notification to the
industrial user shall be provided listing the confidential information
transmitted and the governmental entity requesting it.
T. Change in operations.
(1) Any industrial user contemplating or planning a change in the
manufacturing process, raw materials, auxiliary processes,
pretreatment processes or other changes which may result in
changes to wastewater character, composition, volume or rate of
flow shall notify the Borough, in writing, at least 30 days prior to
making such a change, or, if the change is unplanned, immediately
upon making the change. The report shall include all information
necessary to determine the effect on the wastewater of the change.
(2) The Borough may, on receipt of such a report:
§ 194-26 DANVILLE CODE § 194-26
1:234
§ 194-27. Enforcement.
(a) Continue an existing wastewater discharge permit in effect;
(b) Require application for a new wastewater discharge permit;
(c) Modify an existing wastewater discharge permit to reflect the
changed nature of the waste;
(d) Rescind and reissue an existing wastewater discharge permit
in order to make substantial changes in wastewater discharge
permit conditions;
(e) Revoke an existing wastewater discharge permit or require the
industrial user to cease or prevent the discharge; or
(f) Take such other action as it deems appropriate.
U. Records.
(1) The Borough shall keep and maintain all records relating to the
administration and enforcement of the industrial pretreatment
program, including but not limited to wastewater discharge permit
applications, investigations and calculations, wastewater discharge
permits, inspection reports, industrial user reports, sampling
results and enforcement activities, for a minimum of three years. In
cases of ongoing litigation, records shall be maintained as long as
they may be required.
(2) All industrial users shall keep and maintain records of monitoring
activities and results, wastewater discharge permits and reports to
the Borough for a minimum of three years. In cases of ongoing
litigation, such records shall be maintained as long as they may be
required.
A. Right to refuse. The Borough reserves the right to refuse to accept
wastewater or combinations of wastewater which are discharged in
violation of the terms or conditions of the industrial pretreatment
program or any written directions issued by the Borough pursuant to
the conditions of the industrial pretreatment program. The Borough
may take such steps as it deems necessary, as outlined in this section, to
compel discontinuance of use of the sewer system or pretreatment of
industrial wastes in order to comply with the provisions of the industrial
pretreatment program.
B. Suspension of permit.
(1) The Borough may suspend the wastewater discharge permit when
such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the Borough, in
order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or
may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the
health or welfare of persons or to the environment, causes
interference or pass-through or causes the Borough to violate any
§ 194-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-27
1:235
condition of its NPDES permit or any other federal or state law,
rule, regulation or permit condition.
(2) Any industrial user notified of a suspension of its wastewater
discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the discharge.
In the event of a failure of the industrial user to comply voluntarily
with the notice of suspension, the discharge shall be considered an
unauthorized discharge, and the Borough shall take such steps as
deemed necessary, including immediate severance or plugging of
the connection between the building sewer and the sewage
collection system, to prevent or minimize damage to the sewer
system or endangerment to the environment or any property or
person.
(3) The Borough shall reinstate the wastewater discharge permit upon
submission of proof by the industrial user of the elimination of the
unauthorized discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by
the industrial user describing the causes of the unauthorized
discharge and the measures taken to prevent any future
occurrence shall be submitted to the Borough within 15 days of the
date of occurrence.
C. Revocation of permit.
(1) Any industrial user who violates the following conditions of the
industrial pretreatment program or applicable state and federal
regulations is subject to having its wastewater discharge permit
revoked:
(a) Failure of an industrial user to factually report the wastewater
constituents and characteristics of its discharge in any
application for a wastewater discharge permit or in any reports
required by § 194-26K, L, M or N of the Borough Code;
(b) Failure of the industrial user to report significant changes in
operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics as
required in § 194-26T of the Borough Code;
(c) Refusal of reasonable access to the industrial user's premises
for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or
(d) Significant noncompliance with conditions of the wastewater
discharge permit.
(2) Discharge of any industrial waste to the sewer system by a
significant industrial user without a wastewater discharge permit is
an unauthorized discharge, as provided in § 194-26A, and is subject
to the penalties provided herein.
D. Notice of violation. Whenever the Borough finds that any industrial user
has violated or is violating the provisions of the industrial pretreatment
program, its wastewater discharge permit or any prohibition, limitation
§ 194-27 DANVILLE CODE § 194-27
1:236
or requirements contained herein, the Borough may serve upon such
industrial user a written notice stating the nature of the violation
and requiring a response with a special time. Responses required of
industrial users may include but are not restricted to actions, plans,
compliance schedules or written explanations.
E. Show-cause hearing.
(1) The Borough may direct any industrial user who causes or allows
an unauthorized discharge to enter the sewer system or who
violates any condition or requirement of the industrial
pretreatment program or its wastewater discharge permit to show
cause before the Borough why the proposed enforcement action
should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the industrial user
specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the
Borough regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be
taken, the proposed enforcement action and directing the
industrial user to show cause before the Borough why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing
shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return
receipt requested) at least 10 days before the hearing. Service may
be made on any agent or officer of a corporation if the industrial
user is a corporation.
(2) The Borough may itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence
or may designate any of its members or any representative of the
Borough to:
(a) Issue in the name of the Borough notices of hearings
requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the
production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such
hearings.
(b) Take the evidence.
(c) Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with
recommendations, to the Borough for action thereon.
(3) At any hearing held pursuant to this subsection, testimony taken
must be under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript,
so recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or
any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges
thereof.
(4) After the Borough has reviewed the evidence, it may, in writing,
direct the industrial user to take certain actions to correct the
unauthorized discharge or to achieve compliance. The actions
which may be directed include but are not limited to:
(a) Installation of pretreatment facilities or equipment.
§ 194-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-27
1:237
(b) Modification or additions to existing pretreatment facilities or
equipment.
(c) Initiation of management practices which are required to alter
the nature of the industrial waste being discharged.
(d) Development or implementation of SPCC plans or other
measures.
(e) Other measures found to be necessary to correct the
unauthorized discharge or other noncompliance.
(f) The direction may be in the form of a schedule for compliance,
setting dates by which certain actions shall be taken.
(5) Failure of an industrial user to comply with written directions
issued pursuant to a hearing constitutes a violation of the Borough
Code and may be subject to additional actions or penalties as
outlined in this section.
F. Administrative orders. The Borough may issue written directions as
described in Subsection E(4) of this section without a show-cause
hearing if the Borough determines that such directions are necessary to
correct conditions or remedy continuing violations of any wastewater
discharge permit or other requirements of the industrial pretreatment
program, the Borough Code or federal or state regulations.
G. Right of appeal.
(1) An industrial user may appeal the enforcement actions enumerated
above in Subsections B, C, E and F of this section or wastewater
discharge permit conditions, in whole or in part. An appeal is
subject to the following requirements:
(a) The appeal must be made in writing to the Borough.
(b) The appeal must be made within 30 calendar days from the
date of receipt of the wastewater discharge permit, written
directions or notice of suspension or revocation of a
wastewater discharge permit being appealed by the industrial
user.
(c) The appeal must state the specific provision(s) of a wastewater
discharge permit or the specific directions of the Borough
which are being contested.
(d) The appeal must state the reasons for the appeal of each
provision.
(e) The appeal may suggest alternate or revised provisions to
replace those appealed.
(2) Provisions mandated by federal or state regulations (e.g.,
compliance with categorical standards) shall not be appealed.
§ 194-27 DANVILLE CODE § 194-27
1:238
(3) An appeal shall be made to the Borough and shall be reviewed by
any designated representative(s) of the Borough, provided that:
(a) The representative shall not be the pretreatment coordinator;
and
(b) The representative is not the superintendent.
(4) Within 60 days of receipt, the representatives reviewing the appeal
shall report, in writing, to the Borough the results of the review.
The report shall contain, at a minimum:
(a) A summary of each item appealed, the appellant's reasons for
appeal and the appellant's proposed remedies, if any.
(b) The finding of merit for each point and the reason(s) for
finding.
(c) For each point found to be with merit, a proposed remedy and a
finding that the remedy is allowable under the provisions of the
industrial pretreatment program and all applicable federal,
state and local rules, regulations and laws.
(5) The Borough shall review the report and, at one or more regular or
special public meetings, take any additional testimony offered by
the appellant, reviewer, pretreatment program coordinator or
other interested party. The Borough shall, within 45 days of the
conclusion of testimony, decide to:
(a) Grant the appeal or portions of the appeal, applying such
remedies as it deems proper; or
(b) Deny the appeal.
(6) This decision constitutes final administrative action.
H. Civil actions. If any person violates the provisions of the industrial
pretreatment program, including local federal or state pretreatment
requirements, categorical standards or any wastewater discharge
permit or written directions issued by the Borough, the Borough may
commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the
(Circuit) Court of Centre County.
I. Injunctive relief. If any person causes or permits an unauthorized
discharge to occur or otherwise violates the conditions imposed by the
industrial pretreatment program or any wastewater discharge permit
or written directions issued by the Borough or any federal or state
pretreatment requirement or categorical standard, the Borough may
commence an action in the (Circuit) Court of Centre County for
injunctive relief to stop the unauthorized discharge or to require
compliance with the applicable condition.
§ 194-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-27
1:239
J. Enforcement response plan. The Borough shall develop an enforcement
response plan to guide the pretreatment coordinator in the
administration of the industrial pretreatment program. The
enforcement response plan shall meet the requirements of 40 CFR
403.8(f)(5) regarding the contents of enforcement response plans. The
pretreatment coordinator shall be guided by the enforcement response
plan when reviewing industrial user reports, inspection results and
other compliance information and when recommending to the Borough
enforcement action in response to noncompliance.
K. Significant violators. The Borough shall publish annually, in the local
daily newspaper of highest circulation, a list of industrial users that
were found to be in significant noncompliance during the previous
calendar year. Significant noncompliance shall be determined using
measures of rate, magnitude and type of noncompliance, as delineated
below:
(1) Chronic violations of local limits, prohibitive discharge standards,
categorical standards or other numerical limitations on discharges
of industrial waste. A chronic violation occurs if the violation occurs
in 66% or more of all measurements taken during a six-month
period for the same pollutant(s).
(2) Technical review criteria (TRC) violations of local limits, prohibitive
discharge standards, categorical standards or other numerical
limitations on discharges of industrial waste. A TRC violation
occurs if 33% or more of all of the measurements for any pollutant
equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the
monthly average limit and the applicable TRC. For conventional
pollutants (BOD, total suspended solids and fats, oil and grease),
the TRC equals 1.4; for all other pollutants except pH, the TRC
equals 1.2.
(3) Any violation of limits, prohibitive discharge standards, categorical
standards or other numerical limitations on discharges of industrial
waste which the Borough determines has caused pass-through or
interference or has endangered the health or safety of Borough
personnel or the public.
(4) Any discharge that has caused imminent endangerment to human
health, welfare or the environment or has caused the Borough to
exercise its emergency authority under Subsection B of this
section.
(5) Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater
discharge permit or submitted in response to written directions of
the Borough for starting construction, completing construction or
attaining final compliance.
(6) Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, any required
reports, including but not limited to baseline monitoring reports,
§ 194-27 DANVILLE CODE § 194-27
1:240
§ 194-28. Violations and penalties.95
Any user who is found to have failed to comply with any provisions of
the industrial pretreatment program or the rules, regulations and permits
issued hereunder shall be fined not less than $600 nor more than $1,500
for each offense. Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue
shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In addition to the penalties
provided herein, the Borough may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court
costs, court reporters' fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate
suit at law against the person found to have violated this article or the rules,
regulations and permits issued hereunder.
periodic compliance reports, reports on compliance with
compliance schedules or reports on a change in operations.
(7) Failure to accurately report any noncompliance.
(8) Any other violation, noncompliance or group of violations or
noncompliances which the Borough determines will adversely
affect the operation or implementation of the industrial
pretreatment program.
L. Records. The Borough shall maintain records of all enforcement actions
taken, the reasons for those actions and the results of those actions.
These records shall be made available to the approval authority and the
public during normal Borough business hours.
95.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 194-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-28
1:241
Chapter 199
SKATEBOARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 88. Streets, sidewalks and driveways — See Ch.
216.
§ 199-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SKATEBOARD — A vehicle for riding upon, usually while standing,
propelled by human power and gravity, consisting of material or a portion
of material formed in a thin firm sheet, usually, but not always, shaped
in an oblong or rectangular fashion, mounted on wheels attached to the
underside.
SKATEBOARDING — Operation of a skateboard.
§ 199-2. Obligations of persons engaged in skateboarding.
§ 199-3. Yielding of right-of-way to pedestrians.
A person engaged in skateboarding shall yield the right-of-way to any
pedestrian and shall not overtake or pass a pedestrian while riding upon
or propelling a skateboard. The operator of the skateboard shall dismount
A. A person engaged in skateboarding shall at all times operate his or her
skateboard in such manner as is reasonable, safe and prudent under the
circumstances and conditions then existing and so as not to constitute a
hazard to any person, property or vehicle.
B. A person engaged in skateboarding shall use appropriate safety
equipment and attire.
C. A person engaged in skateboarding shall obey all traffic and pedestrian
control signals as provided by the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code, 75
Pa.C.S.A. §§ 3112 (relating to traffic control signals) and 3113 (relating
to pedestrian control signals), or as amended.
D. A person engaged in skateboarding shall obey the instructions of a
police officer or other person authorized to direct, control or regulate
traffic.
E. The parent, guardian or other person having legal custody of any minor
shall be responsible for instructing, supervising and providing safety
equipment and attire to such minor who may be engaged in
skateboarding.
§ 194-28 DANVILLE CODE § 199-3
1:242
from the skateboard and shall pass or overtake the pedestrian on foot, or
wait until the pedestrian passes, prior to remounting the skateboard.
§ 199-4. Operation in roadways.
No person engaged in skateboarding shall suddenly leave a curb, sidewalk,
berm of street or any other place of safety and ride upon or propel the
skateboard into or toward the path of a vehicle which is so close as to
constitute a hazard. Where there are no pedalcycle lanes, persons engaged
in skateboarding upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right of the
roadway as practical, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle
or a vehicle proceeding in the same direction.
§ 199-5. Ramps and devices.
No person shall place a ramp, half-pipe or other structure used for
skateboarding in or upon any public thoroughfare, street, sidewalk or
municipal parking lot within the Borough of Danville.
§ 199-6. Operation prohibited in certain locations.
It should be unlawful for any person to engage in skateboarding in the
following areas:
§ 199-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates the terms of this chapter shall be subject to the
following penalties:
A. Streets and sidewalks:
(1) The entire length of Mill Street.
(2) Ferry Street from East Market Street to Bloom Street.
(3) The entire length of Continental Boulevard.
(4) U.S. Route 11 (Northumberland Street, Bloom Street and Walnut
Street) for its entire length through the Borough of Danville.
(5) Memorial Park, River and Montgomery Parks. [Added 5-9-2006
by Ord. No. 475]
B. All municipal parking lots in the Borough of Danville. [Amended
5-9-2006 by Ord. No. 475]
C. All private parking lots in the Borough of Danville, unless permission is
granted by the lot owner.
A. First offense. The skateboard used in violation of this chapter shall be
impounded by the Police Department of the Borough of Danville for a
period not to exceed 15 days. If the person violating this chapter is a
minor, in addition to the impounding of the skateboard, the Danville
§ 199-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 199-7
1:243
§ 199-8. Private property rights.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit or effect the rights of any
private property owner to restrict, prohibit or permit the use of skateboards
on private property.
Chapter 203
SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 180. Streets, sidewalks and driveways — See Ch.
216.
§ 203-1. Removal from sidewalks required. [Amended 12-11-2001
by Ord. No. 432]
The owner of every property fronting upon or alongside of any of the streets
in the Borough of Danville is hereby required to remove all snow and ice
from all of the sidewalks in front of and/or alongside of such property within
24 hours after the same shall have ceased to fall or form. The owner of
the property shall be responsible for conforming to the requirement of this
section.
§ 203-2. Placing or throwing of snow upon streets prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant or tenant of any property within
the Borough of Danville to throw or place snow upon the traveled portion of
any street.
Borough Police Department shall notify the parent, guardian or other
person having legal custody of said minor of the violation of this chapter
and the impounding of the skateboard. In addition, the person violating
the chapter and, in the event that person is a minor, the parent,
guardian or other person having legal custody of such minor shall be
provided with a copy of this chapter by the Danville Borough Police
Department.
B. Second and/or subsequent offense. The skateboard used in violation of
this chapter shall be impounded by the Danville Borough Police
Department for a period not to exceed 30 days, and said person shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $15. If the person
operating the skateboard is a minor, the skateboard shall be impounded
by the Police Department of the Borough of Danville for a period not
exceeding 30 days, and the parent, guardian or other person having
legal custody of said minor shall be responsible for the violation by the
minor and, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $15.
§ 199-7 DANVILLE CODE § 203-3
1:244
§ 203-3. Removal by Borough; collection of costs. [Added 5-14-1975
by Ord. No. 258; amended 12-11-2001 by Ord. No. 432]
If any sidewalk in front of and/or alongside of any lot, land or real estate
within the Borough of Danville is not cleared by the owner as directed in
§ 203-1 of this chapter, the Borough may cause the sidewalk to be cleared
forthwith and to immediately report the cost and expense thereof to the
Borough Council, and the charge shall be collected against the owner as
other charges and assessments are by law collectible.
§ 203-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-14-1975 by Ord. No.
258; 12-11-2001 by Ord. No. 432]
Chapter 207
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 180.
Streets, sidewalks and driveways — See Ch.
216
Junked vehicles — See Ch. 243.
A. Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more than $300.96
B. Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall upon
conviction be punishable by fines as listed above and costs of such
proceedings or, upon default of payment of such fines and costs, by
imprisonment in the county jail for a term of not more than 30 days. The
continuation of such violation for each successive day shall constitute a
separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or permitting the
continuation of the violation may be punished as provided above for
each separate offense.
96.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 203-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-4
1:245

ARTICLE I
Recycling
[Adopted 10-11-1994 by Ord. No. 372 (Ch. 106 of the 1975 Code)]
§ 207-1. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Recycling Ordinance."
§ 207-2. Public policy.
The Danville Borough Council, recognizing that the reclamation of
recyclable materials has become an important method for addressing the
growing solid waste disposal problem through conservation of landfill
space, preservation of natural resources and a reduction in energy
consumption, does hereby authorize the storage, collection and
transportation of recyclable material in accordance with the provisions of
the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act (No. 101
of 198897) and this article. This article is intended to be an integral part of
an overall system designed to facilitate recycling and foster the cooperation
of the residents.
§ 207-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BIMETAL CONTAINERS — Empty beverage cans consisting of aluminum
and steel.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Those properties used primarily for
commercial or industrial purposes, excluding those multiple dwelling
residential buildings containing four or more dwelling units.
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES — Church, school, civic service group, municipal
functions and all other such functions.
CORRUGATED PAPER — Structural paper material with an inner core
shaped in rigid parallel furrows and ridges.
CURBSIDE RECYCLING COLLECTION — The scheduled collection and
transportation of recyclable materials placed at the curbline or other area
designated by the collector.
DROPOFF SITES — Those specified locations where recyclable materials
may be taken at specified times.
DWELLINGS — 98
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING FACILITY — A structure containing three or
more dwelling units, including but not limited to garden apartments,
condominiums and townhouses.
A.
97.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
98.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 207-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-3
1:247
DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.99
GLASS CONTAINERS — Bottles and jars made of clear, green or brown
glass. Excluded are plate glass, automotive glass, blue glass and porcelain
and ceramic products.
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — Bond, copier, letterhead or mimeograph
paper typically sold as "white ledger" paper, and computer paper that is
used in commercial, institutional and municipal establishments.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Those facilities that house or serve
groups of people such as hospitals, schools, day-care centers and nursing
homes.
LEAD ACID BATTERIES — Include but are not limited to automotive, truck
and industrial batteries that contain lead.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves from trees.
MUNICIPAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Public facilities operated by the
Borough of Danville and other governmental and quasi-governmental
authorities.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Danville, Montour County, Pennsylvania.
MUNICIPAL RECYCLING PROGRAM — A source separation and collection
program for recycling municipal waste or source-separated recyclable
materials, or a program for designated dropoff points or collection centers
for recycling municipal waste or source-separated recyclable materials,
that is operated by or on behalf of a municipality. The term includes any
source separation and collection program for composting yard waste that is
operated by or on behalf of a municipality. The term shall not include any
program for recycling construction/demolition waste or sludge from sewage
treatment plants.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material, resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities.
Also included is any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or
hazardous waste in the Solid Waste Management Act from a municipal,
commercial or institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater
ONE-FAMILY DWELLING — A detached building, designated for or
occupied exclusively by one family and containing not more than one
dwelling unit.
B.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — A detached or semidetached building
where not more than two individual family or dwelling units are entirely
separated by vertical walls or horizontal floors, unpierced except for
access to the outside or to a common cellar.
C.
99.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 207-3 DANVILLE CODE § 207-3
1:248
treatment plant or air pollution control facility. The term does not include
source-separated recyclable materials.
OCCUPANT — Any person (including domestic service employees) living
and/or sleeping in a dwelling unit.
PERSON(S) — Any individual, partnership, company, association, society,
trust, corporation or other group or entity, whether an owner or lessee of
residences, commercial or institutional establishments.100
RECYCLING — The collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse of
metals, glass, paper, leaf waste and other materials which would otherwise
be disposed of or processed as municipal waste or the mechanized
separation and treatment of municipal waste (other than through
combustion) and creation and recovery of reusable materials other than a
fuel for the operation of energy.
RECYCLING COLLECTOR — A person authorized to collect sourceseparated
recyclable materials from commercial, institutional and
municipal establishments and multifamily housing properties in the
Borough of Danville.
RECYCLING MATERIALS — Any used material having an economic value in
the secondary materials market. This term includes: aluminum and bimetal
beverage cans, clear glass, green glass, brown glass, high-grade office
paper and corrugated paper.
RESIDENTIAL DWELLINGS — Any occupied single- or multifamily dwelling
having up to and including three dwelling units per structure.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Materials that are
separated from municipal waste at the point of origin for the purpose of
recycling.
WASTE — A material whose original purpose has been completed and which
is directed to a disposal or processing facility or is otherwise disposed. The
term does not include source-separated recyclable materials or material
approved by the Borough Council for beneficial use.
§ 207-4. General.
Those recyclable materials separated under the provisions of this article
shall not be considered municipal waste and shall not be subject to
provisions of those ordinances which require disposal of municipal waste
at designated facilities. This exemption applies to recyclable materials
collected by the Borough of Danville or its agents and delivered to an
intermediate processing facility for purposes of materials recovery.
Likewise, the collector of recycling materials shall be exempt from all
provisions of those ordinances which require disposal of municipal waste
by licensed haulers. Recyclables separated, stored, collected or delivered
in any manner other than the approved methods listed in this article,
which shall be adopted by the Borough of Danville from time to time, shall
100. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 207-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-4
1:249
be considered municipal waste and be subject to the provisions of the
appropriate ordinance.
§ 207-5. Establishment of the program.
The Borough of Danville hereby establishes a mandatory program for the
separation of recyclable material from municipal waste by all persons within
the Borough of Danville. After curbside service has been instituted within
the Borough of Danville, the recycling program will be mandatory.
Occupants shall be responsible for the separation of recyclable materials
from solid waste and their preparation and placement at curbside.
Recyclable materials may also be delivered to any established dropoff site.
§ 207-6. Establishment of municipal recycling program for
residential dwellings.
§ 207-7. Separation of recyclables and placement for disposal by
inhabitants of residential dwellings.
A. There is hereby established a municipal recycling program for the
mandatory separation of recyclable materials from solid waste by
persons residing in single-family dwellings or multifamily dwellings
having up to and including three dwelling units per structure.
B. The Borough of Danville shall be responsible for scheduling a day, at
least once a month, for collection of recyclable material. The Borough
Council shall establish and modify this schedule, and the responsibility
for communicating it to the residents of the Borough and to make
regulations pursuant to this article shall be with the Recycling
Coordinator.
A. Recyclable materials from residential dwellings shall be placed at the
curb or other designated place separate from municipal waste for
collection or taken to dropoff sites at such times, dates and places and
in such manner as may be established by regulation of this article.
Separated recyclables shall not be placed in the same containers or
otherwise mixed with other forms of nonrecyclable municipal waste for
collection, removal or disposal. Failure to separate recyclables from
nonrecyclables shall be a violation of these regulations and the
ordinance adopted to enforce these regulations.
B. Materials to be recycled are: clear glass, brown glass, green glass,
aluminum and bimetal beverage cans.
C. Persons shall be required to store recyclables until they recycle them or
until the Borough or its agents collects them. Nothing in these
regulations shall be deemed to impair the ownership of separated
materials by the person who generated them unless and until such
materials are placed at curbside or similar locations for collection by
the Borough or its agent(s).
§ 207-4 DANVILLE CODE § 207-7
1:250
§ 207-8. Separation of recyclables by commercial, municipal and
institutional establishments and at community activities.
§ 207-9. Separation of recyclables by multifamily housing
properties and placement for disposal.
D. The recyclable materials shall be placed in containers which will be
provided by the Borough, and said containers shall be and remain the
property of the Borough and remain with the residence, regardless of
owner and tenant. Any misuse or destruction of said containers shall
subject the person responsible to penalty as hereinafter set forth.
E. Should the containers become lost or unusable, they must be replaced
by notifying the Recycling Coordinator. The Borough is authorized to
charge a replacement fee in accordance with rules and regulations of
the Borough of Danville.
A. Commercial, municipal and institutional establishments shall separate
and store, until collection, high-grade office paper, corrugated paper,
aluminum and bimetal beverage cans, leaf waste, clear glass, green
glass and brown glass. These establishments must arrange for the
transfer of the materials at least once a month to a recycling system by
a collector licensed for the purpose of collecting source-separated
recyclable materials by the Borough of Danville.
B. The owner of each commercial, municipal and institutional
establishment shall provide a quarterly report to the Borough of
Danville as evidence of each such arrangement. The report shall
document the type and total weight of material recycled at the
establishment. Weight slips/invoices must also be submitted with the
quarterly report documenting the total weight of the material recycled.
C. At community activities attended by at least 200 people a day, the
following materials shall be separated and stored, until collection: highgrade
office paper, corrugated paper, leaf waste, aluminum and bimetal
beverage cans, clear glass, brown glass and green glass. Sponsors of
community activities shall provide a report to Danville Borough 30 days
after the event is held. The report shall document the type and weight
of material recycled at the event. Weight slips/invoices must also be
submitted with the report documenting the total weight of the material
recycled.
D. Commercial, municipal and institutional establishments and
coordinators of community activities who comply with this act shall not
be liable for the noncompliance of their tenants where a portion of the
building is leased to tenant(s) and/or for the noncompliance by the
general public where there is public access to the building or grounds
or in other public areas.
A. The owner, landlord or agent of an owner or landlord of a multifamily
housing property of four or more units shall make recycling collection
§ 207-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-9
1:251
§ 207-10. Licensing of recycling collector.
available at the housing units. Danville Borough will make curbside
collection of recyclables available at multifamily housing properties
of four or more units upon the owner's notification to the Borough
Recycling Officer. The owner, landlord or agent of an owner or landlord
of the multifamily housing property of four or more units shall notify
Danville Borough of the intent to participate in the curbside recycling
program. If the owner, landlord or agent of an owner or landlord of a
multifamily housing property of four or more units does not participate
in the Danville Borough curbside program, they will be responsible
for establishing a collection system of recyclables at the property. The
owner, landlord or agent of an owner or landlord of a multifamily
housing property of four or more units shall be responsible for
scheduling a day, at least once a month, for the collection of recyclable
materials.
B. Materials to be separated are: aluminum and bimetal beverage cans,
clear glass, green glass and brown glass. Owners, landlords or agents
of an owner or landlord of a multifamily housing property of four or
more units shall notify Danville Borough if they require recycling
containers. Danville Borough shall make the six-gallon recycling
containers purchased by the Borough available to the multifamily
housing owner. If the owner does not participate in the curbside
program and does not want the recycling containers purchased by the
Borough, the owner shall then provide suitable containers to the
tenants of the multifamily housing property of four or more units. The
owner shall provide a recycling collection system at the property which
must include suitable containers and written instructions to the
occupants concerning the use and availability of the collection system.
These landlords or owners must arrange for the collection of the
recyclable material by a recycling collector licensed in the Borough of
Danville.
C. The owner, landlord or agent of an owner or landlord of a multifamily
housing property of four or more units who does not participate in the
Danville Borough curbside program shall submit a quarterly recycling
report to the Borough as evidence that they are complying with the
recycling ordinance. The report shall document the type and weight of
material recycled at the multifamily housing property. Weight slips/
invoices must also be submitted with the quarterly recycling report
documenting the total weight of the material recycled.
A. Recycling collectors who provide a recycling collection program for
multifamily properties of four or more units, commercial, institutional
and municipal establishments shall be licensed with the Borough of
Danville. Recycling collectors shall complete the Borough of Danville
recycling collection license application and remit the license fee of $25
to Danville Borough by February 1 of each year. Every recycling
collector shall furnish to Danville Borough a quarterly recycling report
§ 207-9 DANVILLE CODE § 207-10
1:252
§ 207-11. Violations by recycling collectors; penalties.
Any recycling collector (except nonprofit organizations) who collects
recyclables in Danville Borough and does not obtain a license to do so
from Danville Borough, or any recycling collector who fails to submit the
quarterly recycling reports to Danville Borough, shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more than $600 and costs of such
proceedings or, upon default of payment of such fines and costs, by
imprisonment in the county jail for a term of not more than 30 days. The
continuation of such violation for each successive day shall constitute a
separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or permitting the
continuation of the violation may be punished as provided above for each
separate offense.
§ 207-12. Lead acid batteries.
No person may place a used lead acid battery in mixed municipal solid
waste, discard or otherwise dispose of a lead acid battery except by delivery
to an automotive battery retail or wholesaler, to a secondary lead smelter
permitted by the Environmental Protection Agency or to a collection or
recycling facility authorized under the laws of the commonwealth.
§ 207-13. Prohibition in burning recyclables, including leaf waste.
[Amended 12-11-2001 by Ord. No. 434]
indicating the total weight of the recyclables collected, the type of
recyclables collected and a list of customers whose sum total equals the
tonnage claimed on the quarterly recycling report.
B. The quarterly recycling reports are due to Danville Borough on the
following dates:101
Due Date Submit by
January 1 to March 31 April 15
April 1 to June 30 July 15
July 1 to September 30 October 15
October 1 to December 31 January 15
C. Nonprofit organizations who provide recycling collection for
multifamily properties of four or more units, commercial, institutional
and municipal establishments are exempt from the license fee
established pursuant to Subsection A, but shall report to Danville
Borough as to the owner and location of the property that they are
providing collection for.102
101. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
102. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 207-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-13
1:253
§ 207-14. Vesting of ownership and unauthorized collection.103
From the time of placement at the curb or designated dropoff sites of the
recyclable materials as designated by the Borough to be recycled pursuant
to the provisions of this article and the regulations issued hereunder, such
material shall become and be the property of the Borough of Danville.
It shall be a violation of the terms of this article for any person other
than the licensed recycling collector to collect, pick up or cause to be
collected or picked up any such materials. If any person, firm, corporation
or other entity removes or causes to be collected or removed any recyclable
materials as specified by the Borough of Danville in § 207-7 of this article
in violation of the provisions of this article, such person, firm, corporation
or other entity shall, upon conviction by a Magisterial District Judge in a
summary proceeding, be subject to a fine of not more than $600, together
with the costs of prosecution. Upon judgment against any such defendant
by summary conviction, on default of the payment of the fine or penalty
imposed and the costs, such defendant may be sentenced and committed to
the county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day of violation shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense and shall be subject to separate
summary proceedings before a Magisterial District Judge, and subject to the
penalty imposed by this section for each and every day such violation shall
continue.
§ 207-15. Nonparticipation.
Upon the discovery of any violation under the terms of this article, the
municipality shall, through its authorized agent(s), give notice to the owner
or occupant (or either of them as the case may be) of a violation hereunder,
either by personal delivery to such owner or occupant, by United States
mail directed to the last known address of such person or persons, as shown
in the real estate registry records of the municipality, or by leaving the
same on the premises where such violation occurs. Nothing contained in
this section shall affect, in any way, the provisions of this article regarding
separate offenses for every day any violation occurs.
A. Residents and businesses in Danville Borough cannot burn any
recyclables that are collected at curbside recycling or at the recycling
dropoff, including leaf waste.
B. Leaves are not to be incorporated in to the regular waste stream.
Nothing herein shall require any person to gather leaves or prevent any
person from utilizing leaves for compost, mulch or other agricultural,
horticultural, silvicultural, gardening or landscape purposes.
103. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 207-13 DANVILLE CODE § 207-16
1:254
§ 207-16. Fines for nonparticipation or nonpayment.104
On neglect or refusal of the occupant of any dwelling serviced by curbside
recycling collection, a multifamily housing program or a commercial,
municipal, institutional or community activity program to separate
recyclable materials from municipal solid waste and place them at curbside
or sites established by the Borough, or pay the penalty or penalties specified
in § 207-14, that person shall, upon conviction of such default, neglect
or refusal, pay a fine of not more than $600, together with the costs of
prosecution, to be collected as now provided by law. Each violation shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 207-17. Pilfering of collection containers.105
If any person is responsible for pilfering of collection containers issued
to a residence slated for either curbside collection or any other phase
of the recycling collection program, such person shall, upon conviction
by a Magisterial District Judge in a summary proceeding, be subject to
a fine of not more than $600, together with the costs of prosecution.
Upon judgment against any such defendant by summary conviction, on
default of the payment of the fine or penalty imposed and the costs, such
defendant may be sentenced and committed to the county jail for a period
not exceeding 30 days. Each day of a violation shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense and shall be subject to separate summary proceedings
before a Magisterial District Judge, and subject to the penalty imposed
by this section for each and every day such violation shall continue. The
affected resident will be responsible for replacing any missing container
through purchase from the Danville Borough.
§ 207-18. Applicability.
This article shall be subject to all applicable federal, state and local laws
and ordinances as well as rules and regulations as set forth by the
Department of Environmental Protection, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 207-19. Delivery of recyclable materials to landfills or
incinerators.
All recyclable materials must be delivered by the licensed collector to sites
for recycling. It shall be a violation of this article for the licensed collector
of recyclable materials to deliver such materials to a landfill or incinerator
for the purpose of disposal unless the markets for such materials no longer
exist.
§ 207-20. Right to contract for services.
Nothing herein is intended nor shall prohibit the Borough of Danville (which
has the responsibility for municipal waste planning, recycling and waste
104. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
105. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 207-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-20
1:255
reduction under the Act of July, 1988, No. 101106) from entering into
agreement(s) with public or private agencies or firms to authorize them
to collect all or part of the recyclable materials from residential dwellings
at curbside, dropoff collection points or other designated locations in
accordance with this article, which shall be adopted by the Borough of
Danville from time to time.
§ 207-21. Enforcement and administration.
The Borough of Danville shall appoint an enforcement officer or officers to
enforce and administer the provisions of this article.
§ 207-22. Fees for curbside recycling.
An annual recycling fee is hereby levied upon each property located in
Danville Borough. The amount of such fee shall be established by Danville
Borough Council and will be subject to change from time to time. The
annual recycling fee shall not be required of residential multifamily housing
properties of four or more units located in Danville Borough which elect to
provide recycling services independent of the Borough curbside program.
§ 207-23. Penalty for overdue payment of annual recycling fee.
Any residential housing property in the Borough of Danville which fails to
make payment of the annual recycling fee to the Borough within 90 days
after the date of the recycling notice shall be charged with a penalty of
10%, which penalty shall be added to the recycling fee and collected by
the Borough Recycling Officer. Danville Borough Council may make further
rules and regulations and provisions relating to the recycling fee, provided
that such rules and regulations do not violate any provisions of this article.
§ 207-24. Fees for recycling dropoff.
A per-usage recycling fee is hereby levied upon each owner, landlord or
agent of an owner or landlord of commercial, municipal or institutional
properties who use the recycling dropoff provided by Danville Borough. The
amount of such fee shall be established by the Danville Borough Council
and will be subject to change from time to time. The Danville Borough
Council may make further rules and regulations and provisions relating to
the recycling fee, provided that such rules and regulations do not violate
any provisions of this article.
§ 207-25. Penalty for overdue payment of recycling dropoff fee.
All owners, landlords or agents of owner or landlords of commercial,
municipal or institutional properties in the Borough of Danville who fail to
make payment of the recycling dropoff fee to the Borough within 90 days
after the date of the recycling notice shall be charged with a penalty of
106. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 207-20 DANVILLE CODE § 207-25
1:256
10%, which penalty shall be added to the recycling fee and collected by the
Borough Recycling Officer.
§ 207-26. Municipal liens. [Amended 4-9-2013 by Ord. No. 514]
The fees for curbside recycling imposed pursuant to § 207-22 of this article
shall act as a municipal lien upon real property. Such lien shall be
enforceable pursuant to the various laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania pertaining to municipal liens.
§ 207-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-26
1:257

ARTICLE II
Garbage and Rubbish Collection
[Adopted 4-8-2002 by Ord. No. 442]
§ 207-27. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARBAGE — The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.107[Added 11-8-2011 by
Ord. No. 507]
OCCUPANT — Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having
possession of a space within a building.[Added 11-8-2011 by Ord. No.
507]
OWNER — Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal
or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records
of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or
otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the
estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate
of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a
court.[Added 11-8-2011 by Ord. No. 507]
RECYCLABLES/RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Those materials specified by
the Borough of Danville for separation, collection, processing, recovery or
reuse as part of recycling program.
RUBBISH — Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage; the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood,
coal, coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes,
wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans,
metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar
materials.[Amended 11-8-2011 by Ord. No. 507]
§ 207-28. Owners and proprietors required to provide and maintain
containers.
The owners of dwellings, apartments, tenements and other houses and
the proprietors of stores, stands, markets, boardinghouses, hotels and
restaurants and other places where garbage is produced shall provide and
maintain containers as required hereinafter for all garbage accumulated on
the premises thereof.
§ 207-29. Required number of containers.
A sufficient number of containers shall be provided by the owners of
dwellings, apartments, tenements and other houses and the proprietors of
stores, stands, markets, boardinghouses, hotels, and restaurants and other
107. Editor's Note: The definition of "municipal solid waste," which previously followed this
definition, was repealed 11-8-2011 by Ord. No. 507.
§ 207-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-29
1:259
places where garbage is produced so that the aggregate capacity shall
be sufficient for normal needs between the intervals of collection given
hereinafter.
§ 207-30. Standards for containers.
Containers shall be made of nonabsorbent material, be watertight and
flytight, and be provided with handles and closely fitting covers made of
nonabsorbent material. The containers shall be kept in repair so as to be
watertight at all times.
§ 207-31. Use and maintenance of containers.
Containers shall be used only for garbage as defined hereinbefore. No more
water shall be allowed or permitted in garbage than naturally accumulates
from table refuse. These containers shall be kept covered and after they are
emptied shall be cleaned by the occupants or proprietors aforesaid.
§ 207-32. Accumulations or deposits in public places or bodies of
water prohibited.
No garbage shall be allowed to accumulate on the ground, be deposited on
the highways, vacant lots or commons nor be thrown into any streams or
other body of water.
§ 207-33. Weekly collection required. [Amended 11-8-2011 by Ord.
No. 507]
The owners of dwellings, apartments, tenements and other houses and
the proprietors of stores, stands, markets, boardinghouses, hotels and
restaurants and other places where garbage is produced shall have said
garbage collected at least once each week from the premises and more
often as may be required by the Board of Health.
§ 207-34. (Reserved)108
§ 207-35. Disinfection of cans. [Amended 11-8-2011 by Ord. No.
507]
All garbage containers shall be disinfected by the occupants of dwellings,
apartments, tenements and other houses and the proprietors of stores,
stands, markets, boardinghouses, hotels and restaurants and other places
where garbage is produced, at least once each week during the months of
May, June, July, August and September, and at least once a month during
the balance of the year.
108. Editor’s Note: Former § 207-34, Hours of collection, was repealed 11-10-2015 by Ord. No.
531.
§ 207-29 DANVILLE CODE § 207-36
1:260
§ 207-36. Vehicle requirements. [Amended 11-8-2011 by Ord. No.
507]
The carts or vehicles used by the collectors of garbage for transportation
from the premises to the place of disposal shall be of substantial
construction and provided with covers which shall be closed at all times
except when garbage is being placed in the cart or vehicle. They shall not
be overfilled so as to endanger fouling the highway and shall be cleansed at
sufficiently frequent intervals to prevent any nuisance from odors.
§ 207-37. Accessibility of containers.
Collectors may not at any time require occupants or proprietors within the
Borough of Danville to place their containers of garbage on the street curbs.
The only requirement shall be that the containers are kept in a place, which
is readily accessible to the collectors. Garbage may not be placed at the
curb collection any sooner than 12 hours prior to collection and containers
shall be removed from the curb no latter than 12 hours following collection.
§ 207-38. Method of disposal; approval required.
The method used for the disposal of garbage shall be approved by the
Borough Code Officer. It shall be conducted and maintained so as not to
create a public nuisance, permit fly breeding or be in any way a menace to
public health.
§ 207-38.1. Dumpsters, temporary dumpsters, and portable storage
devices on public streets. [Added 4-10-2018 by Ord. No. 551109]
A. Purpose. The primary purpose of public streets is for use by vehicular
and pedestrian traffic. Reasonable regulation of obstruction in public
streets and sidewalks is necessary to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the general public.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
DUMPSTER — A metal storage receptacle used to temporarily store
debris or garbage and which is then emptied of its contents or removed
with its contents to a dumpsite.
DUMPSTER HAULER — An individual or company responsible for the
placement and removal of the dumpster, temporary dumpster or
portable storage device.
PORTABLE STORAGE DEVICE — Any item placed in a street that is
not a motor vehicle, as defined by the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code,110
or a temporary dumpster, including, but not limited to, containers
commonly known as "portable storage devices" or "PODS®."
109. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed Ord. No. 542, Placement of dumpsters and
portable storage devices on public streets, adopted 5-9-2017.
110. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 207-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-38.1
1:261
TEMPORARY DUMPSTER — Any dumpster used or intended as a
disposal facility for construction, renovation, or demolition projects,
special events, seasonal use, or other purposes not permanent in
nature.
C. Permit required.
(1) Prior to the issuance of any permit for any dumpster, temporary
dumpster, or portable storage device, its location and usage shall
be reviewed and approved by the Police Department and/or
Borough.
(2) A permit for a dumpster, temporary dumpster, or portable storage
device shall be for an initial term of not more than 45 days,
provided the applicant is in compliance with all provisions of this
article and all other applicable Danville Borough regulations. A
renewal permit may be approved and issued for an additional fortyfive-
day period upon application and payment of the permit
renewal fee. Not more than one renewal permit shall be issued by
the Borough of Danville for any dumpster, temporary dumpster, or
portable storage device placed upon any Borough street.
(3) Temporary dumpster or portable storage devices shall be removed
prior to the expiration of the permit.
D. Requirements.
(1) The following requirements shall apply to any dumpster, temporary
dumpster, or portable storage device placed upon public streets or
pedestrianways in the Borough:
(a) No dumpster, temporary dumpster, or portable storage device
may be placed on any arterial or collector roads in the
Borough; within 40 feet of an intersection; or within any
prohibited or restricted areas.
(b) Sufficient reflective tape shall be placed upon all four sides of
the dumpster, temporary dumpster, or portable storage device
in such a manner as to make it visible at night.
(c) Each of the dumpster, temporary dumpster, or portable storage
device rollers or wheels (if any) must be placed upon a wooden
pad of at least six inches by six inches and at least 3/4 of an
inch in thickness, or on a similarly protective device, in order
to prevent damage to the road surface.
(d) No dumpster, temporary dumpster, or portable storage device
shall be placed nearer than 15 feet to any fire hydrant within
the cartway or other area intended for firefighting equipment.
(e) The name, address and telephone number of the dumpster,
temporary dumpster, or portable storage device owner/
§ 207-38.1 DANVILLE CODE § 207-38.1
1:262
operator shall be conspicuously placed on at least two sides of
the device.
(f) No dumpster, temporary dumpster, or portable storage device
shall be placed within the cartway of any street extending a
distance of more than nine feet from the curbline or edge of
cartway.
(g) The location of any dumpster, temporary dumpster, or portable
storage device upon any public street shall not interfere with
any required clear sight distance across any intersection.
(h) The location of any dumpster, temporary dumpster, or portable
storage device upon any public street shall not obstruct any
pedestrianway or the travel lane of any public street.
(i) No dumpster, temporary dumpster, or portable storage device
shall be loaded in such a manner as to cause its contents to
spill onto any street, sidewalk, or other area intended for
pedestrian travel.
(j) No dumpster, temporary dumpster, or portable storage device
shall contain any hazardous waste unless pursuant to a permit
for such waste issued by the appropriate governmental entity.
(k) No materials contained in a dumpster, temporary dumpster, or
portable storage device shall emit any noxious or offensive
odor or otherwise create any hazard or risk to public health.
(l) No dumpster, temporary dumpster, or portable storage device
shall be placed in such a manner as to interfere with the
operation or maintenance of any public utility.
(m) If approved, a permit sticker will be issued and shall be
conspicuously placed in a location that permits it to be
identified from a public street.
(n) The placement of any dumpster, temporary dumpster, or
portable storage device shall be in accordance with all
requirements of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Motor
Vehicle Code.111
(2) If any damage to the cartway, curb or sidewalk is done by the
placement of or removal of any dumpster, temporary dumpster or
portable storage device on any street or road hereunder, the
dumpster hauler of any dumpster, temporary dumpster or portable
storage device shall be responsible and liable for the same. The
Borough shall retain the right to repair or replace the cartway, curb
and/or sidewalk to its original condition and collect the cost for the
repair or replacement from the dumpster hauler.
111. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 207-38.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-38.1
1:263
§ 207-39. Use of dump requirements.
All collectors and/or haulers of municipal solid waste who handle such
waste which has as its place of origin Danville Borough shall deliver such
waste only to Lycoming County's municipal solid waste facility or facilities.
§ 207-40. Separation of recyclables.
Recyclables shall be kept separate from and disposed of separately from
municipal waste, to the extent required by the other ordinances of the
Borough of Danville pertaining to recycling.
§ 207-41. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Code Officer to enforce the terms of this
article and secure compliance with the requirements thereof.
§ 207-42. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-8-2011 by Ord. No.
507]
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than $300 for the first
offense, and a fine of not more than $600 for the second and subsequent
offenses, and costs of such proceedings or, upon default of payment of such
fines and costs, by imprisonment in the county jail for a term of not more
than 30 days. The continuation of such violation for each successive day
shall constitute a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or
permitting the continuation of the violation may be punished as provided
above for each separate offense.
E. Payment; failure to pay. Payment for all work done by the Borough
under the provisions hereof shall be made by the person made liable
therefor under the provisions hereof within 30 days after a bill therefor
is sent to such dumpster hauler by the Borough. Upon failure to pay
such charges within such time, the same shall be collectible by the
Borough in the manner provided by law for the collection of municipal
claims.
F. Duration of permit; removal of unit; renewal fee. A permit will be issued
for a period of time not to exceed 45 calendar days. All dumpsters or
portable storage devices must be removed prior to the expiration of the
permit. Costs for the permits and renewals are $20 each.
§ 207-38.1 DANVILLE CODE § 207-42
1:264
Chapter 212
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 102.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 120.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
220.
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
§ 207-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-42
1:265

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 212-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Danville Borough
Stormwater Management Ordinance."
§ 212-2. Findings.
The governing body of Danville Borough finds that:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases flood flows and
velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the
carrying capacity of existing streams and storm sewers, greatly
increases the cost of public facilities to convey and manage stormwater,
undermines floodplain management and flood-reduction efforts in
upstream and downstream communities, reduces groundwater
recharge, threatens public health and safety, and increases nonpoint
source pollution of water resources.
B. A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including
reasonable regulation of development and activities causing
accelerated runoff, is fundamental to the public health, safety, welfare,
and the protection of the people of the municipality and all the people of
the commonwealth, their resources, and the environment.
C. Inadequate planning and management of stormwater runoff resulting
from land development and redevelopment throughout a watershed can
also harm surface water resources by changing the natural hydrologic
patterns; accelerating stream flows (which increase scour and erosion
of streambeds and stream banks, thereby elevating sedimentation);
destroying aquatic habitat; and elevating aquatic pollutant
concentrations and loadings such as sediments, nutrients, heavy
metals, and pathogens. Groundwater resources are also impacted
through loss of recharge.
D. Stormwater is an important water resource that provides groundwater
recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams, which also
protects and maintains surface water quality.
E. Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an
essential component in successfully addressing stormwater issues.
F. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are
required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their
separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES).
§ 212-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-3
1:267
§ 212-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety, and welfare within
Danville Borough, by minimizing the harms and maximizing the benefits
described in § 212-2 of this chapter through provisions intended to:
§ 212-4. Statutory authority.
§ 212-5. Applicability.
A. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93 to protect, maintain, reclaim, and
restore the existing and designated uses of the waters of the
commonwealth.
B. Manage accelerated runoff and erosion and sedimentation problems
close to their source, by regulating activities that cause these problems.
C. Preserve the natural drainage systems as much as possible.
D. Maintain groundwater recharge, to prevent degradation of surface and
groundwater quality, and to otherwise protect water resources.
E. Maintain existing flows and quality of streams and watercourses.
F. Preserve and restore the flood-carrying capacity of streams and prevent
scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.
G. Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source, with a minimum
of structures and a maximum use of natural processes.
H. Provide procedures, performance standards, and design criteria for
stormwater planning and management.
I. Provide proper operations and maintenance (O&M) of all temporary
and permanent stormwater management facilities and best
management practices (BMPs) that are constructed and implemented.
J. Provide standards to meet the NPDES permit requirements.
A. Primary authority. Danville Borough is empowered to regulate these
activities by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978, 32 P.S., P.L. 864
(Act 167), 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., as amended, the Stormwater
Management Act, the Code of the Borough of Danville.
B. Secondary authority. Danville Borough also is empowered to regulate
land use activities that affect runoff by the authority of the Act of July
31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, as amended.112
A. This chapter shall apply to all areas of Danville Borough, any regulated
activity within Danville Borough, and all stormwater runoff entering
112. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 212-3 DANVILLE CODE § 212-5
1:268
§ 212-6. Repealer.
Chapter 113 of the Code of the Borough of Danville, entitled "Stormwater
Management," and adopted 2-13-1996, is hereby repealed in its entirety.
Additionally, any ordinance, ordinance provision(s), or regulation of Danville
Borough inconsistent with any of the provision(s) of this chapter is hereby
repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
§ 212-7. Compatibility with other ordinance requirements.
Approvals issued and actions taken pursuant to this chapter do not relieve
the applicant of the responsibility to comply with or to secure required
permits or approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable codes,
laws, rules, statutes, or ordinances. To the extent that this chapter imposes
more rigorous or stringent requirements for stormwater management, the
specific requirements contained in this chapter shall be followed.
into Danville Borough's separate storm sewer system from lands within
the boundaries of Danville Borough.
B. Earth disturbance activities and associated stormwater management
controls are also regulated under existing state law and implementing
regulations. This chapter shall operate in coordination with those
parallel requirements; the requirements of this chapter shall be no less
restrictive in meeting the purposes of this chapter than state law.
C. "Regulated activities" are any earth disturbance activities or any
activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner
that may affect stormwater runoff. "Regulated activities" include, but
are not limited to, the following listed items:
(1) Earth disturbance activities.
(2) Land development.
(3) Subdivision.
(4) Construction of new or additional impervious or semipervious
surfaces.
(5) Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings.
(6) Diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream channel.
(7) Installation of stormwater management facilities or appurtenances
thereto.
(8) Installation of stormwater BMPs.
D. See § 212-11 of this chapter for exemption/modification criteria.
§ 212-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-8
1:269
§ 212-8. Duty of persons engaged in development of land.
Notwithstanding any provision(s) of this chapter, including exemptions, any
landowner or any person engaged in the alteration or development of land
which may affect stormwater runoff characteristics shall implement such
measures as are reasonably necessary to prevent injury to health, safety,
or other property. Such measures also shall include actions as are required
to manage the rate, volume, direction, and quality of resulting stormwater
runoff in a manner which otherwise adequately protects health, property,
and water quality.
§ 212-8 DANVILLE CODE § 212-8
1:270
ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 212-9. Word usage; definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
number includes the plural; and the plural number includes the
singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender; and
words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation, or any other
similar entity.
D. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
E. The words "used or occupied" include the words "intended, designed,
maintained, or arranged to be used, occupied or maintained."
F. Definitions.
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land
through the combined action of human activity and natural processes at
a rate greater than would occur because of the natural process alone.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES — Activities associated with agriculture
such as agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation, and animalheavy
use areas. This includes the work of producing crops, tillage,
land clearing, plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting crops,
or pasturing and raising of livestock and installation of conservation
measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious area is not
considered an agricultural activity.
ALTERATION — As applied to land, a change in topography as a result
of the moving of soil and rock from one location or position to another;
changing of surface conditions by causing the surface to be more or less
impervious; land disturbance.
APPLICANT — A landowner, developer, or other person who has filed
an application for approval to engage in any regulated activities at a
project site within the municipality.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Activities, facilities,
designs, measures or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts
from regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to
promote groundwater recharge and to otherwise meet the purposes
§ 212-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-9
1:271
of this chapter. Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one
of two broad categories or measures: "nonstructural" or "structural."
"Nonstructural" BMPs are measures referred to as operational and/
or behavior-related practices that attempt to minimize the contact
of pollutants with stormwater runoff, whereas "structural" BMPs are
measures that consist of a physical device or practice that is installed
to capture and treat stormwater runoff. "Structural" BMPs include,
but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices and devices, from
large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands, to small-scale
underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter strips, low
impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving, grassed
swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins, and
manufactured devices. "Structural" stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the project site.
CHANNEL EROSION — The widening, deepening, and headward
cutting of small channels and waterways, due to erosion caused by
moderate to large floods.
CISTERN — An underground reservoir or tank used for storing
rainwater.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Montour County Conservation
District. The Montour County Conservation District has the authority
under a delegation agreement executed with the Department of
Environmental Protection to administer and enforce all or a portion of
the regulations promulgated under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
CULVERT — A structure with appurtenant works that carries a stream
and/or stormwater runoff under or through an embankment or fill.
DAM — An artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works,
constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or another
fluid or semifluid, or a refuse bank, fill or structure for highway, railroad
or other purposes which does or may impound water or another fluid or
semifluid.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a twenty-five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours), used in
the design and evaluation of stormwater management systems. Also see
"return period."
DESIGNEE — The agent of this municipality and/or agent of the
governing body involved with the administration, review or
enforcement of any provisions of this chapter by contract or
memorandum of understanding.
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment structure designed to manage
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at
a predetermined rate.
DETENTION VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is captured and
released into waters of the commonwealth at a controlled rate.
§ 212-9 DANVILLE CODE § 212-9
1:272
DEVELOPER — A person, partnership, association, corporation, or
other entity, or any responsible person therein or agent thereof, that
undertakes any regulated activity of this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT SITE (SITE) — The specific tract of land for which a
regulated activity is proposed. Also see "project site."
DISTURBED AREA — An unstabilized land area where an earth
disturbance activity is occurring or has occurred.
DOWNSLOPE PROPERTY LINE — That portion of the property line of
the lot, tract, or parcels of land being developed located such that all
overland or pipe flow from the site would be directed toward it.
DRAINAGE CONVEYANCE FACILITY — A stormwater management
facility designed to convey stormwater runoff and shall include streams,
channels, swales, pipes, conduits, culverts, storm sewers, etc.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee,
allowing the use of private land for stormwater management, drainage,
or conveyance purposes.
DRAINAGEWAY — Any natural or artificial watercourse, trench, ditch,
pipe, swale, channel, or similar depression into which surface water
flows.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human
activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited
to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavations, embankments, land
development, agricultural plowing or tilling, timber harvesting
activities, road maintenance activities, mineral extraction, and the
moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock or earth
materials.
EROSION — The movement of soil particles by the action of water,
wind, ice, or other natural forces.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT POLLUTION CONTROL PLAN — A plan
which is designed to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation.
EXCEPTIONAL VALUE WATERS — Surface waters of high quality,
which satisfies Pa. Code Title 25, Environmental Protection, Chapter
93, Water Quality Standards, § 93.4b(b), (relating to anti-degradation).
EXISTING CONDITIONS — The initial condition of a project site prior
to the proposed construction. If the initial condition of the site is
undeveloped land and not forested, the land use shall be considered
as "meadow" unless the natural land cover is documented to generate
lower curve numbers or rational "C" coefficient.
FEMA — The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOOD — A general but temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of streams,
rivers, and other waters of the commonwealth.
§ 212-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-9
1:273
FLOOD FRINGE — The remaining portions of the one-hundred-year
floodplain outside of the floodway boundary.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water
from any natural source or delineated by applicable Department of
Housing and Urban Development, Federal Insurance Administration
Flood Hazard Boundary, mapped as being a special flood hazard area.
Included are lands adjoining a river or stream that have been or may
be inundated by a one-hundred-year flood. Also included are areas that
comprise Group 13 Soils, as listed in Appendix A of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP) Technical Manual for
Sewage Enforcement Officers (as amended or replaced from time to
time by PADEP).
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of
the adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and
discharge the one-hundred-year frequency flood. Unless otherwise
specified, the boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and
flood insurance studies provided by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA
maps or studies have defined the boundary of the one-hundred-year
frequency floodway, it is assumed, absent evidence to the contrary, that
the floodway extends from the stream to 50 feet from the top of the
bank of the stream.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and
activities necessary for the management of forestland. These include
timber inventory and preparation of forest management plans,
silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and
construction, timber harvesting, site preparation and reforestation.
FREEBOARD — A vertical distance between the elevation of the design
high water and the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin, or diversion ridge.
The space is required as a safety margin in a pond or basin.
GRADE — A slope, usually of a road, channel or natural ground
specified in percent and shown on plans as specified herein.
(TO) GRADE — To finish the surface of a roadbed, top of embankment
or bottom of excavation.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies.
HEC-HMS MODEL CALIBRATED — Hydrologic Engineering Center-
Hydrologic Modeling System. A computer-based hydrologic modeling
technique adapted to the watershed(s) in Montour County for the Act
167 Plan. The model has been calibrated by adjusting key model input
parameters.
HIGH-QUALITY WATERS — Surface water having quality, which
exceeds levels necessary to support propagation of fish, shellfish, and
wildlife and recreation in and on the water by satisfying Pa. Code Title
25, Environmental Protection, Chapter 93, Water Quality Standards,
§ 93.4b(a).
§ 212-9 DANVILLE CODE § 212-9
1:274
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) — Infiltration rates of soils vary
widely and are affected by subsurface permeability as well as surface
intake rates. Soils are classified into one of four HSG (A, B, C, and
D) according to their minimum infiltration rate, which is obtained for
bare soil after prolonged wetting. The Natural Resource Conservation
Service (NRCS) of the U.S. Department of Agriculture defines the four
groups and provides a list of most of the soils in the United States
and their group classification. The soils in the area of interest may be
identified from a soil survey report from the local NRCS office or the
County Conservation District.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS AREA) — A surface that
prevents the infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious surface
(or areas) includes, but is not limited to: roofs, additional indoor living
spaces, patios, garages, storage sheds and similar structures, parking
or driveway areas, and any new streets and sidewalks. Any surface
areas proposed to initially be gravel or crushed stone shall be assumed
to be impervious surfaces.
IMPOUNDMENT — A retention or detention basin designed to retain
stormwater runoff and release it at a controlled rate.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURES — A structure designed to direct runoff
into the ground (e.g., french drains, seepage pits, seepage trench, etc.).
INLET — A surface connection to a closed drain. A structure at the
diversion end of a conduit. The upstream end of any structure through
which water may flow.
LAND DEVELOPMENT (DEVELOPMENT) —
MAIN STEM (MAIN CHANNEL) — Any stream segment or other runoff
conveyance facility used as a reach in the Montour County Act 167
watershed hydrologic model(s).
MANNING EQUATION (MANNING FORMULA) — A method for
calculation of velocity of flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g.,
cubic feet per second) in open channels based upon channel shape,
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
(a) A group of two or more buildings; or
The division or allocation of land or space between or among
two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of,
or for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds,
condominiums, building groups, or other features.
(b)
(1)
(2) Any subdivision of land;
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the Pa.
Municipalities Planning Code.113
(3)
113. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
§ 212-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-9
1:275
roughness, depth of flow and slope. "Open channels" may include
closed conduits so long as the flow is not under pressure.
MUNICIPALITY — Danville Borough, Pennsylvania.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM
(NPDES) — The federal government's system for issuance of permits
under the Clean Water Act, which is delegated to PADEP in
Pennsylvania.
NOAA ATLAS 14 — Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States,
Atlas 14, Volume 2, U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration, National Weather Service,
Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center, Silver Spring, Maryland
(2004). NOAA's Atlas 14 can be accessed at Internet address
http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution that enters a water
body from diffuse origins in the watershed and does not result from
discernible, confined, or discrete conveyances.
NRCS — Natural Resource Conservation Service [previously Soil
Conservation Service (SCS)].
OPEN CHANNEL — A drainage element in which stormwater flows
with an open surface. Open channels include, but shall not be limited to,
natural and man-made drainageways, swales, streams, ditches, canals,
and pipes not under pressure.
OUTFALL —
OUTLET — Points of water disposal from a stream, river, lake,
tidewater, or artificial drain.
PADEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
PARKING LOT STORAGE — Involves the use of impervious parking
areas as temporary impoundments with controlled release rates during
rainstorms.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, or a governmental unit, public utility or any other legal
entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights
and duties.
PERVIOUS AREA — Any area not defined as impervious.
PIPE — A culvert, closed conduit, or similar structure (including
appurtenances) that conveys stormwater.
(1) Point where water flows from a conduit, stream, or drain;
"Point source" as described in 40 CFR 122.2 at the point where the
municipality's storm sewer system discharges to surface waters of
the commonwealth.
(2)
§ 212-9 DANVILLE CODE § 212-9
1:276
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of Danville
Borough.
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined, or discrete conveyance,
including, but not limited to: any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, or conduit
from which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in state
regulations at 25 Pennsylvania Code § 92.1.
PROBABLE MAXIMUM FLOOD (PMF) — The flood that may be
expected from the most severe combination of critical meteorological
and hydrologic conditions that are reasonably possible in any area.
The PMF is derived from the probable maximum precipitation (PMP)
as determined on the basis of data obtained from the National
Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated
activities in the municipality are planned, conducted, or maintained.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — Any person licensed by the
Pennsylvania Department of State or otherwise qualified by law to
perform the work required by this chapter.
RATIONAL FORMULA — A rainfall-runoff relation used to estimate
peak flow.
REDEVELOPMENT — Earth disturbance activities on land which has
previously been developed.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Any earth disturbance activities or any
activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner
that may affect stormwater runoff.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Activity involving
earth disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92,
Chapter 102, or the Clean Streams Law.
RELEASE RATE — The percentage of predevelopment peak rate of
runoff from a site or subwatershed area to which the postdevelopment
peak rate of runoff must be reduced to protect downstream areas.
RELEASE RATE DISTRICT — Those subwatershed areas in which
postdevelopment flows must be reduced to a certain percentage of
predevelopment flows as required to meet the plan requirements and
the goals of Act 167.
RETENTION BASIN — An impoundment in which stormwater is stored
and not released during the storm event. Stored water may be released
from the basin at some time after the end of the storm.
RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF — The volume of runoff
that is captured and not released directly into the surface waters of this
commonwealth during or after a storm event.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a
storm event of a given magnitude can be expected to recur. For
example, the twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be expected
§ 212-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-9
1:277
to recur on the average once every 25 years; or stated in another way,
the probability of a twenty-five-year storm occurring in any one given
year is 0.04 (i.e., a 4% chance).
RIPARIAN BUFFER — A vegetated area bordering perennial and
intermittent streams and wetlands, that serves as a protective filter to
help protect streams and wetlands from the impacts of adjacent land
uses.
RISER — A vertical pipe extending from the bottom of a pond that is
used to control the discharge rate from the pond for a specified design
storm.
ROAD MAINTENANCE — Earth disturbance activities within the
existing road right-of-way, such as grading and repairing existing
unpaved road surfaces, cutting road banks, cleaning or clearing
drainage ditches, and other similar activities. Road maintenance
activities that do not disturb the subbase of a paved road (such as
milling and overlays) are not considered earth disturbance activities.
ROOFTOP DETENTION — Temporary ponding and gradual release of
stormwater falling directly onto flat roof surfaces by incorporating
controlled-flow roof drains into building designs.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.
RUNOFF CAPTURE VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is captured
(retained) and not released into surface waters of the commonwealth
during or after a storm event.
SEDIMENT — Soils or other materials transported by surface water as
a product of erosion.
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier, dam, retention or detention basin
located and designed to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt, or other material
transported by stormwater runoff.
SEDIMENT POLLUTION — The placement, discharge, or any other
introduction of sediment into waters of the commonwealth occurring
from the failure to properly design, construct, implement or maintain
control measures and control facilities in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by the movement of water.
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled
with loose stone or similar coarse material, into which surface water is
directed for infiltration into the ground.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) primarily used for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff.
§ 212-9 DANVILLE CODE § 212-9
1:278
SHEET FLOW — Runoff that flows over the ground surface as a thin,
even layer, not concentrated in a channel.
SOIL COVER COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by the NRCS that is based on relating soil type and land use/
cover to a runoff parameter called "curve number" (CN).
SPILLWAY (EMERGENCY) — A depression in the embankment of a
pond or basin, or other overflow structure, that is used to pass peak
discharges greater than the maximum design storm controlled by the
pond or basin.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory
requirements to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality
under Title 25 of that Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law.
STORAGE INDICATION METHOD — A reservoir routing procedure
based on solution of the continuity equation (inflow minus outflow
equals the change in storage) with outflow defined as a function of
storage volume and depth.
STORM FREQUENCY — The number of times that a given storm
"event" occurs or is exceeded on the average in a stated period of years.
See also "return period."
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes and/or open channels that convey
intercepted runoff and stormwater from other sources, but excludes
domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER — Drainage runoff from the surface of the land
resulting from precipitation, snow, or ice melt.
STORMWATER HOTSPOT — A land use or activity that generates
higher concentrations of hydrocarbons, trace metals, or toxicants than
are found in typical stormwater runoff.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES — Any structure, natural
or man-made, that, due to its condition, design, or construction,
conveys, stores, or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical
stormwater management facilities include, but are not limited to,
detention and retention basins, open channels, storm sewers, pipes and
infiltration facilities.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The Montour County
Stormwater Management Plan for managing stormwater runoff in
Montour County as required by the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act
167), and known as the "Stormwater Management Act."
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN (SWM SITE PLAN) — The
plan prepared by the applicant or his representative indicating how
stormwater runoff will be managed at the project site in accordance
with this chapter.
STREAM ENCLOSURE — A bridge, culvert, or other structure in excess
of 100 feet in length upstream to downstream which encloses a
regulated waters of the commonwealth.
§ 212-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-9
1:279
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel
of land by any means, into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, transfer of ownership, or
building or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision
by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than
10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of access or any
residential dwellings, shall be exempt (Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247114).
SUBWATERSHED AREA — The smallest drainage unit of a watershed
for which stormwater management criteria has been established in the
stormwater management plan.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land that gathers or carries surface
water runoff.
TIMBER OPERATIONS — See "forest management."
TIME OF CONCENTRATION (Tc) — The time for surface runoff to
travel from the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to a
point of interest within the watershed. This time is the combined total
of overland flow time and flow time in pipes or channels, if any.
USDA — The United States Department of Agriculture.
WATERCOURSE — A channel or conveyance of surface water, such as
a stream or creek, having defined bed and banks, whether natural or
artificial, with perennial or intermittent flow.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Rivers, streams, creeks,
rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs and other bodies or channels
of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts thereof,
whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
WATERSHED — Region or area drained by a river, watercourse, or
other surface water, whether natural or artificial.
WETLAND — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs and similar areas. (The term includes but is not limited
to wetland areas listed in the State Water Plan, the United States Forest
Service Wetlands Inventory of Pennsylvania, the Pennsylvania Coastal
Zone Management Plan and a wetland area designated by a river basin
commission. This definition is used by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency and the United States Army Corps of Engineers.)
114. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 212-9 DANVILLE CODE § 212-9
1:280
ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management Standards
§ 212-10. General requirements.
A. For all regulated activities, unless specifically exempted in § 212-11:
(1) Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM site plan is
required.
(2) No regulated activities shall commence until the municipality
issues written approval of a SWM site plan which demonstrates
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
(3) The SWM site plan shall demonstrate that adequate capacity will
be provided to meet the volume and rate control requirements as
described under §§ 212-13 and 212-14 of this chapter.
(4) The SWM site plan approved by the municipality shall be on-site
throughout the duration of the regulated activities.
B. For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment
control (E&S) BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and
maintained during the regulated earth disturbance activities (e.g.,
during construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this
chapter and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania
Code (including, but not limited to Chapter 102, Erosion and Sediment
Control) and the Clean Streams Law. Various BMPs and their design
standards are listed in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Program Manual (E&S Manual), No. 363-2134-008 (April 15, 2000), as
amended and updated.
C. For all regulated activities, stormwater BMPs shall be designed,
installed, implemented, operated, and maintained to meet the purposes
and requirements of this chapter and to meet all requirements under
Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law, conform
to the state water quality requirements, meet all requirements under
the Stormwater Management Act, and any more stringent requirements
as determined by the municipality.
D. The municipality may, after consultation with PADEP, approve measures
for meeting the State Water Quality Requirements other than those in
this chapter, provided that they meet the minimum requirements of,
and do not conflict with state law, including, but not limited to, the
Clean Streams Law.
E. All regulated activities shall include, to the maximum extent
practicable, measures to:
(1) Protect health, safety, and property.
(2) Meet the water quality goals of this chapter by implementing
measures to:
§ 212-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-10
1:281
(a) Minimize disturbance to floodplains, wetlands, natural slopes,
existing native vegetation, and woodlands.
(b) Create, maintain, or extend riparian buffers and protect
existing forested buffers.
(c) Provide trees and woodlands adjacent to impervious areas
whenever feasible.
(d) Minimize the creation of impervious surfaces and the
degradation of waters of the commonwealth and promote
groundwater recharge.
(e) Protect natural systems and processes (drainageways,
vegetation, soils, and sensitive areas) and maintain, as much as
possible, the natural hydrologic regime.
(f) Incorporate natural site elements (wetlands, stream corridors,
mature forests) as design elements.
(g) Avoid erosive flow conditions in natural flow pathways.
(h) Minimize soil disturbance and soil compaction.
(i) Minimize thermal impacts to waters of the commonwealth.
(j) Disconnect impervious surfaces by directing runoff to pervious
areas wherever possible and decentralize and manage
stormwater at its source.
F. Impervious areas:
(1) The measurement of impervious areas shall include all of the
impervious areas in the total proposed development, even if
development is to take place in stages.
(2) For developments taking place in stages, the entire development
plan must be used in determining conformance with this chapter.
(3) For projects that add impervious area to a parcel, the total
impervious area on the parcel is subject to the requirements of this
chapter.
G. If diffused flow is proposed to be concentrated and discharged onto
adjacent property, the applicant must document that adequate
downstream conveyance facilities exist to safely transport the
concentrated discharge, or otherwise prove that no erosion,
sedimentation, flooding, or other harm will result from the
concentrated discharge.
(1) Applicant must provide an easement for proposed concentrated
flow across adjacent properties to a drainageway or public right-ofway.
§ 212-10 DANVILLE CODE § 212-10
1:282
(2) Such stormwater flows shall be subject to the requirements of this
chapter.
H. Stormwater drainage systems shall be provided in order to permit
unimpeded flow along natural watercourses, except as modified by
stormwater management facilities or open channels consistent with this
chapter.
I. Where watercourses traverse a development site, drainage easements
(to encompass the one-hundred-year flood elevation with a minimum
width of 20 feet) shall be provided conforming to the line of such
watercourses. The terms of the easement shall prohibit excavation, the
placing of fill or structures, and any alterations that may adversely
affect the flow of stormwater within any portion of the easement. Also,
maintenance, including mowing of vegetation within the easement, may
be required, except as approved by the appropriate governing
authority.
J. When it can be shown that, due to topographic conditions, natural
drainageways on the site cannot adequately provide for drainage, open
channels may be constructed conforming substantially to the line and
grade of such natural drainageways. Work within natural drainageways
shall be subject to approval by PADEP under regulations at 25 Pa Code
Chapter 105 through the joint permit application process, or, where
deemed appropriate by PADEP, through the general permit process.
K. Any stormwater management facilities or any facilities that constitute
water obstructions (e.g., culverts, bridges, outfalls, or stream
enclosures, etc.) that are regulated by this chapter, that will be located
in or adjacent to waters of the commonwealth (including wetlands),
shall be subject to approval by PADEP under regulations at 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 105 through the joint permit application process, or, where
deemed appropriate by PADEP, the general permit process. When there
is a question whether wetlands may be involved, it is the responsibility
of the applicant or his agent to show that the land in question cannot be
classified as wetlands; otherwise, approval to work in the area must be
obtained from PADEP.
L. Should any stormwater management facility require a dam safety
permit under PADEP Chapter 105, the facility shall be designed in
accordance with Chapter 105 and meet the regulations of Chapter 105
concerning dam safety.
M. Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this chapter that
will be located on, or discharged onto state highway rights-of-way shall
be subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation (PENNDOT).
N. Minimization of impervious surfaces and infiltration of runoff through
seepage beds, infiltration trenches, etc., are encouraged, where soil
conditions and geology permit, to reduce the size or eliminate the need
for detention facilities.
§ 212-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-10
1:283
§ 212-11. Exemptions/modifications.
O. Infiltration BMPs should be dispersed throughout the site, made as
shallow as practicable, and located to maximize use of natural on-site
infiltration features while still meeting the other requirements of this
chapter.
P. Roof drains shall not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers,
or roadside ditches in order to promote overland flow and infiltration/
percolation of stormwater where it is advantageous to do so. When it is
more advantageous to connect directly to streets or storm sewers, then
the municipality shall permit it on a case-by-case basis.
Q. Applicants are encouraged to use low-impact development (LID)
practices to comply with the requirements of this chapter and the state
water quality requirements.
R. When stormwater management facilities are proposed within 1,000 feet
of a downstream municipality, the SWM plan shall be submitted to the
downstream Municipal's Engineer for review and comment.
A. Under no circumstance shall the applicant be exempt from
implementing such measures as necessary to:
(1) Meet state water quality standards and requirements.
(2) Protect health, safety, and property.
(3) Meet special requirements for high quality (HQ) and exceptional
value (EV) watersheds.
B. The applicant must demonstrate that the following BMPs are being
utilized to the maximum extent practicable to receive consideration for
the exemptions:
(1) Design around and limit disturbance of floodplains, wetlands,
natural slopes over 15%, existing native vegetation, and other
sensitive and special value features.
(2) Maintain riparian and forested buffers.
(3) Limit grading and maintain nonerosive flow conditions in natural
flow paths.
(4) Maintain existing tree canopies near impervious areas.
(5) Minimize soil disturbance and reclaim disturbed areas with topsoil
and vegetation.
(6) Direct runoff to pervious areas.
C. The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed development/
additional impervious area will not adversely impact the following:
§ 212-10 DANVILLE CODE § 212-11
1:284
(1) Capacities of existing drainageways and storm sewer systems.
(2) Velocities and erosion.
(3) Quality of runoff if direct discharge is proposed.
(4) Existing known problem areas.
(5) Safe conveyance of the additional runoff.
(6) Downstream property owners.
D. An applicant proposing regulated activities, after demonstrating
compliance with Subsections A, B, and C, may be exempted from
various requirements of this chapter according to the following table:
New Impervious Area1,2
(square footage) Applicant Must Provide
0 to 5,000 —
> 5,000 Rate controls, volume controls and
SWM site plan
NOTES:
1 Gravel in existing condition shall be considered pervious and gravel
in proposed condition shall be considered impervious.
2 New impervious area since the date of adoption of this chapter.
E. The municipality may deny or revoke any exemption pursuant to this
section at any time for any project that the municipality believes may
pose a threat to public health, safety, property or the environment.
F. An applicant proposing regulated activities, after demonstrating
compliance with Subsections A, B, and C, may be exempted from
various requirements of this chapter if documentation can be provided
that a downstream man-made water body (i.e., reservoir, lake, or manmade
wetlands) has been designed or modified to address the potential
stormwater flooding impacts of the proposed development.
G. The purpose this section is to ensure consistency of stormwater
management planning between local ordinances and NPDES permitting
(when required) and to ensure that the applicant has a single and clear
set of stormwater management standards to which the applicant is
subject. The municipality may accept alternative stormwater
management controls under this section, provided that:
(1) The alternative controls are documented to be acceptable to PADEP
(or delegated authority), for NPDES requirements pertaining to
postconstruction stormwater management requirements.
§ 212-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-11
1:285
§ 212-12. Waivers.
(2) The alternative controls are in compliance with all other sections of
this chapter, including, but not limited to, § 212-10D and
Subsections A through C of this section.
H. Agricultural activities are exempt from requirements of this chapter
provided the activities are performed according to the requirements of
25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
I. Forest management and timber operations are exempt from the rate
and volume control requirement and SWM site plan preparation
requirement of this chapter provided the activities are performed
according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102. It should be
noted that temporary roadways are not exempt.
A. The provisions of this chapter are the minimum standards for the
protection of the public welfare.
B. All waiver requests must meet the provisions of Subsections G and H.
(1) Waivers shall not be issued from implementing such measures as
necessary to:
(a) Meet state water quality standards and requirements.
(b) Protect health, safety, and property.
(c) Meet special requirements for high quality (HQ) and
exceptional value (EV) watersheds.
(2) The municipality will then consider waiver requests in accordance
with § 212-10D, except waiver requests for § 212-19B and C, which
will be at the municipality's sole discretion.
C. If an applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the governing body of
the municipality that any mandatory provision of this chapter is
unreasonable or causes unique or undue unreasonableness or hardship
as it applies to the proposed project, or that an alternate design may
result in a superior result within the context of §§ 212-2 and 212-3 of
this chapter, the governing body of the municipality upon obtaining the
comments and recommendations of the Municipal Engineer and
Conservation District may grant a waiver or relief so that substantial
justice may be done and the public interest is secured; provided that
such waiver will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose
of this chapter.
D. The applicant shall submit all requests for waivers in writing and shall
include such requests as a part of the plan review and approval process.
The applicant shall state in full the facts of unreasonableness or
hardship on which the request is based, the provision or provisions of
this chapter that are involved, and the minimum waiver or relief that is
necessary. The applicant shall state how the requested waiver and how
§ 212-11 DANVILLE CODE § 212-12
1:286
the applicant's proposal shall result in an equal or better means of
complying with the intent or purpose and general principles of this
chapter.
E. The municipality shall keep a written record of all actions on waiver
requests.
F. The municipality may charge a fee for each waiver request, which shall
be used to offset the administrative costs of reviewing the waiver
request. The applicant shall also agree to reimburse the municipality
for reasonable and necessary fees that may be incurred by the
Municipal Engineer and/or Solicitor in any review of a waiver request.
G. In granting waivers, the municipality may impose reasonable conditions
at will, in its judgment, to substantially secure the objectives of the
standards or requirements that are to be modified.
H. The municipality may grant applications for waivers when the following
findings are made, as relevant:
(1) That the waiver shall result in an equal or better means of
complying with the intent of this chapter.
(2) That the waiver is the minimum necessary to provide relief.
(3) That the applicant is not requesting a waiver based on cost
considerations.
(4) That existing downgradient stormwater problems will not be
exacerbated.
(5) That runoff is not being diverted to a different drainage area.
(6) That increased flooding or ponding on off-site properties or
roadways will not occur.
(7) That potential icing conditions will not occur.
(8) That increase of peak flow or volume from the site will not occur.
(9) That erosive conditions due to increased peak flows or volume will
not occur.
(10) That adverse impact to water quality will not result.
(11) That increased one-hundred-year floodplain levels will not result.
(12) That increased or unusual municipal maintenance expenses will
not result from the waiver.
(13) That the amount of stormwater generated has been minimized to
the greatest extent allowed.
§ 212-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-12
1:287
§ 212-13. Volume controls.
(14) That infiltration of runoff throughout the proposed site has been
provided where practicable and predevelopment groundwater
recharge protected.
(15) That peak flow attenuation of runoff has been provided.
(16) That long-term operation and maintenance activities are
established.
(17) That the receiving streams and/or water bodies will not be
adversely impacted in flood-carrying capacity, aquatic habitat,
channel stability and erosion and sedimentation.
A. The low-impact development practices provided in the BMP Manual
and in Appendix B of this chapter shall be utilized for all regulated
activities to the maximum extent practicable.115
B. Stormwater runoff volume controls shall be implemented using the
Design Storm Method or the Simplified Method as defined below. For
regulated activity areas equal to or less than one acre that do not
require hydrologic routing to design the stormwater facilities, this
chapter establishes no preference for either method; therefore, the
applicant may select either method on the basis of economic
considerations, the intrinsic limitations on applicability of the analytical
procedures associated with each methodology, and other factors.
(1) The Design Storm Method (CG-1 in the BMP Manual) is applicable
to any sized regulated activity. This method requires detailed
modeling based on site conditions.
(a) Do not increase the postdevelopment total runoff volume when
compared to the predevelopment total runoff volume for the
two-year, twenty-four-hour storm event.
(b) For hydrologic modeling purposes.
[1] Existing nonforested pervious areas must be considered
meadow (good condition) for predevelopment hydrologic
calculations.
[2] Twenty percent of existing impervious area, when present
within the proposed project site, shall be considered
meadow (good condition) for predevelopment hydrologic
calculations for redevelopment.
(2) The Simplified Method (CG-2 in the BMP Manual) is independent of
site conditions and should be used if the Design Storm Method is
not followed. This method is not applicable to regulated activities
115. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 212-12 DANVILLE CODE § 212-13
1:288
greater than one acre or for projects that require detailed design
of stormwater storage facilities. For new impervious surfaces:
(a) Stormwater facilities shall capture at least the first two inches
of runoff from all new impervious surfaces.
(b) At least the first one inch of runoff from new impervious
surfaces shall be permanently removed from the runoff flow,
i.e. it shall not be released into surface waters of the
commonwealth. Removal options include reuse, evaporation,
transpiration, and infiltration.
(c) Wherever possible, infiltration facilities should be designed to
accommodate infiltration of the entire permanently removed
runoff; however, in all cases at least the first 0.5 inch of the
permanently removed runoff should be infiltrated.
(d) Actual field infiltration tests at the location of the proposed
elevation of the stormwater BMPs are required. Infiltration test
shall be conducted in accordance with the BMP Manual.
Notification of the municipality shall be provided to allow
witnessing of the testing.
(3) In cases where it is not possible or desirable to use infiltrationbased
best management practices to partially fulfill the
requirements in either Subsection B(1) or (2), the following
procedure shall be used:
(a) At a minimum, the following documentation shall be provided
to justify the decision to not use infiltration BMPs:
[1] Description of and justification for field infiltration/
permeability testing with respect to the type of test and
test locations.
[2] An interpretive narrative describing existing site soils and
their structure as these relate to the interaction between
soils and water occurring on the site. In addition to
providing soil and soil profile descriptions, this narrative
shall identify depth to seasonal high water tables and
depth to bedrock, and provide a description of all
subsurface elements (fragipans and other restrictive
layers, geology, etc.) that influence the direction and rate
of subsurface water movement.
[3] A qualitative assessment of the site's contribution to
annual aquifer recharge shall be made, along with
identification of any restrictions or limitations associated
with the use of engineered infiltration facilities.
[4] The provided documentation must be signed and sealed by
a professional engineer or geologist.
§ 212-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-13
1:289
§ 212-14. Rate controls.
§ 212-15. Sensitive areas and stormwater hotspots.
(b) The following water quality pollutant load reductions will be
required for all disturbed areas within the proposed
development:
Pollutant Load Units
Required
Reduction
(%)
Total Suspended Solids
(TSS)
pounds 85
Total Phosphorous (TP) pounds 85
Total Nitrate (NO3) pounds 50
(c) The performance criteria for water quality best management
practices shall be determined from the Pennsylvania
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, most current
version.
C. The applicable worksheets from the BMP Manual must be used in
calculations to establish volume control.
A. Lands contained within Montour County that have not had release rates
established under an approved Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan:
(1) Postdevelopment discharge rates shall not exceed the
predevelopment discharge rates for the one-, two-, ten-, twentyfive-,
fifty-, and one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour storm events.
B. Lands contained within Montour County that have had release rates
established under an approved Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan:
(1) The postdevelopment peak discharge rates shall be in accordance
with the approved release rate map for the individual watershed.
A. Sensitive areas, as defined below, and stormwater hotspots which
require special consideration with regard to stormwater management.
(1) Sensitive areas are defined as those areas that, if developed, have
the potential to endanger a water supply. These areas consist of the
delineated one-year zone of contribution and direct upslope areas
tributary to the water supply wells. Municipalities may update the
sensitive area boundaries based on new research or studies as
required.
(2) Stormwater hotspots are land development projects that have a
high potential to endanger local water quality and could potentially
threaten groundwater reservoirs. The Municipal Engineer will
§ 212-13 DANVILLE CODE § 212-15
1:290
determine what constitutes these classifications on a case-by-case
basis. The PADEP wellhead protection contaminant source list shall
be used as a guide in these determinations. Industrial
manufacturing site and hazardous material storage areas must
provide NPDES SIC codes. Industrial sites referenced in 40 CFR
125 are also examples of hotspots.
B. Performance standards.
(1) The location of the boundaries of sensitive areas is set by drainage
areas tributary to any public water supply. The exact location of
these boundaries as they apply to a given development site shall be
determined using mapping at a scale which accurately defines the
limits of the sensitive area. If the project site is within the sensitive
area (in whole or in part), two-foot contour interval mapping shall
be provided to define the limits of the sensitive area. If the project
site is adjacent to, but within 500 linear feet of a defined sensitive
area, a five-foot contour interval map defining the limits of the
sensitive area shall be included in the stormwater management
plan to document the site's location relative to the sensitive area.
(2) Stormwater hotspot developments may be required to prepare and
implement a stormwater pollution prevention plan and file notice of
intent as required under the provision of the EPA Industrial
Stormwater NPDES Permit Requirements.
(3) Stormwater hotspot developments must use an acceptable
pretreatment BMP prior to volume control and/or rate control
BMPs. Acceptable pretreatment BMPs for these developments
include those based on filtering, settling, or chemical reaction
processes such as coagulation.
(4) Stormwater hotspot developments and development in sensitive
areas must include riparian buffers as defined in Article VI.
§ 212-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-15
1:291

ARTICLE IV
Erosion and Sedimentation Standards
§ 212-16. Requirements during earth disturbance activities.
A. The applicant shall meet requirements as contained in 25 Pa Code,
Chapters 92 and 102, as required, and applicable as follows:
(1) The implementation and maintenance of erosion and sedimentation
control BMPs.
(2) Development of written plans.
(3) Submission of plans for approval.
(4) Obtaining erosion and sedimentation control and NPDES permits.
(5) Maintaining plans and permits on site.
B. Evidence of any necessary plan or permit approval for earth
disturbance activities from PADEP or the Montour County Conservation
District must be provided to the municipality.
C. A copy of the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan and any
other permit, as required by PADEP or the Montour County
Conservation District, shall be available at the project site at all times if
required under Chapter 102.
D. Construction of temporary roadways (e.g., for utility construction,
timber harvesting, etc.) shall comply with all applicable standards for
erosion and sedimentation control and stream crossing regulations
under 25 Pa. Code, Chapters 102 and 105. The erosion and
sedimentation control plan shall be submitted to the Montour County
Conservation District for approval and shall address the following, as
applicable:
(1) Design of the roadway system, including haul roads, skid roads,
landing areas, trails, and storage and staging areas.
(2) Runoff control structures (e.g., diversions, culverts, detention
ponds, etc.).
(3) Stream crossings for both perennial and intermittent streams.
(4) Access to public roadways, including design of rock construction
entrance for mud and debris control.
(5) A remediation plan for restoring the disturbed area through
regrading, topsoil placement, reseeding, and other stabilization
techniques, as required.
E. Additional erosion and sedimentation control design standards and
criteria that must be applied where infiltration BMPs are proposed
include the following:
§ 212-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-16
1:293
(1) Areas proposed for infiltration BMPs shall be protected from
sedimentation and compaction during the construction phase, so as
to maintain their maximum infiltration capacity.
(2) Infiltration BMPs shall be protected from receiving sediment-laden
runoff.
(3) The source of protection for infiltration BMPs shall be identified
(i.e., orange construction fence surrounding the perimeter of the
BMP).
§ 212-16 DANVILLE CODE § 212-16
1:294
ARTICLE V
Riparian Buffer Standards
§ 212-17. Riparian buffer requirements.
Where a riparian buffer is required for a regulated activity, the riparian
buffer shall be established as follows:
A. The buffer shall be measured perpendicularly from the top of the
stream bank landward.
(1) High quality or exceptional value watersheds: a minimum of 150
feet;
(2) Impaired streams: a minimum of 150 feet;
(3) All other watersheds: a minimum of 50 feet; or
(4) As determined by a stream corridor study approved by PADEP and
the municipality.
B. The riparian buffer shall be located on both sides of all perennial and
intermittent streams. The perennial and intermittent streams and the
riparian buffer boundaries shall be shown on all applications for
building permits, subdivision, or land development. Existing uses within
the buffer are permitted to continue but not be expanded. Placement of
new structures or roadways within the riparian buffer shall be
prohibited, unless specifically permitted by PADEP. Where a wetland
exists within the buffer area, the buffer shall be extended landward to
provide a minimum buffer of 25 feet, as measured perpendicularly from
the wetland boundary.
C. The buffer shall be undisturbed forest consisting of appropriate native
species.
D. Where wetlands are located partially or entirely within a buffer, the
buffer shall be extended to encompass the wetland and shall be
widened by a distance sufficient to provide a twenty-five-foot riparian
forest buffer measured perpendicularly from the wetland boundary.
E. The following uses shall be permitted in the buffer:
(1) Footpaths, trails and bike paths, provided that:
(a) Width is limited to five feet;
(b) Width may be increased, provided a corresponding increase in
the buffer is provided;
(c) Construction shall have minimal impact to the buffer.
(2) Stream crossings, provided the crossing is designed and
constructed in such a manner as to minimize the impact to the
buffer. The riparian buffer shall be restored to its original
§ 212-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-17
1:295
condition, to the maximum extent practical, upon completion of
construction.
(3) Utility lines, provided that the crossing is designed and constructed
in such a manner as to minimize the impact to the inner buffer and
provided that there is no practical alternative to locating the utility
line within the buffer. The riparian buffer shall be restored to its
original condition, to the maximum extent practical, upon
completion of construction.
(4) Maintenance and restoration of the riparian buffer.
(5) Projects conducted with the objective of improvement,
stabilization, restoration, or enhancement of the stream bank,
stream channel, floodplain, watershed hydrology, riparian buffers,
or aquatic habitat and maintenance activities associated with such
projects. These projects include, but are not limited to, agricultural
and stormwater management best management practices. Such
projects must receive appropriate permits and approvals from
PADEP prior to starting the project.
(6) Minor private recreational uses for the property owner. Such uses
include benches, fire rings, and similar uses. Such uses do not
include structures such as cabins, sheds, pavilions, garages,
dwellings, or similar structures.
F. Disturbance of the riparian buffer shall be limited to the area necessary
to perform an allowable use.
G. Where possible and practical, disturbances shall be installed and
restored prior to beginning the next phase.
H. Allowable activities shall not cause stormwater flow to concentrate.
I. Any vegetation removed for an allowable activity shall be replaced
immediately upon completion of the activity. Where mature trees are
removed, such trees shall be replaced with the largest practical trees of
acceptable native species.
J. Erosion and sedimentation controls shall be installed and maintained
during construction. Evidence of an approved erosion and
sedimentation control plan, NPDES permit or other PADEP permit,
where required, shall be submitted prior to issuance of local permits.
K. Riparian buffers shall be maintained in a manner consistent with sound
forest management practices. In the absence of a site specific
management plan, the following maintenance guidelines apply:
(1) Buffers shall be inspected periodically for evidence of excessive
sediment deposition, erosion, or concentrated flow channels.
Prompt action shall be taken to correct these problems and prevent
future occurrence.
§ 212-17 DANVILLE CODE § 212-17
1:296
§ 212-18. Riparian buffer easement.
For all riparian buffers, an easement shall be provided:
(2) Trees presenting an unusual hazard of creating downstream
obstructions shall be removed. Such material shall be removed
from the floodplain or the riparian forest buffer (whichever is
widest); or cut into sections small enough to prevent the possibility
of creating obstructions downstream. Wherever possible, large
stable debris should be conserved.
(3) Vegetation should be inspected periodically to ensure diverse
vegetative cover and vigorous plant growth consistent with
buffering objectives.
(a) Remove invasive plant species that may threaten the integrity
of the buffer.
(b) Periodic cutting of trees may be necessary to promote vigorous
growth and encourage regeneration.
(4) Excessive use of fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, and other
chemicals shall be avoided. These products should be used only
when absolutely necessary to maintain buffer vegetation.
A. Easements shall be in accordance with § 212-30 and recorded in
accordance with § 212-47 of this chapter.
§ 212-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-18
1:297

ARTICLE VI
Design Criteria
§ 212-19. Design criteria for stormwater management and drainage
facilities.
A. General design guidelines.
(1) Stormwater shall not be transferred from one watershed to
another, unless:
(a) The watersheds are sub-watersheds of a common watershed
which join together within the perimeter of the property;
(b) The effect of the transfer does not alter the peak rate discharge
onto adjacent lands; or
(c) Easements from the affected landowner(s) are provided.
(2) Consideration shall be given to the relationship of the subject
property to the drainage pattern of the watershed. A concentrated
discharge of stormwater to an adjacent property shall be within an
existing watercourse or confined in an easement or returned to a
predevelopment flow type condition.
(3) Low-impact development BMPs and recharge facilities are
encouraged (e.g., rooftop storage, dry wells, cisterns, recreation
area ponding, diversion structures, porous pavements, holding
tanks, infiltration systems, in-line storage in storm sewers, and
grading patterns). They shall be located, designed, and constructed
in accordance with the latest technical guidance published by
PADEP, provided they are accompanied by detailed engineering
plans and performance capabilities and supporting site specific
soils, geology, runoff and groundwater and infiltration rate data to
verify proposed designs. Additional guidance from other sources
may be accepted at the discretion of the Municipal Engineer (a
preapplication meeting is suggested).
(4) All existing and natural watercourses, channels, drainage systems
and areas of surface water concentration shall be maintained in
their existing condition unless an alteration is approved by the
appropriate regulatory agency.
(5) The design of all stormwater management facilities shall
incorporate sound engineering principles and practices. The
municipality shall reserve the right to disapprove any design that
would result in the continuation or exacerbation of a documented
adverse hydrologic or hydraulic condition within the watershed, as
identified in the plan.
(6) The design and construction of multiple-use stormwater detention
facilities are strongly encouraged. In addition to stormwater
§ 212-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-19
1:299
management, facilities should, where appropriate, allow for
recreational uses including ball fields, play areas, picnic grounds,
etc. Consultation with the municipality, and prior approval are
required before design. Provision for permanent wet ponds with
stormwater management capabilities may also be appropriate.
(a) Multiple use basins should be constructed so that potentially
dangerous conditions are not created.
(b) Water quality basins or recharge basins that are designed for a
slow release of water or other extended detention ponds are
not permitted for recreational uses, unless the ponded areas
are clearly separated and secure.
(7) Should any stormwater management facility require a dam safety
permit under PADEP Chapter 105, the facility shall be designed in
accordance with Chapter 105 and meet the regulations of Chapter
105 concerning dam safety.
B. Stormwater management facility design considerations. All stormwater
management facilities shall meet the following design requirements:
(1) For stormwater management facilities and BMPs that retain or
detain water and are of a relatively small scale (less or equal to
than three feet of depth from the bottom of the basin to the top of
embankment and less than one acre-foot of storage), exceptions to
the requirements in this section may be allowed at the sole
discretion of the municipality.
(2) No outlet structure from a stormwater management facility, or
swale, shall discharge directly onto a municipal or state roadway.
(3) The top, or toe, of any slope shall be located a minimum of 10 feet
from any property line.
(4) The minimum horizontal distance between any structure and any
stormwater facility shall be 25 feet. The lowest floor elevation of
any structure constructed immediately adjacent to a detention
basin or other stormwater facility shall be a minimum of two feet
above the one-hundred-year water surface elevation.
(5) Stormwater management facility bottom (or surface of permanent
pool) elevations must be greater than adjacent floodplain
elevations (FEMA or HEC-RAS analysis). If no floodplain is defined,
bottom elevations must be greater than existing ground elevations
50 feet horizontally from top of stream bank in the facilities'
vicinity.
(6) Basin outflow culverts discharging into floodplains must account
for tailwater. Tailwater corresponding to the one-hundred-year
floodplain elevation must be used for all twenty-four-hour design
storms, or the applicant may elect to determine flood elevations of
§ 212-19 DANVILLE CODE § 212-19
1:300
the adjacent watercourse for each twenty-four-hour design storm.
The floodplain is assumed to be 50 feet from top of stream bank in
areas where a floodplain is not designated, or no other evidence is
provided.
(7) The invert of all stormwater management facilities and
underground infiltration/storage facilities shall be located a
minimum of two feet above the seasonal high groundwater table.
The invert of stormwater facilities may be lowered if adequate
subsurface drainage is provided.
(8) Whenever possible, the side slopes and basin shape shall be
amenable to the natural topography. Vertical side slopes and
rectangular basins shall be avoided whenever possible.
(9) Exterior slopes of compacted soil shall not exceed 3:1, and may be
further reduced if the soil has unstable characteristics.
(10) Interior slopes of the basin shall not exceed 3:1.
(11) Unless specifically designed as a volume control facility, all
stormwater management facilities shall have a minimum slope of
1% extending radially out from the principal outlet structure.
Facilities designed as water quality/infiltration BMPs may have a
bottom slope of zero.
(12) Impervious low-flow channels are not permitted within stormwater
management facilities.
(13) Unless specifically designed as a volume control or water quality
facility, all stormwater management facilities must empty over a
period of time not less than 24 hours and not more than 72 hours
from the end of the facility's inflow hydrograph. Infiltration tests
performed at the facility locations and proposed basin bottom
depths, in accordance with the BMP Manual, must support time-toempty
calculations if infiltration is a factor.
(14) Energy dissipators and/or level spreaders shall be installed at
points where pipes or drainageways discharge to or from basins.
Discharges to drainage swales shall be dissipated, or piped, to an
acceptable point.
(15) Landscaping and planting specifications must be provided for all
stormwater management basins and be specific for each type of
basin.
(a) Minimal maintenance, saturation tolerant vegetation must be
provided in facilities designed as water quality/infiltration
BMPs.
(16) A safety fence may be required, at the discretion of the
municipality, for any stormwater management facility. The fence
shall be a minimum of four feet high, and of a material acceptable
§ 212-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-19
1:301
to the municipality. A gate with a minimum opening of 10 feet shall
be provided for maintenance access.
(17) Principal outlet structures. All principal outlet structures shall:
(a) Be constructed of reinforced concrete or an alternative
material approved by the Municipal Engineer. When approved
for use, all metal risers shall:
[1] Be suitably coated to prevent corrosion.
[2] Have a concrete base attached with a watertight
connection. The base shall be sufficient weight to prevent
flotation of the riser.
[3] Provide a trash rack or similar appurtenance to prevent
debris from entering the riser.
[4] Provide an anti-vortex device, consisting of a thin vertical
plate normal to the basin berm.
(b) Provide trash racks to prevent clogging of primary outflow
structure stages for all orifices equivalent to 12 inches or
smaller in diameter.
(c) Provide outlet aprons which shall, at a minimum, extend to the
toe of the basin slope.
(d) Where spillways will be used to control peak discharges in
excess of the ten-year storm, the control weirs shall be
constructed to withstand the pressures of impounded waters
and convey flows at computed outlet velocities without erosion.
(18) Emergency spillways. Any stormwater management facility
designed to store runoff shall provide an emergency spillway
designed to convey the one-hundred-year postdevelopment peak
rate flow with a blocked primary outlet structure. The emergency
spillway shall be designed per the following requirements:
(a) The top of embankment elevation shall provide a minimum one
foot of freeboard above the maximum water surface elevation.
This is to be calculated when the spillway functions for the onehundred-
year postdevelopment inflow, with a blocked outlet
structure.
(b) Avoid locating on fill areas, whenever possible.
(c) The spillway shall be armored to prevent erosion during the
one-hundred-year post-development flow, with a blocked
primary outlet structure.
[1] Synthetic liners or riprap may be used, and calculations
sufficient to support proposed armor must be provided. An
earthen plug must be used to accurately control the
§ 212-19 DANVILLE CODE § 212-19
1:302
spillway invert if riprap is the proposed armoring material.
Emergency spillway armor must extend up the sides of the
spillway, and continue at full width to a minimum of 10 feet
past the toe of slope.
(d) Municipal Engineer may require the use of additional
protection when slopes exceed 4:1 and spillway velocities
might exceed NRCS standards for the particular soils involved.
(e) Any underground stormwater management facility (pipe
storage systems) must have a method to bypass flows higher
than the required design (up to a one-hundred-year
postdevelopment inflow) without structural failure, or causing
downstream harm or safety risks.
(19) Stormwater management basins. Design of stormwater
management facilities having three feet or more of water depth
(measured vertically from the lowest elevation in the facility to the
crest of the emergency spillway) shall meet the following additional
requirements:
(a) The maximum water depth within any stormwater
management facility shall be no greater than eight feet when
functioning through the primary outlet structure.
(b) The top of embankment width shall be at least 10 feet.
(c) A ten-foot wide access to the basin bottom must be provided
with a maximum longitudinal slope of 10%.
(d) Berms shall be constructed using soils that conform to the
unified soil classification of CH, MH, CL or ML. The
embankments shall be constructed in a maximum of six-inch
lifts. The lifts will each be compacted to a density of 98% of a
standard proctor analysis as per each layer of compacted fill
shall be tested to determine its density analysis per ASTM 698.
Each layer of compacted fill shall be tested to determine its
density per ASTM 2922 or ASTM 3017.
(e) A cutoff and key trench of impervious material shall be
provided under all embankments four feet or greater in height.
The cutoff trench shall run the entire length of the
embankment and tie into undisturbed natural ground.
(f) Antiseep collars, or a PADEP-approved alternative, must be
provided on all outflow culverts in accordance with the
methodology contained in the latest edition of the PADEP
Erosion and Sedimentation Manual. An increase in seepage
length of 15% must be used in accordance with the
requirements for permanent antiseep collars.
(20) Construction of stormwater management facilities.
§ 212-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-19
1:303
(a) Basins used for rate control only shall be installed prior to or
concurrent with any earthmoving or land disturbances, which
they will serve. The phasing of their construction shall be noted
in the narrative and on the plan.
(b) Basins that include water quality or recharge components shall
have those components installed in such a manner as to not
disturb or diminish their effectiveness.
(c) Compaction test reports shall be kept on file at the site and be
subject to review at all times with copies being forwarded to
the Municipal Engineer upon request.
(d) Temporary and permanent grasses or stabilization measures
shall be established on the sides and base of all earthen basins
within 15 days of construction.
C. Stormwater carrying facilities.
(1) All storm sewer pipes, grass waterways, open channels, swales and
other stormwater carrying facilities that service drainage areas
within the site must be able to convey postdevelopment runoff from
the ten-year design storm.
(2) Stormwater management facilities that convey off-site water
through the site shall be designed to convey the twenty-five-year
storm event (or larger events, as determined by the Municipal
Engineer).
(3) All developments shall include provisions that allow for the
overland conveyance and flow of the postdevelopment onehundred-
year storm event without damage to public or private
property.
(4) Storm sewers.
(a) New storm sewers shall be designed to convey
postdevelopment runoff without surcharging inlets for the tenyear
storm event.
(b) When proposing to connect to an existing storm sewer system,
the applicant must demonstrate that the proposed system will
not exacerbate any existing stormwater problems and will not
exceed downstream capacity.
(c) Inlets, manholes, pipes, and culverts shall be designed in
accordance with PENNDOT Publication 13M, and constructed
in accordance PENNDOT Publication 40, and PENNDOT
Publication 72M, Standards for Roadway Construction (RC).
Other construction details may be approved at the sole
discretion of the municipality. All material and construction
details (inlets, manholes, pipe trenches, etc.), must be shown
on the SWM site plan. A note should be added to the
§ 212-19 DANVILLE CODE § 212-19
1:304
construction plans stating that all inlet and junction box
frames, concrete top units, and grade adjustment rings shall be
set in a bed of mortar.
(d) A minimum pipe size of 18 inches in diameter shall be used in
all roadway systems (public or private) proposed for
construction in the municipality. Pipes should be designed to
provide a minimum velocity of 2 1/2 feet per second when
flowing full. Arch pipes of equivalent cross-sectional area may
be substituted in lieu of circular pipe where the depth of cover
is shallow or where conflicts with utilities exist.
(e) All storm sewer pipes shall be laid to a minimum depth of one
foot from the bottom of foundations or pavement to the crown
of pipe.
(f) In curbed roadway sections, the maximum encroachment of
water on the roadway travel lanes should not exceed 1/2 of a
lane or one inch less than the depth of curb during the roadway
design storm of five-minute duration. Gutter depth shall be
verified by inlet capture/capacity calculations that account for
road slope and opening area. Design of roadway drainage
should be consistent with the guidance in PENNDOT
Publication 13M.
[1] Inlets should be placed at a maximum of 600 feet apart.
[2] Inlets should be placed so drainage cannot cross
intersections or street center lines.
(g) Standard Type "C" inlets with eight-inch hoods should be used
along curbed roadway networks. Type "C" inlets with ten-inch
hoods that provide a two-inch sump condition may be used
with approval of the municipality when roadway longitudinal
slopes are 1.0% or less.
(h) For inlets containing a change in pipe size, the elevation of the
crown of the smaller pipes should be higher than the crown of
the largest pipe.
(i) All inlets should provide a minimum two-inch drop between the
lowest inlet pipe invert elevation and the outlet pipe invert
elevation.
(j) On curbed sections, a double inlet should be placed at the low
point of sag vertical curves, or a flanking inlet should be placed
within 100 feet on each side of the inlet at the low point.
(k) At all roadway low points, swales and easements should be
provided behind the curb or swale and through adjacent
properties to channelize and direct any overflow of stormwater
runoff away from dwellings and structures.
§ 212-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-19
1:305
(l) All inlets in paved areas shall have heavy-duty bicycle-safe
grating. A note to this effect shall be added to the SWM site
plan and inlet details therein.
(m) Inlets must be sized to accept the specified pipe sizes without
knocking out any of the inlet corners. All pipes entering or
exiting inlets shall be cut flush with the inside wall of the inlet.
A note to this effect shall be added to the SWM site plan and
inlet details therein.
(n) Inlets should have weep holes covered with geotextile fabric
placed at appropriate elevations to completely drain the
subgrade prior to placing the base and surface course on
roadways.
(o) Inlets, junction boxes, or access holes greater than five feet in
depth should be equipped with ladder rungs placed 15 inches
on center and shall be detailed on the SWM site plan.
(p) Inlets should not have a sump condition in the bottom (unless
designed as a water quality BMP). Pipes shall be flush with the
bottom inside surface of the box or concrete channels should
be poured.
(q) Accessible drainage structures should be located on
continuous storm sewer system at all invert changes, at all
locations where a transition in storm sewer pipe sizing is
required, at all vertical and horizontal angle points exceeding
5°, and at all points of convergence of two or more storm sewer
pipes.
(r) All storm drainage piping should be provided with either
reinforced concrete headwalls at inlets or end sections at
outlets compatible with the pipe material and size.
(s) Outlet protection and energy dissipaters shall be provided at
all surface discharge points in order to minimize erosion
consistent with PENNDOT Publication 13M, or FHWA
Publication HEC-14.
[1] Flow velocities and volumes from any storm sewer shall
not cause a degradation of the receiving water body.
(t) Stormwater roof drains and pipes should not be directly
connected to storm sewers or discharge onto impervious areas
without prior approval by the municipality.
(5) Swale conveyance facilities.
(a) Swales must be able to convey postdevelopment runoff from a
ten-year design storm with six inches of freeboard to top of the
swale.
§ 212-19 DANVILLE CODE § 212-19
1:306
§ 212-20. Calculation methodology.
(b) Swales shall have side slopes no steeper than 3:1 unless
approved by the municipality.
(c) All swales shall be designed, labeled on the SWM site plan, and
details provided to adequately construct and maintain the
design dimension of the swales.
(d) Swales shall be designed for stability using velocity or shear
criteria. Velocity criteria may be used for channels with less
than 10% slope. Shear criteria may be used for all swales.
Documentation must be provided to support velocity and/or
shear limitations used in calculations.
(e) Where swale bends occur, the computed velocities or shear
stresses shall be multiplied by the following factor for the
purpose of designing swale erosion protection:
Factor
Swale Bends
(degrees)
1.75 30 to 60
2.00 60 to 90
2.50 90 or greater
(f) Manning's "n" values used for swale capacity design must
reflect the permanent condition.
A. All calculations shall be consistent with the guidelines set forth in the
BMP Manual, as amended herein.
B. Stormwater runoff from all development sites shall be calculated using
either the Rational Method or the NRCS Rainfall-Runoff Methodology.
Methods shall be selected by the design professional based on the
individual limitations and suitability of each method for a particular
site.
C. Rainfall values:
(1) Rational Method. The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
Drainage Manual, Intensity-Duration-Frequency Curves,
Publication 584, Chapter 7A, latest edition, shall be used in
conjunction with the appropriate time of concentration and return
period.
(2) NRCS Rainfall-Runoff Method. The Soil Conservation Service Type
II, twenty-four-hour rainfall distribution shall be used in
conjunction with rainfall depths from NOAA Atlas 14 or be
consistent with the following table:
§ 212-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-20
1:307
Return Interval
(year)
24-hour Rainfall Total
(inches)
1 2.35
2 2.82
10 4.09
25 5.05
50 5.94
100 6.99
D. Runoff volume:
(1) Rational Method. Not to be used to calculate runoff volume.
(2) NRCS Rainfall-Runoff Method. This method shall be used to
estimate the change in volume due to regulated activities.
Combining curve numbers for land areas proposed for development
with curve numbers for areas unaffected by the proposed
development into a single weighted curve number is not
acceptable.
E. Peak flow rates:
(1) Rational Method. This method may be used for design of
conveyance facilities only. Extreme caution should be used by the
design professional if the watershed has more than one main
drainage channel, if the watershed is divided so that hydrologic
properties are significantly different in one versus the other, if the
time of concentration exceeds 60 minutes, or if stormwater runoff
volume is an important factor. The combination of Rational Method
hydrographs based on timing shall be prohibited.
(2) NRCS Rainfall-Runoff Method.
(a) This method is recommended for design of stormwater
management facilities and where stormwater runoff volume
must be taken into consideration. The following provides
guidance on the model applicability:
[1] NRCS's 55: limited to 100 acres in size.
[2] NRCS's TR-20 or HEC-HMS: no size limitations.
[3] Other models as preapproved by the Municipal Engineer.
(b) The NRCS antecedent runoff condition II (ARC II, previously
AMC II) must be used for all simulations. The use of continuous
simulation models that vary the ARC are not permitted for
stormwater management purposes.
§ 212-20 DANVILLE CODE § 212-20
1:308
(3) For comparison of peak flow rates, flows shall be rounded to a tenth
of a cubic foot per second (cfs).
F. Runoff coefficients.
(1) Rational Method. Use Table C-1 (Appendix C).116
(2) NRCS Rainfall-Runoff Method. Use Table C-2 (Appendix C).117
Curve numbers (CN) should be rounded to tenths for use in
hydrologic models as they are a design tool with statistical
variability. For large sites, CN's should realistically be rounded to
the nearest whole number.
(3) For the purposes of predevelopment peak flow rate and volume
determination, existing nonforested pervious areas conditions shall
be considered as meadow (good condition).
(4) For the purposes of predevelopment peak flow rate and volume
determination, 20% of existing impervious area, when present,
shall be considered meadow (good condition).
G. Design storm.
(1) All stormwater management facilities shall be verified by routing
the proposed one-, two-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and one-hundredyear
hydrographs through the facility using the storage indication
method or modified Puls method. The twenty-four-hour design
storm hydrograph shall be computed using a calculation method
that produces a full hydrograph.
(2) The stormwater management and drainage system shall be
designed to safely convey the postdevelopment one-hundred-year
storm event to stormwater detention facilities, for the purpose of
meeting peak rate control.
(3) All structures (culverts or bridges) proposed to convey runoff under
a municipal roadway shall be designed to pass the fifty-year design
storm with a minimum of one foot of freeboard measured below the
lowest point along the inside surface of the crown for culverts or
the low chord for bridges. For detailed guidance for design of
culverts and bridges, refer to PennDOT Publications 13M and 15M.
H. Time of concentration.
(1) The time of concentration is a parameter that represents the
average condition that best reflects the hydrologic response of the
area. The following time of concentration (Tc) computational
methodologies shall be used unless another method is preapproved
by the Municipal Engineer:
116. Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
117. Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 212-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-20
1:309
(a) Predevelopment — NRCS's Lag Equation:
Time of Concentration = Tc = [(Tlag/.6) * 60] (minutes)
Where:
Tlag = Lag time (hours)
L = Hydraulic length of watershed (feet)
Y = Average overland slope of watershed (percent)
S = Maximum retention in watershed as defined by:
S = [(1000/CN) — 10]
CN = NRCS curve number for watershed
(b) Postdevelopment; commercial, industrial, or other areas with
large impervious areas (>20% impervious area) — NRCS
Segmental Method. The length of sheet flow shall be limited to
100 feet. Tc for channel and pipe flow shall be computed using
Manning's equation.
(c) Postdevelopment; residential, cluster, or other low-impact
designs less than or equal to 20% impervious area — NRCS
Lag Equation or NRCS Segmental Method.
(2) Additionally, the following provisions shall apply to calculations for
time of concentration:
(a) The postdevelopment Tc shall never be greater than the
predevelopment Tc for any watershed or subwatershed. This
includes when the designer has specifically used swales to
reduce flow velocities. In the event that the designer believes
that the postdevelopment Tc is greater, it shall still be set equal
to the predevelopment Tc for modeling purposes.
(b) The minimum Tc for any watershed shall be five minutes.
(c) The designer may choose to assume a five-minute Tc for any
postdevelopment watershed or subwatershed without
providing any computations.
(d) The designer must provide computations for all
predevelopment Tc paths. A five-minute Tc cannot be assumed
for predevelopment.
§ 212-20 DANVILLE CODE § 212-20
1:310
§ 212-21. Downstream hydraulic capacity analysis.
(e) Undetained fringe areas (areas that are not tributary to a
stormwater facility but where a reasonable effort has been
made to convey runoff from all new impervious coverage to
best management practices) may be assumed to represent the
predevelopment conditions for purpose of Tc calculation.
I. Drainage areas tributary to sinkholes or closed depressions in areas
underlain by limestone or carbonate geologic features shall be excluded
from the modeled point of analysis defining pre-development flows. If
left undisturbed during construction activities, areas draining to closed
depressions may also be used to reduce peak runoff rates in the
postdevelopment analysis. New, additional contributing runoff should
not be directed to existing sinkholes or closed depressions.
J. Where uniform flow is anticipated, the Manning's equation shall be
used for hydraulic computations and to determine the capacity of open
channels, pipes, and storm sewers. The Manning's equation should not
be used for analysis of pipes under pressure flow or for analysis of
culverts. Manning's "n" values shall be obtained from PENNDOT's
Drainage Manual, Publication 584 or PennDOT Publication 13M. Inlet
control shall be checked at all inlet boxes to ensure the headwater
depth during the ten-year design event is contained below the top of
grate for each inlet box.
K. The municipality may approve the use of any generally accepted full
hydrograph approximation technique that shall use a total runoff
volume that is consistent with the volume from a method that produces
a full hydrograph.
L. The municipality has the authority to require that computed existing
runoff rates be reconciled with field observations, conditions and site
history. If the designer can substantiate, through actual physical
calibration, that more appropriate runoff and time of concentration
values should be utilized at a particular site, then appropriate
variations may be made upon review and recommendation of the
municipality.
A. Any downstream or off-site hydraulic capacity analysis conducted in
accordance with this chapter shall use the following criteria for
determining adequacy:
(1) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey
the postdevelopment runoff associated with a bankfull event (or
two-year storm event) at velocities consistent with protection of the
channels from erosion. Acceptable velocities shall be based upon
criteria included in the PADEP Erosion and Sediment Pollution
Control Program Manual.
§ 212-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-21
1:311
(2) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey
the postdevelopment twenty-four-year design storm runoff without
creating any hazard to persons or property.
(3) Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which must
pass or convey flows from the tributary area must be designed in
accordance with PADEP, Chapter 105 regulations (if applicable)
and, at a minimum, pass the postdevelopment twenty-four-year
design storm runoff.
(4) It must be demonstrated that the downstream conveyance channel,
other stormwater facilities, roadways, or overland areas are
capable of safely conveying the one-hundred-year design storm
without causing additional damage to buildings or other
infrastructure.
(5) Proposed projects must be consistent with regulations from the
National Flood Insurance Program and any local floodplain
ordinances.
§ 212-21 DANVILLE CODE § 212-21
1:312
ARTICLE VII
Site Plan and Report Requirements
§ 212-22. General requirements.
No activity regulated by this chapter may commence until the applicant has
received written approval of a SWM site plan from the municipality.
§ 212-23. SWM site plan and report contents.
The SWM site plan and SWM site report shall consist of all applicable
calculations, maps, and plans. All SWM site plan materials shall be
submitted to the municipality in a format that is clear, concise, legible,
neat and well organized; otherwise, the SWM site plan shall be rejected.
Appropriate sections from Chapter 220, Subdivision and Land Development,
and other applicable local ordinances, shall be followed in preparing the
SWM Site plan.
A. SWM site plan shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Plans shall be of one size and in a form that meets the requirements
for recording in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Montour
County.
(a) Scale:
[1] Plans for tracts of less than 20 acres: one inch equals 50
feet or less;
[2] Plans for tracts of 20 acres or more: no greater than one
inch equals 100 feet;
(b) All lettering and details shall be drawn to a size to be legible if
the plans are reduced to half-size.
(2) The name of the development; name and location address of the
property site; name, address, and telephone number of the
applicant/owner of the property; and name, address, telephone
number, email address, and the seal and signature of the qualified
professional preparing the SWM site plan.
(3) The date of submission and dates of all revisions.
(4) A graphical and written scale on all drawings and maps.
(5) A North arrow on all drawings and maps.
(6) A location map at a minimum scale of one inch equals 1,000 feet
and illustrates the project relative to highways, municipalities or
other identifiable landmarks.
(7) Metes and bounds description of the entire tract perimeter.
(8) Existing and final contours at intervals:
§ 212-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-23
1:313
(a) Slopes less than 5%: no greater than one foot;
(b) Slopes between 5% to 15%: no greater than two feet;
(c) Steep slopes (greater than 15% or 15%), five-foot contour
intervals may be used.
(9) Perimeters of existing water bodies within the project area
including stream banks, lakes, ponds, springs, field delineated
wetlands or other bodies of water, sinkholes, flood hazard
boundaries (FEMA delineated floodplains and floodways), areas of
natural vegetation to be preserved, the total extent of the upstream
area draining through the site, and overland drainage paths. In
addition, any areas necessary to determine downstream impacts,
where required for proposed stormwater management facilities
must be shown.
(10) The location of all existing and proposed utilities, on-lot
wastewater facilities, water supply wells, sanitary sewers, and
water lines on and within 50 feet of property lines including inlets,
manholes, valves, meters, poles, chambers, junction boxes, and
other utility system components.
(11) A key map showing all existing man-made features beyond the
property boundary that may be affected by the project.
(12) Soil names and boundaries with identification of the Hydraulic Soil
Group classification including rock outcroppings.
(13) Proposed impervious surfaces (structures, roads, paved areas, and
buildings), including plans and profiles of roads and paved areas
and floor elevations of buildings.
(14) Existing and proposed land use(s).
(15) Horizontal alignment, vertical profiles, and cross sections of all
open channels, pipes, swales and other BMPs.
(16) The location and clear identification of the nature of permanent
stormwater BMPs.
(17) The location of all erosion and sedimentation control facilities,
shown on a separate from the SWM site plan (typically an erosion
and sedimentation plan).
(18) The location of easements as requested by the municipality or
where required by this chapter. In lieu of providing an easement to
the public right-of-way, a note may be added to the plan granting
the municipality or their designees access to all easements via the
nearest public right-of-way.
(19) Construction details for all drainage and stormwater BMPs.
§ 212-23 DANVILLE CODE § 212-23
1:314
(20) Identification of short-term and long-term ownership, operations,
and maintenance responsibilities.
(21) Notes and statements:
(a) A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging that the
stormwater BMPs are fixtures that cannot be altered or
removed without prior approval by the municipality.
(b) A statement referencing the Operation and Maintenance
(O&M) Agreement and stating that the O&M Agreement is part
of the SWM site plan.
(c) A note indicating that record drawings will be provided for all
stormwater facilities prior to occupancy, or the release of the
surety bond.
(d) The following signature block for the qualified professional
preparing the stormwater management plan:
"I, ____________________, hereby certify that the Stormwater
Management Plan meets all design standards and criteria of
the Danville Borough Stormwater Management Ordinance."
(e) The following signature block for the Municipal Engineer
review of the stormwater management plan:
"I, ____________________, have reviewed the Stormwater
Management Plan in accordance with the Design Standards
and Criteria of Danville Borough's Stormwater Management
Ordinance."
B. SWM site report shall include (but not limited to):
(1) General data, including:
(a) Project name;
(b) Project location: address of the property site;
(c) Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant/owner
of the property;
(d) Name, address, telephone number, email address, and
engineering seal of the individual preparing the SWM site
report;
(e) Date of submission and revisions.
(2) Project description narrative that clearly discusses the project and
provides the following information:
(a) Narrative.
§ 212-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-23
1:315
[1] Statement of the regulated activity describing what is
being proposed. Overall stormwater management concept
with description of permanent stormwater management
techniques, including construction specifications and
materials to be used for stormwater management
facilities.
[2] Expected project schedule.
[3] Location map showing the project site and its location
relative to release rate districts.
[4] Detailed description of the existing site conditions
including a site evaluation completed for projects
proposed in areas of carbonate geology or karst
topography, and other environmentally sensitive areas
such as brownfields.
[5] Total site area, pre and post, which must be equal or have
an explanation as to why it is not.
[6] Total site impervious area.
[7] Total off-site areas.
[8] Number and description of stormwater management
facilities.
[9] Type of development.
[10] Predevelopment land use.
[11] Whether site is a water quality sensitive (WQS)
development.
[12] Whether site is in a defined sensitive area.
[13] Types of water quality and recharge systems used, if
applicable.
[14] Complete hydrologic, hydraulic, and structural
computations for all stormwater management facilities.
[15] A written maintenance plan for all stormwater features
including detention facilities and other stormwater
management elements.
[16] Identification of ownership and maintenance responsibility
for all permanent stormwater management facilities.
[17] Other pertinent information, as required.
(b) Summary tables.
§ 212-23 DANVILLE CODE § 212-23
1:316
[1] Predevelopment hydrologic soil group (HSG) assumptions,
curve numbers (CN), Computation of average slope,
hydraulic length, computed time of concentration.
[2] Existing conditions runoff volume and peak rate of runoff.
[3] Postdevelopment runoff volume and peak rate of runoff.
[4] Undetained areas, areas to ponds.
[5] Land use for each subarea.
[6] Hydrologic soil group (HSG) assumptions, curve numbers
(CN).
[7] Time of concentration computed for each subarea.
[8] Postdevelopment peak rate of runoff routed to ponds and
out.
[9] Pond maximum return period design data including:
maximum water surface elevation, berm elevation, and
emergency spillway elevation.
[10]Water quality depth and volume requirements.
(c) Calculations.
[1] Complete hydrologic, hydraulic and structural
computations, calculations, assumptions, and criteria for
the design of all stormwater BMPs.
[2] Details of the berm embankment and outlet structure
indicating the embankment top elevation, embankment
side slopes, top width of embankment, emergency spillway
elevation, perforated riser dimensions, pipe barrel
dimensions and dimensions and spacing of antiseep
collars.
[3] Design computations for the control structures (pipe
barrel and riser, etc.).
[4] A plot or table of the stage-storage (volume vs. elevation)
and all supporting computations.
[5] Routing computations.
(d) Drawings.
[1] Drainage area maps for all watersheds and inlets depicting
the time of concentration path for both existing conditions
and post-developed condition.
§ 212-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-23
1:317
[2] All stormwater management facilities must be located on a
plan and described in detail including easements and
buffers boundaries.
(3) Reports that do not clearly indicate the above information may be
rejected for review by the municipality and will be returned to the
applicant.
(4) Description of, justification, and actual field results for infiltration
testing with respect to the type of test and test location for the
design of infiltration BMPs.
(5) The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes, water quality,
and peak flows) on surrounding properties and aquatic features
and on any existing municipal stormwater collection system that
may receive runoff from the project site.
(6) Description of the proposed changes to the land surface and
vegetative cover including the type and amount of impervious area
to be added.
(7) Identification of short-term and long-term ownership, operation,
and maintenance responsibilities as well as schedules and costs for
inspection and maintenance activities for each permanent
stormwater or drainage BMP, including provisions for permanent
access or maintenance easements.
C. Supplemental information to be provided prior to recording of the SWM
site plan, as applicable:
(1) Signed and executed Operations and Maintenance Agreement
(Appendix A).118
(2) Signed and executed easements, as required for all on-site and offsite
work.
(3) An erosion and sedimentation control plan and approval letter from
the Montour County Conservation District.
(4) A NPDES permit.
(5) Permits from PADEP and ACOE.
(6) Geologic assessment.
(7) Soils investigation report, including boring logs, compaction
requirements, and recommendations for construction of detention
basins.
(8) A highway occupancy permit from PENNDOT when utilization of a
PENNDOT storm drainage system is proposed or when proposed
facilities would encroach onto a PENNDOT right-of-way.
118. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 212-23 DANVILLE CODE § 212-24
1:318
§ 212-24. SWM site plan and report submission.
§ 212-25. SWM site plan and report review.
§ 212-26. Modification of plans.
A modification to a submitted SWM site plan and report for a development
site that involves a change in stormwater management facilities or
A. The applicant shall submit the SWM site plan and report for the
regulated activity.
B. Five copies of the SWM site plan and report shall be submitted and be
distributed as follows:
(1) Two copies to the municipality accompanied by the requisite
executed Review Fee Reimbursement Agreement, as specified in
this chapter.
(2) One copy to the Municipal Engineer.
(3) One copy to the Montour County Planning Commission.
(4) One copy to the Montour County Conservation District.
C. Additional copies shall be submitted as requested by the municipality or
PADEP.
A. The municipality shall require receipt of a complete SWM site plan and
report as specified in this chapter. The municipality shall review the
SWM site plan and report for consistency with the purposes,
requirements, and intent of this chapter.
B. The municipality shall not approve any SWM site plan and report that is
deficient in meeting the requirements of this chapter. At its sole
discretion and in accordance with this article, when a SWM site plan
and report is found to be deficient, the municipality may disapprove the
submission and require a resubmission, or in the case of minor
deficiencies, the municipality may accept submission of modifications.
C. The municipality shall notify the applicant in writing within 45 calendar
days whether the SWM site plan and report is approved or disapproved
if the SWM site plan and report is not part of a subdivision or land
development plan. If the SWM site plan and report involves a
subdivision or land development plan, the timing shall following the
subdivision and land development process according to the
Municipalities Planning Code.
D. The Municipal Building Permit Office shall not issue a building permit
for any regulated activity if the SWM site plan and report has been
found to be inconsistent with this chapter, as determined by the
municipality. All required permits from PADEP must be obtained prior
to issuance of a building permit.
§ 212-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-26
1:319
techniques, or that involves the relocation or redesign of stormwater
management facilities, or that is necessary because soil or other conditions
are not as stated on the SWM site plan as determined by the municipality,
shall require a resubmission of the modified SWM site plan in accordance
with this chapter.
§ 212-27. Resubmission of disapproved SWM site plan and report.
A disapproved SWM site plan and report may be resubmitted with the
revisions addressing the municipality's concerns documented in writing, to
the municipality in accordance with this chapter. The applicable municipal
review fee must accompany a resubmission of a disapproved SWM site plan
and report.
§ 212-28. Authorization to construct and term of validity.
The municipality's approval of a SWM site plan and report authorizes the
regulated activities contained in the SWM site plan for a maximum term
of validity of five years following the date of approval. The municipality
may specify a term of validity shorter than five years in the approval for
any specific SWM site plan. Terms of validity shall commence on the date
the municipality signs the approval for a SWM site plan. If stormwater
management facilities included in the approved SWM site plan have not
been constructed, or if a record drawing of these facilities has not been
approved within this time, then the municipality may consider the SWM site
plan disapproved and may revoke any and all permits or approvals.
§ 212-29. Record drawings, completion certificate and final
inspection.
A. The applicant shall be responsible for providing record drawings of all
stormwater BMPs included in the approved SWM site plan. The record
drawing and an explanation of any discrepancies with the approved
SWM site plan shall be submitted to the municipality as a prerequisite
for the release of the guarantee or issuance of an occupancy permit.
B. The record drawing shall include a certification of completion signed by
a qualified professional verifying that all permanent stormwater BMPs
have been constructed according to the approved SWM site plan and
report.
(1) Drawings shall show all approved revisions and elevations and
inverts to all manholes, inlets, pipes, and stormwater control
facilities.
C. After receipt of the record drawing and certification of completion by
the municipality, the municipality may conduct a final inspection.
§ 212-26 DANVILLE CODE § 212-29
1:320
ARTICLE VIII
Easements
§ 212-30. Easements.
A. Easements shall be established to accommodate the existence of
drainageways.
B. Where a tract is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or
stream, there shall be provided an easement paralleling the line of such
watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream with a width adequate to
preserve the unimpeded flow of natural drainage in the one-hundredyear
floodplain.
C. Easements shall be established for all on-site stormwater management
or drainage facilities, including but not limited to: detention facilitates
(above or below ground), infiltration facilities, all stormwater BMPs,
drainage swales, and drainage facilities (inlets, manholes, pipes, etc.).
D. Easements are required for all areas used for off-site stormwater
control.
E. Easements to accommodate earthmoving equipment should be a
minimum of 20 feet wide.
F. Easements shall provide ingress to, and egress from, a public right-ofway.
In lieu of providing an easement to the public right-of-way, a note
may be added to the plan granting the municipality or their designees
access to all easements via the nearest public right-of-way able for
vehicle ingress and egress on grades of less than 10% for carrying out
inspection or maintenance activities.
G. Where possible, easements shall be centered on side and/or rear lot
lines.
H. Nothing shall be planted or placed within the easement which would
adversely affect the function of the easement, or conflict with any
conditions associated with such easement.
I. All easement agreements shall be recorded with a reference to the
recorded easement indicated on the site plan. The format and content
of the easement agreement shall be reviewed and approved by the
Municipal Engineer and Solicitor. The applicant agrees to reimburse
the municipality for reasonable and necessary fees that may be
incurred by the Municipal Engineer and/or Solicitor for such reviews.
§ 212-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-30
1:321

ARTICLE IX
Maintenance Responsibilities
§ 212-31. Financial guarantee.
§ 212-32. Maintenance responsibilities.
A. The applicant shall provide a financial guarantee to the municipality
and in a format acceptable to the municipality for the timely installation
and proper construction of all stormwater management controls as
required by the approved SWM site plan and this chapter, equal to
110% of the full construction cost of the required controls in
accordance with the Municipalities Planning Code.
B. At the completion of the project and as a prerequisite for the release of
the financial guarantee, the applicant shall:
(1) Provide a certification of completion from the owner and an
engineer, architect, surveyor or other qualified person, verifying
that all permanent facilities have been constructed according to
the SWM site plan and report and approved revisions thereto.
(2) Provide a set of record drawings.
(3) Request a final inspection from the municipality to certify
compliance with this chapter, after receipt of the certification of
completion and record drawings by the municipality.
A. The SWM site plan and report for the project site shall describe the
future operation and maintenance responsibilities. The operation and
maintenance description shall outline required routine maintenance
actions and schedules necessary to ensure proper operation of the
stormwater control facilities.
B. The SWM site plan and report for the project site shall establish
responsibilities for the continuing operating and maintenance of all
proposed stormwater control facilities, consistent with the following
principals:
(1) If a development consists of structures or lots that are to be
separately owned and in which streets, sewers, and other public
improvements are to be dedicated to the municipality, stormwater
control facilities/BMPs may also be dedicated to and maintained by
the municipality.
(2) If a development site is to be maintained in a single ownership or if
sewers and other public improvements are to be privately owned
and maintained, then the ownership and maintenance of
stormwater control facilities/BMPs shall be the responsibility of the
owner or private management entity.
§ 212-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-32
1:323
§ 212-33. Maintenance agreement for privately owned stormwater
facilities.
(3) Facilities, areas, or structures used as stormwater BMPs shall be
enumerated as permanent real estate appurtenances and recorded
as deed restrictions or easements that run with the land.
(4) The SWM site plan and report shall be recorded as a restrictive
deed covenant that runs with the land.
(5) The municipality may take enforcement actions against an
applicant for failure to satisfy any provision of this chapter.
C. The municipality, upon recommendation of the Municipal Engineer,
shall make the final determination on the continuing maintenance
responsibilities prior to final approval of the SWM site plan and report.
The municipality may require a dedication of such facilities as part of
the requirements for approval of the SWM site plan. Such a
requirement is not an indication that the municipality will accept the
facilities. The municipality reserves the right to accept or reject the
ownership and operating responsibility for any portion of the
stormwater management controls.
D. If the municipality accepts ownership of stormwater BMPs, the
municipality may, at its discretion, require a fee from the applicant to
the municipality to offset the future cost of inspections, operations, and
maintenance.
E. It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any permanent stormwater BMP
required by an approved SWM site plan, or to allow the property to
remain in a condition, which does not conform to an approved SWM site
plan, unless the municipality grants an exception in writing.
A. Prior to final approval of the SWM site plan and report, the applicant
shall sign the Operation and Maintenance (O&M) Agreement (Appendix
A)119 covering all stormwater control facilities that are to be privately
owned. The Operation and Maintenance (O&M) Agreement shall be
recorded with the SWM site plan and made a part hereto.
B. Other items may be included in the Operation and Maintenance (O&M)
Agreement where determined necessary to guarantee the satisfactory
operation and maintenance of all BMP facilities. The Operation and
Maintenance (O&M) Agreement shall be subject to the review and
approval of the municipality and the Municipal Solicitor.
C. The owner is responsible for operation and maintenance of the
stormwater BMPs. If the owner fails to adhere to the Operation and
Maintenance (O&M) Agreement, the municipality may perform the
services required and charge the owner appropriate fees. Nonpayment
of fees may result in a lien against the property.
119. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 212-32 DANVILLE CODE § 212-33
1:324
ARTICLE X
Inspections
§ 212-34. Schedule of inspections.
§ 212-35. Right-of-entry.
A. The municipality or their municipal assignee may inspect all phases of
the installation of temporary or permanent stormwater management
facilities pursuant to this chapter.
B. During any stage of earth disturbance activities, if the municipality
determines that the stormwater management facilities are not being
installed in accordance with the approved SWM site plan, the
municipality may revoke or suspend any existing permits or approvals
until all violations are corrected or until a revised SWM site plan is
submitted and approved as specified in this chapter.
C. Stormwater BMPs shall be inspected by the landowner, or the
landowner's designee according to the inspection schedule described
on the SWM site plan for each BMP.
(1) The municipality may require copies of the inspection reports, in a
form as stipulated by the municipality.
(2) If such inspections are not conducted or inspection reports not
submitted as scheduled, the municipality, or their designee, may
conduct such inspections and charge the owner appropriate fees.
Nonpayment of fees may result in a lien against the property.
(a) Prior to conducting such inspections, the municipality shall
inform the owner of its intent to conduct such inspections. The
owner shall be given 30 days to conduct required inspections
and submit the required inspection reports to the municipality.
A. Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized
representatives of the municipality may enter at reasonable times, upon
any property within the municipality, to inspect the implementation,
condition, or operations and maintenance of the stormwater BMPs in
regard to any aspect governed by this chapter.
B. Stormwater BMP owners and operators shall allow persons working on
behalf of the municipality ready access to all parts of the premises for
the purposes of determining compliance with this chapter.
C. Persons working on behalf of the municipality shall have the right to
temporarily locate on any stormwater BMP in the municipality such
devices, as are necessary, to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the
discharges from such stormwater BMP.
D. Unreasonable delay in allowing the municipality access to a stormwater
BMP is a violation of this chapter.
§ 212-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-35
1:325

ARTICLE XI
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 212-36. Notification.
§ 212-37. Enforcement.
§ 212-38. Public nuisance.
§ 212-39. Suspension and revocation.
A. In the event that a person fails to comply with the requirements of this
chapter, an approved SWM site plan, or fails to conform to the
requirements of any permit or approval issued hereunder, the
municipality shall provide written notification of the violation. Such
notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and establish a
time limit for correction of these violation(s).
B. Failure to comply within the time specified shall subject such person to
the penalties provisions of this chapter. All such penalties shall be
deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the municipality from
pursuing any and all other remedies. It shall be the responsibility of the
owner of the real property on which any regulated activity is proposed
to occur, is occurring, or has occurred, to comply with the terms and
conditions of this chapter.
A. The applicant shall keep a copy of the approved SWM site plan at the
project site throughout the duration of the construction activity. The
municipality or their designee may make periodic inspections during
construction.
B. Adherence to approved SWM site plan.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to
undertake any regulated activity on any property except as
provided for by an approved SWM site plan and pursuant to the
requirements of this chapter.
(2) It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any control structure
required by the SWM site plan pursuant to this chapter.
(3) It shall be unlawful to allow a property to remain in a condition that
does not conform to an approved SWM site plan.
A. A violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby deemed a public
nuisance.
B. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
A. Any approval or permit issued by the municipality may be suspended or
revoked for:
§ 212-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-39
1:327
§ 212-40. Violations and penalties.
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
approved SWM site plan or Operation & Maintenance (O&M)
Agreement.
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable
law, ordinance, rule or regulation relating to the regulated activity.
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act, during
the regulated activity which constitutes or creates a hazard or
nuisance, pollution, or which endangers the life or property of
others.
B. A suspended approval or permit may be reinstated by the municipality
when:
(1) The municipality or their designee has inspected and approved the
corrections to the violation(s) that caused the suspension.
(2) The municipality is satisfied that the violation(s) has been
corrected.
C. An approval that has been revoked by the municipality cannot be
reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new approval under the
provisions of this chapter.
A. The municipality may file a criminal action against anyone violating the
provisions of this chapter. A violation shall be a summary offense.
Anyone found guilty, pleading guilty, entering a no contest plea or
subjected to a verdict or order other than an acquittal shall be guilty of
a summary offense and shall be subject to a fine of $300 for each
violation, recoverable with costs. Each day that the violation continues
shall be a separate offense and penalties shall be cumulative.
B. The municipality may file a civil action against anyone violating the
provisions of this chapter. Anyone who has been found by a court to be
liable or determined to have violated this chapter shall pay a judgment
of $500 plus all court costs and reasonable attorneys fees incurred in
enforcement. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate violation.
C. In addition, the municipality, may institute injunctive, mandamus, or
any other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for the
enforcement of this chapter. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall
have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent
injunctions, mandamus, or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
Anyone determined to be subject to such injunction, mandamus,
restraining order or other form of relief requested by the municipality
shall reimburse the municipality for all court costs and reasonable
attorney fees incurred in association with said action(s).
§ 212-39 DANVILLE CODE § 212-40
1:328
§ 212-41. Appeals.
D. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the municipality, the right to
commence any action for enforcement and/or violation pursuant to this
section.
E. Pursuit of any and all available remedies is at the discretion and
election of the municipality.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of the municipality or its designee,
relevant to the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the
municipality within 30 days of that action.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the municipality, relevant to
the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the Montour County Court
of Common Pleas within 30 days of the municipality's decision.
§ 212-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-41
1:329

ARTICLE XII
Prohibitions
§ 212-42. Prohibited discharges and connections.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or underground, that
allows any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water to enter the municipality's separate storm
sewer system or waters of the commonwealth is prohibited.
B. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the municipality's separate storm sewer system, which has
not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records, and
approved by the municipality is prohibited.
C. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into the
municipality's separate storm sewer system or into surface waters of
the commonwealth, which are not composed entirely of stormwater,
except those in Subsection D below, and discharges allowed under a
state or federal permit.
D. The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to
be significant contributors to pollution to the waters of the
commonwealth:
(1) Potable water sources including dechlorinated water line and fire
hydrant flushings.
(2) Irrigation drainage.
(3) Air-conditioning condensate.
(4) Springs.
(5) Water from crawl space pumps.
(6) Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred. (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used.
(7) Discharges from fire-fighting activities.
(8) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(9) Uncontaminated water from foundations or from footing drains.
(10) Lawn watering.
(11) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
(12) Uncontaminated groundwater.
(13)Water from individual residential car washing.
§ 212-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-42
1:331
§ 212-43. Roof drains.
Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration areas, vegetative
BMPs, or pervious areas to the maximum extent practicable.
§ 212-44. Alteration of BMPs.
(14) Routine external building washdown (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
E. In the event that the municipality or PADEP determines that any of the
discharges identified in Subsection D is a significant contributor to
pollution to the waters of the Commonwealth, the responsible person(s)
shall be notified to cease the discharge. Upon notice provided by the
municipality or PADEP, the discharger will have a reasonable time, as
determined by the municipality or PADEP, to cease the discharge,
consistent with the degree of pollution caused by the discharge.
F. Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's responsibilities under
commonwealth law.
A. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any existing
stormwater BMP, facilities, areas, or structures unless it is part of an
approved maintenance program, without the written approval of the
municipality.
B. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping, or vegetation into
a stormwater BMP, facilities, areas, structures, or within a drainage
easement which would limit or alter the functioning of the BMP without
the written approval of the municipality.
§ 212-42 DANVILLE CODE § 212-44
1:332
ARTICLE XIII
Fees and Expenses
§ 212-45. General.
The fee required by this chapter is the municipal review fee. The municipal
review fee shall be established by the municipality to defray review costs
incurred by the municipality and the Municipal Engineer. The applicant
shall pay all fees.
§ 212-46. Expenses covered by fees.
The fees required by this chapter shall, at a minimum, cover:
§ 212-47. Recording of approved SWM site plan and related
agreements.
A. Administrative and clerical costs.
B. Review of the SWM site plan and report by the municipality.
C. Preconstruction meetings.
D. Inspection of stormwater management facilities/BMPs and drainage
improvements during construction.
E. Final inspection upon completion of the stormwater management
facilities/BMPs and drainage improvements presented in the SWM site
plan.
F. Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions
regulated by this chapter, correct violations, and assure proper
completion of stipulated remedial actions.
A. The owner of any land upon which permanent BMPs will be placed,
constructed, or implemented, as described in the SWM site plan, shall
record the following documents in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds
of Montour County, within 15 days of approval of the SWM site plan by
the municipality:
(1) The SWM site plan.
(2) Operations and Maintenance (O&M) Agreement (Appendix A).120
(3) Easements under § 212-30.
(4) Riparian buffers under § 212-18.
B. The municipality may suspend or revoke any approvals granted for the
project site upon discovery of the failure of the owner to comply with
this section.
120. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 212-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-47
1:333
Chapter 216
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND DRIVEWAYS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 88.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 180.
Skateboards — See Ch. 199.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
220.
Trees — See Ch. 231.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 237.
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
§ 212-47 DANVILLE CODE § 212-47
1:334
ARTICLE I
Sidewalks and Gutters
§ 216-1. Encroachments by doorsteps and cellar doors.121
No doorstep, which is to be built on the grade of the sidewalk or pavement,
shall encroach leaving less than three feet from the line of the street; nor
shall cellar doors, which are to be built on the grade of the sidewalk or
pavement, leave less than four feet from the line of the street.
§ 216-2. Areas and steps below pavement level to be protected.
All areas and steps leading below the level of the pavement shall be
protected by good iron railing and all gratings over vaults shall be securely
fixed in such a manner as to render the passage of the streets and
pavements safe at all times.
§ 216-3. Use of sidewalks for display of merchandise.
Merchants in the Borough of Danville are hereby allowed and permitted to
occupy 1/2 part of the width of pavement or footwalk adjoining the line of
buildings wherein they conduct their respective business for the purpose of
exhibiting their goods, wares and merchandise. The outside and remaining
portion of all such pavements or footwalks shall in no way be obstructed.
§ 216-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 and
costs of such proceedings or, upon default of payment of such fines and
costs, by imprisonment in the county jail for a term of not more than
30 days. The continuation of such violation for each successive day shall
constitute a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or
permitting the continuation of the violation may be punished as provided
above for each separate offense.122
121. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
122. Editor's Note: Former Article II, Excavations in State Highways, which immediately
followed this article, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
§ 216-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-4
1:335

ARTICLE II
Access Driveways for Gasoline Stations
§ 216-5. Purposes.
The basic considerations that shall govern the location and design of service
station approaches and/or curb cuts on public property shall be the
regimentation of motor vehicle traffic into and out of service stations and
the facilitation of the safe movement of pedestrian traffic.
§ 216-6. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPROACH — That section of the roadway right-of-way between the
pavement edge or curb and the property line which is designed and used for
the interchange of traffic between the roadway pavement and the gasoline
service station property.
CORNER ISLAND — That section of the roadway right-of-way between the
pavement edge or curb and the property line which occurs on the corner of
a highway intersections between the nearest approach on each highway.
INTERMEDIATE ISLAND — That section of roadway right-of-way between
the pavement edge or curb and the property line which occurs between
approaches.
PAVEMENT EDGE — The edge of a hard-surfaced roadway pavement,
exclusive of shoulder or berm.
PERMANENT TYPE CONSTRUCTION — Plain or reinforced concrete,
bituminous concrete or macadam of required thickness.
PUBLIC ALLEY — Any public way or lane, generally not less than eight feet
nor more than 20 feet wide, within any block or a municipality, which affords
access to the side or rear of buildings in such block.
RADIUS CURB — That section of curb occurring between the roadway curb
and the end of the approach, having a radius of not less than three feet in
urban areas and not less than five feet in rural areas.
RAMPED CURB — That section of a curb occurring between the roadway
curb and the end of the approach. Such ramped curb shall be sloped down
from the top of the roadway curb to the approach grade at a horizontal
distance of 18 inches.
SHOULDER LINE — The intersection of the shoulder slope with the side
slope or ditch slope.
SIDEWALK — A permanent hard-paved walkway, continuous for a
reasonable distance and an integral party of the highway development, for
use of pedestrians only.
§ 216-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-6
1:337
STABILIZED MATERIALS — Any aggregate such as gravel, stone, slag, or
mixtures of such aggregates with soil, placed in such a manner as to provide
a smooth, stable, all-weather surface not subject to undue traveling.
§ 216-7. Approaches.
A. Width of drive. The width of all approaches shall not be greater than 35
feet in the throat of the approach, measured at right angles to the axis
of the approach.
B. Return radii:
(1) Where the flared edge of an approach controls the turning radius of
a vehicle entering the service station by a right turn from the
adjacent outside traffic lane of the roadway, the radius of that edge
may be as long as practical to provide a freestanding and safe
turning movement, but shall not be less than three feet. The radii of
all other approach edges shall not be over 40 feet nor less than
three feet. A flaring radius is desirable where the flared edge
controls the turning radius of a vehicle leaving the service station
and entering the adjacent outside traffic lane by a right-hand turn.
(2) All approach flares shall be tangent to the curbline or edge of
roadway pavement, and the entire flare shall fall within the
highway right-of-way.
C. Angle of approach. The interior angle between the axis of approach and
the center line of the roadway shall fall between 45° and 90°.
D. Intermediate islands. Between all approaches there shall be
intermediate islands of sufficient length along the highway, but not less
than 10 feet measured along the right-of-way line, nor less than six feet
measured along the curbline.
E. Corner islands. Where a gasoline service station improvement is made
on a property which lies on the corner of a highway intersection, a
corner island shall be provided to meet the following requirements.
(1) Approaches or curb cuts shall begin not nearer to the adjacent
pavement edge of the intersecting highway than the point of
intersection of the extended property line with the curb or edge of
the pavement of the roadway on which the driveway is to be
constructed, but shall not be less than 15 feet measured
perpendicular to the pavement edges of the intersecting highway.
F. Drainage.
(1) Curb cuts for driveways shall leave undisturbed a curb height of
not less than 1 1/2 inches above gutter grade, thereby maintaining
the functional properties of the curb.
§ 216-6 DANVILLE CODE § 216-7
1:338
(2) Where a drainage ditch exists, adequate drainage pipe shall be
installed under the driveway, which meets the approval of the
Department of Highways.
G. Driveway pavement.
(1) Where street curbs and sidewalks exist, the approaches shall be of
permanent construction.
(2) Where no curbs exist, the sidewalk portion of the approaches shall
be of permanent construction and the remainder may be of
stabilized material.
(3) Where no sidewalks exist with or without curbs, approaches may
be built with stabilized material or with a higher type material,
which is optional with the owner.
H. Slope of driveway.
(1) Where open shoulders exist, the grade of entrance and exit
driveways shall slope away from the roadway pavement at a rate of
not less than 1/4 inch per foot, or not more than one inch per foot,
for a distance equivalent to the prevailing width of the shoulder.
(2) Approach ramps may extend from the face of the curb up to the
outer edge of the sidewalk, in cases where a planting area occurs
between the two.
(3) The rate of slope of approach ramps preferable should not exceed
one inch per foot, but such ramps shall not extend beyond 1/2 the
width of the sidewalk.
(4) Where conditions are such that the slope of one inch per foot is not
obtainable under Subsection H(3) above, then the sidewalk area of
the approach may be lowered sufficiently to obtain the allowable
ramp slope, and the sidewalk immediately adjacent warped up to
meet the normal sidewalk grade, at a slope not exceeding 3/8 inch
per foot.
I. Radius curbs.
(1) Where street curbs exist, radius curbs shall be installed in
conjunction with approaches of radii as set forth in Subsection B
above. Such radius curbs shall extend the full depth of the
approach ramps and shall have an inclined face for a distance of
three feet, measured perpendicularly back from the curbline, from
which point they shall be warped gradually into the approach
ramps.
§ 216-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-8
1:339
§ 216-8. Submission of plans and specifications; permits; permit
fee.123
Plans and specifications, prepared by a licensed professional engineer or
architect, hired by and paid for by the applicant, may be required by the
Code Officer prior to the issuing of any required permits. If in the opinion of
the Code Officer the plans and specification need review by the Borough's
engineering firm, then the applicant shall be responsible for all costs and
expenses associated with said review. The Code Officer shall collect an
amount equal to estimated review cost from the applicant, with all excess
funds, if any, to be returned to the applicant. If the plans and specifications
are in accordance with the provisions of this article and conform to any or
all existing Borough ordinances, the Code Officer is hereby directed to issue
a permit. There shall be a charge of in such amount as shall be established
by resolution of the Borough Council paid to the Borough of Danville at the
time the permit is issued.
§ 216-9. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person who shall violate any provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction therefor, be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 and
costs of proceedings or, upon default of payment of such fines and costs,
by imprisonment in the county jail for a term of not more than 30 days.
The continuation of such violation for each successive day shall
constitute a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or
permitting the continuation of the violation may be punished as
provided above for each separate offense.
B. Proceedings for the violation hereof may be instituted by anyone
making any information before any Magisterial District Judge and may
be commenced by issuing either a summons or a warrant after
information has been made, and proceedings to restrain any violation
or the continuance of any violation of this article may be prosecuted as
provided by law.
C. In addition to the penalties herewith provided for violation of this
article, the Borough in the exercise of its police powers, in case of such
violation, reserves to itself the right to raze or remove any building
constructed in violation of this article at the cost and expense of the
owner or person guilty of violating this article.
D. Any structure erected or existing contrary to the provisions of this
article is declared to be a public nuisance and subject to actions at law
and equity for the abatement thereof.
123. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 216-8 DANVILLE CODE § 216-9
1:340
ARTICLE III
Sidewalk Repair and Construction
§ 216-10. Construction or reconstruction required upon notice.
Every owner of property in the Borough of Danville shall, upon 30 days'
notice from the Borough Council, construct or reconstruct a sidewalk,
which shall conform to all applicable requirements of this article, in front of
or along side of such property.
§ 216-11. Repair required upon notice.
Every owner of property in the Borough of Danville shall, upon 30 days'
notice from the Borough Council, repair the sidewalk, in the manner
stipulated in such notice, in front of or along side such property.
§ 216-12. Notices required to be printed or written.
The notices referred to in §§ 216-10 and 216-11 may be written or printed
or partly written and partly printed.
§ 216-13. Submission of plans and specifications; permitted
materials.124
All sidewalks shall be constructed, reconstructed and repaired of cement
or bituminous concrete only. Where the existing sidewalk is of brick and/
or slate and at least two-thirds of the said sidewalk is in good repair, the
sidewalk may be repaired with brick and/or slate. The Code Officer, prior
to issuing of any required permits, may require plans and specifications
prepared by a licensed professional engineer or architect, hired by and
paid for by the property owner. If in the opinion of the Code Officer, the
property owner's plans and specifications need reviewed by the Borough's
engineering firm, then the applicant shall be responsible for all costs and
expenses associated with said review. At a minimum, the plans and
specifications, if required, shall include a line and grade, length and width
of walk and a typical cross-section. Upon notice, as provided in § 216-10 or
216-11, as the case may be, such work of construction, reconstruction or
repair shall be done by the owner or owners of such property.
§ 216-14. Width requirements.
A. On all streets within the Borough of Danville, the sidewalk shall be at
least five feet wide.
B. Exception: Sidewalk width may be reduced to equal the dimension of
existing and adjoining sections of sidewalk.125
124. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
125. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 216-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-15
1:341
§ 216-15. Supports: where required; permitted materials.
In all cases where sidewalks are constructed, reconstructed or repaired
over coal cellars or other excavations under such sidewalks, such sidewalks
shall be supported by iron or steel beams or girders or stone or concrete
arches. In no case shall any support of wood or other perishable material be
used.
§ 216-16. Enforcement; inspection.
Prior to beginning any work under this article, every property owner so
affected shall obtain a permit from the Borough Code Officer. There shall
be no additional fee or cost associated with the issuance of the permit,
other than set forth elsewhere in this article. It shall be the duty and
responsibility of the Borough Code Officer to determine, in the case of any
individual property, whether or not the sidewalk shall be reconstructed or
repaired, and if so, the specific part or parts thereof to be reconstructed
or repaired. The Code Officer may at any time, during the course of work
of constructing, reconstructing or repairing any sidewalk, visit the site
of such work to ascertain whether such work is being done according
to requirements; and he/she shall visit any such site for such purpose
whenever requested by the property owner. Within two days after the
completion of the work of construction, reconstruction or repair of any
sidewalk, it shall be the duty of the owner of the property where such work
was done to notify the Code Officer of that fact, so that he/she may inspect
such sidewalk to determine whether the grade thereof has been observed
and followed.
§ 216-17. Work done by owner upon own initiative.
Any property owner, upon his/her own initiative and without notice from
any Borough authority, may construct, reconstruct or repair a sidewalk
in front of or along his/her property, provided that such owner shall first
make application to the Borough Code Officer and shall conform to the
requirements of this article, and provided that he/she shall also notify the
Code Officer, a required by § 216-16, within two days after completion of
the work.
§ 216-18. Violations and penalties.
Any persons who shall violate any provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 and
costs of such proceedings or, upon default of payment of such fines and
costs, by imprisonment in the county jail for a term of not more than
30 days. The continuation of such violation for each successive day shall
constitute a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or
permitting the continuation of the violation may be punished as provided
above for each separate offense.
§ 216-15 DANVILLE CODE § 216-18
1:342
ARTICLE IV
Street and Sidewalk Excavations
§ 216-19. Definitions.
§ 216-20. Location restrictions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to open or to make any excavation of
any kind in any street in the Borough of Danville except in and upon those
portions thereof established for the use of vehicles.
§ 216-21. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to open or to make any excavation of any
kind in any of the streets in the Borough of Danville without first securing a
permit therefor, as hereinafter provided.
§ 216-22. Permit applications; compliance agreement; Borough to
be saved from liability.
Any person who shall desire to make any opening or excavation in any of
the streets in the Borough of Danville shall make application to the Borough
Secretary in writing for the purpose. Such application shall be made upon
blanks to be furnished by the Borough and shall set forth the name of the
applicant, the exact location of the proposed opening or excavation and the
approximate size or depth thereof, and shall contain an agreement on the
part of the applicant that the work shall be done in full compliance with the
ordinances of the Borough of Danville and the laws of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania in relation thereto, and that the applicant shall well and
truly save, defend and keep harmless the Borough from and indemnify
it against any manner therefrom or occurring in the prosecution of the
work connected therewith or from any other matter, cause or thing relating
thereto.
§ 216-23. Permit fee; inspection fee. [Amended 2-9-2010 by Ord.
No. 502]
Before any permit shall be issued to open or excavate any street in the
Borough, the applicant shall pay to the Borough office a permit fee in the
A. Words and terms defined. As used in this article, the following terms
shall have the meanings indicated:
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, firm, association or
corporation.
STREET — Any public street, avenue, road, square, alley, highway or
other public place located in the Borough of Danville and established
for the use of vehicles.
B. Word usage. In this article, the singular shall include the plural and the
masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
§ 216-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-23
1:343
amount of $100. There shall be an additional inspection fee charged at the
rate of $20 per hour for the attendance of the Street Superintendent during
the opening, inspection or closing of any openings or excavations in any
Borough street.
§ 216-24. Refilling and restoring of excavation; defects.
Any person who shall open or excavate any improved street in the Borough
shall thoroughly and completely refill the opening or excavation, puddling
and ramming so as to prevent any settling thereafter (said excavation to
be filled with 2RC stone for the full depth of the excavation) and shall
restore the surface to the same condition as it was before the opening
or excavation, and such restoration shall be in accordance with the
specifications of the Department of Highways of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, which are hereby adopted as specifications of the Borough for
restoration of surfaces of streets in the Borough. As restored, the surface
shall conform to the proper grade and be of the same surface covering as
the part of the thoroughfare immediately adjoining the opening. If, within
two years after the restoration of the surface, as herein provided, defects
shall appear therein resulting from defective backfilling by the applicant,
the applicant shall reimburse the Borough for the cost of all necessary
repairs to the permanent paving.
§ 216-25. Work to be done at expense of applicant; supervision by
Street Superintendent.
All other work in connection with openings in any street, including
excavation, protection, refilling, and temporary paving, shall be done by the
applicant at his expense. All such work shall be subject to the provisions
of this article and to the supervision and approval of the Street
Superintendent, provided that the Street Superintendent may require that
the cutting of the surface of improved streets and the backfilling of all
excavations therein shall be done by the Borough, and the charge therefor
shall be paid by the applicant on the basis of the actual cost of the work plus
20%.
§ 216-26. Excavation specifications; completion of unsatisfactory
work by Borough.
A. No opening or excavation in any street shall extend from the curbline
into the highway a distance greater than one foot beyond the center line
of the street before being refilled and the surface of the highway
restored to a condition safe and convenient for travel.
B. No more than 100 feet longitudinally shall be opened in any street at
any one time, which may be reduced if conditions warrant.
C. The work of excavation shall be so conducted so as not to interfere with
water mains, sewers or their connections with a house or any other
subsurface lines or constructions, until permission of the proper
§ 216-23 DANVILLE CODE § 216-26
1:344
§ 216-27. Emergency excavations without permits.
In the case of any leak, explosion or other accident in any subsurface pipe,
line, construction or apparatus, it shall be lawful for the person owning
or responsible for such pipe, line, construction or apparatus to commence
any excavation to remedy such condition before securing a permit, provided
authorities in connection with such subsurface lines or constructions
have been obtained.
D. No tunneling shall be allowed without the express approval of the
Street Superintendent and permission therefor endorsed upon the
permit. The backfilling of a tunnel excavation shall be made only in the
presence of the Street Superintendent or an inspector designated by
him/her and shall be done only in a method approved by him/her.
E. All openings or excavations shall be backfilled promptly with suitable
materials and thoroughly and mechanically compacted in layers, each
of which shall not exceed six inches in depth. On improved streets, the
backfilling shall be placed to within 10 inches of the surface.
F. On improved streets, a temporary paving of plant-mixed bituminous
materials thoroughly compacted, may be installed flush with the
surface of the adjoining paving until permanent surface repair can be
made.
G. During the making of any excavation in any street, every necessary and
reasonable precaution shall be taken by the applicant and the parties
making the same to keep the street in a safe and passable condition,
both day and night, by guards, barriers, lanterns and other devices. All
excavating permits are granted under and subject to the express
condition that the person to whom the same is issued shall indemnify,
save and keep harmless the Borough from any loss in damages, or
otherwise whatsoever, which may or shall be occasioned at any time by
said excavation, or by any leak, explosion or other injury from any pipe,
apparatus, conduit or any other matter placed in the said excavation.
H. The applicant shall notify the Street Superintendent when the opening
or excavation is ready for backfilling before any backfilling is done, and
when the work is completed by proper backfilling, in the case of
unimproved streets, and by temporary paving, in the case of improved
streets.
I. In the event that any work performed by or for a permit holder shall, in
the opinion of the Street Superintendent, be unsatisfactory and the
same shall not be corrected in accordance with his instructions within
the time fixed by him or in the event that the work for which the permit
was granted is not completed within the time fixed by the Borough
Secretary, the Borough may proceed to correct such unsatisfactory
work or complete any such work not completed, and shall charge the
cost thereof, plus 20%, to the applicant.
§ 216-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-27
1:345
that application for a permit shall be made immediately and not later
than the next business day thereafter, and that all other provisions of this
article are fully compiled with. If any such emergency condition shall not be
immediately attended to by the owner or person responsible for such pipe,
line, construction or apparatus, the Street Superintendent, after such notice
as he shall deem necessary under the circumstances of the particular case,
shall proceed to do the work necessary and required by such emergency,
and charge the same on the basis of cost plus 20% to such owner or person.
§ 216-28. Notice of repaving; excavations in new paving restricted.
The Borough Secretary shall give timely notice to all persons owning
property abutting on any street within the Borough about to be paved
or improved and to all public utility companies operating in the Borough.
All such persons and utility companies shall make all water, gas or sewer
connections, as well as any repairs thereto which would necessitate
excavation of the said street, within 30 days from the giving of such notice,
unless such time is extended in writing for cause shown by the Borough
Secretary. New paving shall not be opened for a period of five years after
the completion thereof, except in case of emergency and the necessity for
the opening of such paving to be determined by the Street Superintendent.
If it is sought to excavate upon or open a street within five years after the
completion of the paving thereof for any reason other than an emergency as
above stated, the applicant shall make application to the Borough Council,
and a permit for such opening shall only be issued after express approval of
Council.
§ 216-29. Approval of water or gas main construction required.
No new water or gas main shall hereafter be laid or constructed and no
existing water or gas main shall be extended in any of the streets of the
Borough until the exact location thereto and the plan therefor shall have
been first approved by the Borough Council.
§ 216-30. Payment for work done by Borough.
Payment for all work done by the Borough under the provisions hereof shall
be made by the person made liable therefor under the provisions hereof
within 30 days after a bill therefor is sent to such person by the Borough.
Upon failure to pay such charges within such time, the same shall be
collectible by the Borough in the manner provided by law for the collection
of municipal claims.
§ 216-31. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 and
costs of such proceedings or, upon default of payment of such fines and
costs, by imprisonment in the county jail for a term of not more than
30 days. The continuation of such violation for each successful day shall
§ 216-27 DANVILLE CODE § 216-31
1:346
constitute a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or
permitting the continuation of the violation may be punished as provided
above for each separate offense.
§ 216-32. Laying of sidewalks or curbs or planting of poles not
affected.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to laying sidewalks or curbs or
to the planting of poles.
§ 216-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-32
1:347

ARTICLE V
Off-Street Parking and Driveways
§ 216-33. Permit required.
§ 216-34. Additional requirements.
Issuance of a permit under these regulations does not relieve the permittee
from any additional responsibility to secure other federal, state, or local
approvals or permits as may be required by law.
§ 216-35. Permit fees.
A. Before any private driveway may be constructed and or before any curb
cut may be made, the applicant shall furnish a sketch plan of the
proposed driveway to the Zoning Officer. The sketch plan shall
adequately describe the design of the driveway, including:
(1) Location and width.
(2) Other existing features pertinent to the driveway such as physical
features and slope.
(3) Provisions for drainage.
(4) Surfacing materials to be utilized for the construction of the
driveway.
(5) Existing streets and rights-of-way adjoining the driveway.
B. When the Zoning Officer receives the sketch plan for the driveway, he
or she will forward a copy of the driveway request to the Street
Superintendent and the Police Chief for their review and approval.
A. Permit issuance fees. Permit fees shall be used to defray costs incurred
by the Borough in reviewing and processing the application and plan
including preliminary review of the site location identified in the
application, and issuing and processing the permit. The permit fee for
driveways shall be established from time to time by resolution of
Borough Council.126
B. Additional inspection fees. If the Borough determines that the
permitted work is of sufficient magnitude or importance to warrant
assignment of inspection and review to the Borough's engineering firm,
then the permittee shall pay for all salary and expenses of the review by
the Borough's engineering firm.
C. Work completion notification. When all permitted work has been
completed, the applicant shall notify the Borough for final inspection.
The final inspection of the driveway shall be performed by the Street
126. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 216-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-35
1:349
§ 216-36. General driveway requirements.
Superintendent and the Police Chief and/or the Borough's engineering
firm.
A. General rule. All driveways shall be located, designed, constructed and
maintained in such a manner as not to interfere or be inconsistent with
the design, maintenance and drainage of the Borough right-of-way.
B. Use of rear yard for parking. To every extent possible, residents shall
utilize the rear yard of their property for parking. If a rear yard area
does not exist for a particular lot, or if the topography or any other
condition precludes the use of parking in the rear yard area, then the
front yard may be utilized for parking. If residential driveway/parking of
450 square feet or less is constructed in a rear or side yard and
accessed from a Borough alley, then all provisions of this article shall be
waived. Otherwise, and regardless of the existence or nonexistence of a
sidewalk and or curb, all provisions of this article must be complied
with when the driveway/parking is accessed from a Borough street
(other than alley).127
C. Slope, rise, grade and drainage. The least possible slope shall be used
for any driveway. Where a driveway intersects with a sidewalk, the
sidewalk (implied or otherwise) shall be maintained at a maximum
slope of 8%. Where a driveway intersects with curb, the curb shall be
tapered. All driveway approaches shall be installed 1 1/2 inches above
the adjacent roadway or the gutter grade to maintain proper street
drainage.
D. General location restrictions. Access driveways shall be permitted at
locations in which:
(1) Sight distance is adequate to safely allow each permitted
movement to be made into or out of the access driveway;
(2) The free movement of normal highway traffic is not impaired;
(3) The driveway will not create a hazard; and
(4) The driveway will not create an area of undue traffic congestion on
the Borough street.
E. Minimum yard regulations. A minimum side yard setback distance of
five feet shall be maintained from the applicant's side yard property
line.
F. Surfacing. Any off-street parking or loading area shall be surfaced with
asphalt, concrete, brick, cement pavers or similar durable and dustless
material. Dustless material shall not include loose stone of any size. All
off-street parking areas shall be so graded and drained as to dispose of
127. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 216-35 DANVILLE CODE § 216-36
1:350
§ 216-37. Issuance of permit.
If the Street Superintendent and the Police Department and/or the
Borough's Engineering Firm approves the driveway application, then the
Zoning Officer shall issue a permit for the construction of the driveway.
§ 216-38. Rectification of improper work.
If any person shall construct a driveway or a curb cut and shall not conform
to the requirements of this article, or if any person constructs a driveway
without obtaining a permit to do so, the Borough of Danville may order
such person, firm or corporation to remove the improper work and replace
the same in compliance with this article. Notice to remove and replace
improper or unpermitted work shall be given by registered or certified mail
and shall state that the person, firm or corporation shall have 30 days from
receipt of notice to comply therewith. Upon compliance, the Borough of
Danville may do or cause the requested repairs to be done and may levy
the cost of its work on such owner as a property lien to be collected in any
manner provided by law.
§ 216-39. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $1,000, and in the event of default in payment thereof, to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of
this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
all surface water accumulated within the area and shall be so arranged
and marked as to provide for the orderly and safe loading, parking and
storage of self-propelled vehicles.128
G. Sight distances. All driveways shall be situated in such a fashion so that
safe driveway access onto the Borough right-of-way can be provided. In
a situation where significant safety hazards exist, such as excessive
slope or areas of extremely limited sight distance, a driveway permit
may be denied, based on the Borough Police Chief's review and
recommendation.
128. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 216-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-39
1:351
Chapter 220
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 102.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 120.
Streets, sidewalks and driveways — See Ch.
216.
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
§ 216-39 DANVILLE CODE § 216-39
1:352
ARTICLE I
Introduction
§ 220-1. Regulations in effect.
The following subdivision and land development regulations shall be in full
force and effect, including definitions, plan requirements and processing
procedure, design standards, improvements and construction requirements
and conditions of acceptance of public improvements by the Borough of
Danville.
§ 220-2. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance of the Borough of Danville."
§ 220-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-2
1:353

ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 220-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls,
used or intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals
or property. Included shall be all manufactured homes and trailers to be
used for human habitation.129
FLOOD-FRINGE AREA — The remaining portions of a floodplain which
are located outside of the floodway as indicated in the Flood Insurance
Study (FIS) dated May 16, 2008, and the accompanying maps or the most
recent revision thereof as issued by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.130
FLOODPLAIN — The one-hundred-year flood area as indicated in the Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) dated May 16, 2008, and the accompanying maps
or the most recent revision thereof as issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.131
FLOOD-PRONE AREA — 132
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas required to carry and discharge a one-hundred-year flood. The
areas identified as "floodway" in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated May
16, 2008, and the accompanying maps or the most recent revision thereof
as issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.133
PRIMARY FLOOD-FRINGE — Those portions of the flood-fringe area for
which detailed hydrologic information is available.
A.
SECONDARY FLOOD-FRINGE — Those portions of the flood-fringe
area for which incomplete hydrologic information is available. However,
one-hundred-year flood elevations are provided in the NFIP study. (In
this area, there shall be demonstration that a proposed use, when
combined with all other existing and anticipated uses, will not increase
the water surface elevation of the one-hundred-year flood more than
one foot.)
B.
A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream or
watercourse, which is subject to partial or complete inundation.
A.
An area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation of surface
waters from any source.
B.
129. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
130. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
131. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
132. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
133. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 220-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-3
1:355
IMPROVEMENT — Any man-made, immovable item that becomes part of, is
placed upon or is affixed to real estate.[Added 1-9-2007 by Ord. No. 479]
LAND DEVELOPMENT —
MEDIATION — A voluntary negotiating process in which parties in a dispute
mutually select a neutral mediator to assist them in jointly exploring and
settling their differences, culminating in a written agreement which the
parties themselves create and consider acceptable.
PROFESSIONAL CONSULTANTS — Persons who provide expert or
professional advice, including but not limited to architects, attorneys,
certified public accountants, engineers, geologists, land surveyors,
landscape architects or planners.[Added 1-9-2007 by Ord. No. 479]
REGULATORY FLOOD — A flood having an average frequency of
occurrence on the order of once in 100 years and as indicated in the Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) dated May 16, 2008, and the accompanying maps
or the most recent revision thereof as issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.134
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots, regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of or for the purpose of streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
A.
A subdivision of land; provided, however, that "land development" shall
not include:
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or
single-family semidetached dwelling into not more than three
residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium.
(1)
The addition of an accessory building, including farm buildings, on
a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal building.
(2)
The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the confines
of an enterprise which would be considered an amusement park.
For purposes of this subsection, an "amusement park" is defined
as a tract or area used principally as a location for permanent
amusement structures or rides. This exclusion shall not apply to
newly acquired acreage by an amusement park until initial plans
for the expanded area have been approved by proper authorities.
(3)
B.
§ 220-3 DANVILLE CODE § 220-3
1:356
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year flood elevation
as indicated in the most recent revision of the Flood Insurance Study
(FIS) dated May 16, 2008, and the accompanying maps or the most recent
revision thereof as issued by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.135
STREET — A public right-of-way for vehicular or other traffic, whether
designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road,
avenue, boulevard, lane, place or alley or however otherwise designated,
and for the purpose of this chapter shall be classed as follows:
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached
to the ground, including but not limited to buildings, factories, sheds,
cabins, mobile homes and similar items.
SUBDIVIDER/DEVELOPER — A person, copartnership or corporation
owning land in the municipality, for which a subdivision and/or land
development application is filed and processed under the provisions of this
chapter.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access, for residential dwelling shall be exempted.
ARTERIAL STREETS — Those streets which traverse through the
municipality and are used primarily for through, fast or heavy traffic.
A.
COLLECTOR STREETS — Those streets which carry traffic from minor
streets to the major system of arterial streets, including principal
entrance streets of a residential development and streets for major
circulation within such development.
B.
MINOR STREETS — Those streets which are used primarily for access
to the abutting properties.
C.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS — Minor streets which are parallel to
and adjacent to arterial streets and which provide access to abutting
properties and protection from through traffic.
D.
ALLEYS — Minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular service
access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a
street.
E.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — The division of any lot, tract or parcel of land
or parcels of land which abut a street of insufficient width or require
A.
134. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
135. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 220-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-3
1:357
TOPOGRAPHIC MAP — A map showing the elevations of the ground by
contours or elevations.
WATER SURVEY — An inventory of the source, quantity, yield and use of
groundwater and surface water resources within the municipality.
that a street be laid out through unimproved land or the division of
any lot, tract or parcel of land into five or more lots, tracts or parcels
of land, including changes in street lines or lot lines, for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or of building
development.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — The division of any lot, tract or parcel of
land or a part thereof into fewer than five lots, tracts or parcels of
land, including changes in street lines or lot lines, for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or of building
development, where such division, change or transfer does not abut
a street of insufficient width and does not require that a street be
laid out through unimproved land. No parcel of land held in single or
separate ownership at the time of application for a minor subdivision
may be further subdivided into an aggregate of five or more lots,
tracts or parcels of land at any time subsequent to that date except in
accordance with the requirements for a major subdivision.
B.
§ 220-3 DANVILLE CODE § 220-3
1:358
ARTICLE III
Plan Requirements and Processing Procedures
§ 220-4. Compliance required; submission to Planning Commission.
The plan requirements and processing procedures shall be followed by
subdividers as set forth herein and shall be submitted to the official
Planning Commission of the municipality for review and approval prior to
consideration or approval by the governing body.
§ 220-5. Effect of filing an application; schedule of submissions.136
With the exception of minor subdivisions, at the time of filing the
preliminary application and the final application, the applicant shall include
a check payable to the Borough of Danville in the amount specified in
Schedule I137 hereof. Said fee shall be treated as a deposit against the final
review fee for the preliminary application and the final application. Review
fees shall include the reasonable and necessary charges by the Borough's
professional consultants for review and report thereon to the Borough of
Danville. Such fees shall also cover the cost of inspection of improvements;
provided, however, that the applicant shall not be required to reimburse
the Borough for any inspection which is duplicative of inspections covered
by other governmental agencies or public utilities; the burden of proving
that any inspection is duplicative shall be on the applicant. In addition, fees
charged to the Borough relating to any appeal of a decision shall not be
considered review fees and may not be charged to the applicant.
A. Review fees shall be reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary
and customary charges for similar service in the community, but in no
event shall the fees exceed the rate or cost charged by the professional
consultant for comparable services to the Borough for services which
are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on applicants.
B. Changes in regulations following plat approval.
(1) When an application for approval of a plat, whether preliminary or
final, has been approved or approved without condition or
approved by the applicant's acceptance of conditions, no
subsequent change or amendment in the zoning, subdivision or
other governing ordinance or plan shall be applied to affect
adversely the right of the applicant to commence and to complete
any aspect of the approved development in accordance with the
terms of such approval within five years from such approval.
(2) The five-year period shall be extended for the duration of any
litigation, including appeals, which prevents the commencement or
completion of the development, and for the duration of any sewer
or utility moratorium or prohibition which was imposed subsequent
136. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
137. Editor's Note: See § 220-29, Fees.
§ 220-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-5
1:359
to the filing of any application for preliminary approval of a plat.
In the event of an appeal filed by any party for the approval or
disapproval of a plat, the five-year period shall be extended by the
total time from the date the appeal was filed until a final order in
such matter has been entered and all appeals have been concluded
and any period for filing appeals or requests for reconsideration
have expired; provided, however, that no extension shall be based
on any water or sewer moratorium which was in effect as of the
date of the filing of a preliminary application. [Added 12-9-2002
by Ord. No. 447]
C. Where final approval is preceded by preliminary approval, the aforesaid
five-year period shall be counted from the date of the preliminary
approval. In the case of any doubt as to the terms of a preliminary
approval, the terms shall be construed in the light of the provisions of
the governing ordinances or plans as they stood at the time when the
application for such approval was duly filed.
D. Where the landowner has substantially completed the required
improvements as depicted upon the final plat within the aforesaid fiveyear
limit, or any extension thereof as may be granted by the governing
body, no change of municipal ordinance or plan enacted subsequent to
the date of filing of the preliminary plat shall modify or revoke any
aspect of the approved final plat pertaining to zoning classification or
density or lot, building, street or utility location.
E. In the case of a preliminary plat calling for the installation of
improvements beyond the five-year period, a schedule shall be filed by
the landowner with the preliminary plat delineating all proposed
sections as well as deadlines within which applications for final plat
approval of each section are intended to be filed. Such schedule shall be
updated annually by the applicant, on or before the anniversary of the
preliminary plat approval, until final plat approval of the final section
has been granted, and any modification in the aforesaid schedule shall
be subject to approval of the governing body in its discretion.
F. Each section in any residential subdivision or land development, except
for the last section, shall contain a minimum of 25% of the total number
of dwelling units as depicted on the preliminary plan, unless a lesser
percentage is approved by the governing body in its discretion.
Provided that the landowner has not defaulted with regard to or
violated any of the conditions of the preliminary plat approval,
including compliance with the landowner's aforesaid schedule of
submission of final plats for the various sections, then the aforesaid
protections afforded by substantially completing the improvements
depicted upon the final plat within five years shall apply; and for any
section or sections beyond the initial section in which the required
improvements have not been substantially completed within said fiveyear
period, the aforesaid protections shall apply for an additional term
or terms of three years from the date of final plat approval for each
section.
§ 220-5 DANVILLE CODE § 220-5
1:360
§ 220-6. Preapplication.
G. Failure of the landowner to adhere to the aforesaid schedule of
submission of final plats for the various sections shall subject any such
section to any and all changes in zoning, subdivision and other
governing ordinance enacted by the municipality subsequent to the
date of the initial preliminary plan submission.
H. Applicability of ordinance amendments. When an application for either
special exception or a conditional use has been filed with either the
Zoning Hearing Board or the governing body, as relevant, and the
subject matter of such application would ultimately constitute either a
land development or a subdivision, no change or amendment of the
zoning, subdivision, or other governing ordinance or plans shall affect
the decision on such application adversely to the applicant and the
applicant shall be entitled to a decision in accordance with the
provisions of the governing ordinances or plans as they stood at the
time the application was duly filed. Provided, further, should such an
application be approved by either the Zoning Hearing Board or
governing body, as relevant, the applicant shall be entitled to proceed
with the submission of either land development or subdivision plans
within a period of six months or longer or as may be approved by either
the Zoning Hearing Board or the governing body following the date of
such approval in accordance with the provisions of the governing
ordinances or plans as they stood at the time the application was duly
filed before either the Zoning Hearing Board or governing body. If
either a land development or subdivision plan is so filed within said
period, such plan shall be subject to the provisions of Section 508(1)
through (4) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,138 as
amended, and specifically to the time limitations of said Section 508(4)
which shall commence as of the date of filing such land development or
subdivision plan. [Added 12-9-2002 by Ord. No. 447]
I. No application will be considered at a regular monthly meeting of the
Borough Planning Commission unless it has been submitted, with
required fees, not later than the first day of the month in which
consideration is requested, unless this requirement is waived by the
Planning Commission on a case-by-case basis. [Added 1-9-2007 by
Ord. No. 479]
A. Procedure for preapplication plans and data. Prior to the preparation
and filing of the preliminary application, the subdivider/developer may
submit to the Commission the following plans and data and shall
ascertain from the Commission those elements which should be
considered in the design of the subdivision/development. These shall
include any features of the municipality's future Land Use Plan,
Thoroughfare Plan or Community Facilities Plan or of any plans of the
138. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508.
§ 220-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-6
1:361
§ 220-7. Minor subdivisions.
Commission, including but not limited to proposed streets, recreation
areas, drainage reservations, shopping centers and school sites.
B. Specifications for preapplication plans and data. Preapplication plans
and data shall be labeled as such and shall include the following:
(1) General information describing or outlining existing covenants,
land characteristics, community facilities and utilities and
information describing the proposed subdivision and development
such as the number of residential lots, typical lot width and depth,
price range, business areas, playgrounds, park areas, other public
areas, proposed protective covenants, proposed sewage disposal
and other utilities and street improvements.
(2) A location map showing the relationship of the proposed
subdivision/development to existing community facilities which
serve or influence it, which shall include the name of the
development, the location of any existing facilities, traffic arteries,
public or other schools, parks, playgrounds, utilities, churches,
shopping centers, airports, hospitals, principal places of
employment, title, scale, North arrow and date. Hazardous features
shall also be shown, such as open mine shafts and areas subject to
periodic flooding.
(3) A map showing the location of the proposed subdivision with
respect to the municipality's flood-prone areas, including
information on but not limited to the regulatory flood elevations,
boundaries of flood-prone areas, proposed lots and sites, fills, flood
or erosion protective facilities and areas subject to special deed
restrictions.
(4) Where the subdivision lies partially or completely in a flood-prone
area or where the subdivision borders on a flood-prone area, the
preapplication plan map shall include detailed information giving
the location and elevation of proposed roads, public utilities and
building sites. All such maps shall also show contours at intervals of
two or five feet, depending upon the slope of the land, and identify
accurately the boundaries of the flood-prone areas.
A. Submission. Not less than 15 days prior to the meeting of the Planning
Commission at which the application is to be considered, the developer
shall submit six copies of a minor subdivision plat of any minor
subdivision to the Borough Planning Commission and two copies to the
Montour County Planning Commission, with appropriate fees. Said
minor subdivision plat shall outline the developer's proposals in
sufficient detail to permit a determination by the Planning Commission
that the proposed subdivision conforms to the provisions of this
chapter, including but not limited to a property survey performed by a
registered surveyor.
§ 220-6 DANVILLE CODE § 220-7
1:362
§ 220-8. Major subdivision/commercial land development.
B. Review and approval.
(1) Upon completion of the review by the Borough Planning
Commission, the Borough Planning Commission shall refer the
application, along with its recommendations, to the Borough
Council for final action. Such final action by the Borough Council
shall be communicated to the developer, in writing, not later than
90 days following the date of the regular meeting of the
Commission next following the date the application is filed, or after
a final order of the court remanding an application, provided that
should said next regular meeting occur more than 30 days
following the filing of the application, said ninety-day period shall
be measured from the 30th day following the day the application
has been filed, or the final order of the court. Such written
notification shall include recommendations for such changes as
may be required. [Amended 12-9-2002 by Ord. No. 447]
(2) The decision of the Borough Council shall be in writing and shall be
communicated to the applicant personally or mailed to him at his
last known address not later than 15 days following the decision.
(3) The Borough Council's approval shall be expressed by placing the
following official stamp upon the minor subdivision plat:
"Approved by the Danville Borough Council this _____ day of
__________, _____.
Signed ___________________________________ President
Signed ___________________________________ Secretary"
C. Filing. The Borough Council shall retain one copy of the approved minor
subdivision plat in its files; one copy shall be provided to the Secretary
of the Borough Planning Commission; and two copies shall be returned
to the developer, who shall file one copy in the office of the Recorder of
Deeds of the county within 90 days of the approval thereof. Such
approval shall be nullified unless so filed or unless an extension of time
is granted by the Borough Council upon the written request of the
subdivider. Such an extension shall be granted automatically by the
Borough Council for a period of 30 days; provided, however, that only
one extension shall be authorized.
A. Preliminary application procedure.
(1) Filing. The subdivider/developer, not less than 15 days prior to the
meeting of the Planning Commission at which consideration is
desired, shall file with the Commission eight copies of a preliminary
application for the proposed layout of the subdivision/development.
All documents and data submitted hereunder shall be labeled
"preliminary application."
§ 220-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-8
1:363
(2) Action by Commission.
(a) The Commission shall submit all such applications to the
Montour County Planning Commission for review and report,
together with a fee sufficient to cover the costs of the review
and report, which fee shall be paid by the applicant, provided
that the Borough Council shall not approve such application
until the county report is received or until the expiration of 30
days from the date the application is delivered to the county.
(b) The Commission may also submit copies of the preliminary
application to the Municipal Engineer, the Municipal Authority,
public utilities, the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, the County Soil Conservation Office and other
public agencies and shall return the application to the
subdivider/developer either approved or with
recommendations for changes necessary for approval. The
Borough Council shall communicate its action to the
subdivider/developer in writing on such preliminary
application within 90 days following the date of the regular
meeting of the Planning Commission next following the date
the application is filed, provided that should the next said
regular meeting occur more than 30 days following the filing of
the application, said ninety-day period shall be measured from
the 30th day following the day the application has been filed. In
the event that any modification from this chapter is requested
by the subdivider/developer or is deemed necessary by the
Borough Council for approval, the modification and the
reasons for its necessity shall be entered in the records of the
Borough Council.
(c) The Borough Council shall determine, except as otherwise
provided herein, whether the preliminary application shall be
approved, approved with modifications or disapproved and
shall notify the subdivider/developer in writing thereof,
including, if approved with modifications or disapproved, a
statement of reasons for such action, and shall return a copy of
the preliminary application to the subdivider/developer. The
decision of the Borough Council shall be communicated to the
applicant personally or mailed to him at his last known address
not later than 15 days following the decision.
(d) When the application is not approved in terms as filed, the
decision shall specify the defects found in the application and
describe the requirements which have not been met and shall,
in each case, cite to the provisions of the statute or ordinance
relied upon.
(e) Failure of the Borough Council to render a decision and
communicate it to the applicant within the time and in the
manner required herein shall be deemed an approval of the
§ 220-8 DANVILLE CODE § 220-8
1:364
application in terms as presented unless the applicant has
agreed, in writing, to an extension of time or change in the
prescribed manner of presentation of communication of the
decision, in which case failure to meet the extended time or
change in manner of presentation of communication shall have
like effect.
(f) When an application is approved with modifications, the
developer shall agree to such modifications in writing. Failure
to return such a written acceptance within 30 days of
notification shall result in disapproval of the plan.
(3) Engineering data.
(a) Before the Commission makes its recommendations to the
Borough Council for final action on any submitted application,
the Commission shall submit copies of the preliminary
application and accompanying data to the Municipal Engineer,
who shall advise the Commission as to the suitability of all
engineering details and specifications. In addition, the
developer must submit the plan as well as required planning
modules to the Regional Office of the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection, which shall review said plan for
compliance with the Sewage Facilities Act.139 The results of
this review shall be presented to the Commission and/or its
engineer for review.
(b) The developer shall also present evidence of notification of all
affected public utilities as to the suitability of all utility
easements.
(c) All plans presented for review shall include a plan depicting
what will be done by the developer to control soil erosion and
sedimentation during the development stages. This plan shall
be presented by the developer to both the Municipal Engineer
and the Montour County Office of the United States Soil
Conservation Service for their review and report.
(d) Nothing in the above subsection shall relieve the developer
from complying with any other state or federal law either in
effect as of the adoption of this chapter or enacted subsequent
to this chapter.
(4) Approval. Approval of the preliminary application shall not
constitute approval of the final subdivision/land development
application by the Commission.
(5) Information to be provided.
139. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 220-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-8
1:365
(a) Plan specifications. The preliminary plan of the subdivision/
development shall be drawn at a scale of 100 feet to one inch
or larger. The preliminary plan shall show:
[1] The proposed name of the subdivision.
[2] The names and addresses of the owner and the subdivider
and the developer's registered surveyor, engineer,
landscape architect or land planner who prepared the
plan, including the seal of the surveyor and other
applicable seals.
[3] The street layout, showing the names (which, when not
extensions of existing streets, shall not duplicate other
names of streets in the municipality) and widths of rightsof-
way of streets.
[4] The layout of lots, showing dimensions and numbers, and
the existing zoning designation.
[5] Parcels of land proposed to be dedicated or reserved for
schools, parks, playgrounds or other public, semipublic or
community purposes.
[6] A legend and notes.
[7] The building setback or front yard lines.
[8] The graphic scale, North point and date.
[9] A location map showing the subdivision name and location;
the Tax Map number; major existing thoroughfares related
to the subdivision, including the distance therefrom; and
the title, graphic scale, North point and date.
[10] The tract boundary lines, showing dimensions, bearings
and monuments.
[11] Existing streets and rights-of-way, on or adjoining the site,
including dedicated widths and roadway widths.
[12] Easements' locations, widths and purposes.
[13] Existing and proposed utilities, including sanitary and
storm sewers, other drainage facilities, waterlines, gas
mains, electric utilities and other facilities. The size or
capacity of each should be shown, and the location of or
distance to each existing utility should be indicated.
[14] Existing platting of adjacent land.
[15] Areas subject to periodic flooding.
§ 220-8 DANVILLE CODE § 220-8
1:366
[16] Other features or conditions which would affect the
subdivision/land development.
[17] A description of the protective covenants or private
restrictions to be incorporated in the deeds.
[18] Site data, including the number of residential lots, the
typical lot size, the acreage of the subdivision/
development and the acreage in proposed recreation and
other public, semipublic and community areas.
[19] Physical features such as railroads, existing permanent
buildings, watercourses and other existing features
pertinent to proper subdivision.
[20] Ground elevations. On a tract based on a datum plan
approved by the Municipal Engineer, for land that slopes
less than 2%, elevations shall be shown at all breaks in
grade and along drainage channels or swales not more
than 100 feet apart; and for land that slopes more than 2%,
contours shall be shown with an interval of not more than
five feet and less in cases where necessary to show
irregular land for planning purposes.
(b) Engineer's report. The preliminary application shall be
accompanied by the developer's engineering report. The
engineering report, preliminary plat and all other plats
submitted with the report shall be signed by a registered
professional engineer of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
and/or a professional land surveyor and shall bear the imprint
of his seal. Either the report or the plat shall include the
following information:
[1] A profile of each street, showing existing ground lines and
proposed grades.
[2] A typical cross section of each type of roadway to be built,
including all applicable cross-section data for the entire
width of rights-of-way.
[3] The proposed type of surfacing for streets.
[4] Information regarding existing drainage systems in the
subdivision/development, both surface and underground,
including the location, size, type and grade of drainage
structures, storm sewers, drain tile and drainage ditches.
The engineer's opinion shall be expressed regarding the
adequacy of such drainage facilities, and the basis shall be
given for such conclusions.
[5] Information regarding proposed drainage systems in the
subdivision, both surface and underground, including the
§ 220-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-8
1:367
size, location, type and grade of drainage structures,
storm sewers, drain tile and drainage ditches proposed to
be constructed and the drainage areas they are designed
for.
[6] The location of all watercourses, bodies of water or
streams, with their low- and high-water elevations. All the
elevations shall be United States Geological Survey datum.
[7] Sanitary sewers, either in place or proposed.
[8] A description of the water supply and sewage disposal
facilities which will operate successfully in the subdivision/
development. Such facilities shall be designed in
accordance with recognized sanitary engineering
standards and must take into consideration all data in this
report which has a bearing on these facilities.
[9] The water supply. If water is to be provided by means other
than by private wells owned and maintained by the
individual owners of lots within the subdivision or
development, applicants shall present evidence to the
Planning Commission that the subdivision or development
is to be supplied by a certificated public utility, by a bona
fide cooperative association of lot owners or by a
municipal corporation, authority or utility. A copy of a
certificate of public convenience from the Pennsylvania
Public Utility Commission or an application for such
certificate, a cooperative agreement or a commitment or
agreement to serve the area in question, whichever is
appropriate, shall be acceptable evidence.
(c) Planning modules. When planning modules are required by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (DEP),
evidence of DEP approval of such modules shall be submitted
with the preliminary application.
(d) Additional data.
[1] Where the owner of the site under consideration owns
contiguous land suitable for development, the abovedescribed
engineering data shall cover all such contiguous
lands. This provision, however, may be waived, in full or in
part, by the Planning Commission if it is not considered
essential to the evaluation of the plans for the current
development tract; provided, however, that the developer
shall be required to submit not less than a prospective
street layout and a topographic map of the contiguous
lands at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet, regardless of
any such waiver.
§ 220-8 DANVILLE CODE § 220-8
1:368
[2] No plat which will require access to a highway under the
jurisdiction of the Department of Transportation shall be
finally approved unless the plat contains a notice that a
highway occupancy permit is required pursuant to Section
420 of the Act of June 1, 1945 (P.L. 1242, No. 428), known
as the "State Highway Law,"140 before driveway access to a
state highway is permitted.
B. Final application procedure.
(1) Filing.
(a) The subdivider/developer shall file with the Borough Planning
Commission and the Montour County Planning Commission a
final application for the section (or portion) to be developed. All
documents and data submitted hereunder shall be labeled
"final application." Failure to comply with the time limitation
herein provided shall make the approval of the preliminary
application null and void unless an extension of time is
requested by the subdivider/developer and for good cause
granted by the Commission.
(b) The subdivider/developer, not less than 15 days prior to the
meeting at which consideration is desired, shall file with the
Commission eight copies of a final application for the proposed
subdivision and development, including all information
required under Subsection B(10) and (11) hereof.
(2) Conformance with preliminary application. The final application
will have incorporated all changes and modifications required by
the Borough Council; otherwise, it shall conform to the approved
preliminary application, and it may constitute only that portion of
the approved preliminary application which the subdivider
proposes to record and develop at the time, provided that such
portion conforms to all of the requirements of this chapter.
(3) Completion of improvements or guaranty thereof prerequisite to
final plat approval.
(a) No plat or land development shall be finally approved unless
the streets shown on such plat have been improved to a mudfree
or otherwise permanently passable condition and any
walkways, curbs, gutters, sanitary sewers, storm sewers and
other improvements as may be required by this chapter have
been installed in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter. In lieu of the completion of any improvements
required as a condition for the final approval of a plat,
including improvements or fees required, the subdivider/
developer shall deposit with the municipality a financial
security acceptable to the governing body in an amount
140. Editor's Note: See 36 P.S. § 670-420.
§ 220-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-8
1:369
sufficient to cover the costs of such improvements or common
amenities, including but not limited to roads, stormwater
detention and/or retention basins and other related drainage
facilities, recreational facilities, open space improvements or
buffer or screen plantings which may be required. The
applicant shall not be required to provide financial security
for the costs of any improvements for which financial security
is required by and provided to the PA Department of
Transportation in connection with the issuance of a highway
occupancy permit. Such financial security shall provide for and
secure to the public the completion of any improvements which
may be required within the period fixed in this chapter for
such completion. The municipality shall be identified on such
security as a party to be notified in the event that said security
is canceled, revoked or redeemed by the holder thereof.
[Amended 12-9-2002 by Ord. No. 447]
(b) Without limitation as to other types of financial security which
the municipality may approve, which approval shall not be
unreasonably withheld, federal or commonwealth-chartered
lending institution irrevocable letters of credit and restrictive
or escrow accounts in such lending institutions shall be
deemed acceptable financial security for the purposes of this
section.
(c) Such financial security shall be posted with a bonding company
or federal- or commonwealth-chartered lending institution
chosen by the party posting the financial security, provided
that said bonding company or lending institution is authorized
to conduct such business within the commonwealth.
(d) Such bond or other security shall provide for and secure to the
public the completion of any improvements which may be
required on or before the date fixed in the formal action of
approval or accompanying agreement for completion of the
improvements.
(e) The amount of financial security to be posted for the
completion of the required improvements shall be equal to
110% of the cost of completion estimated as of 90 days
following the date scheduled for completion by the developer.
Annually, the municipality may adjust the amount of the
financial security by comparing the actual cost of the
improvements which have been completed and the estimated
cost for the completion of the remaining improvements as of
the expiration of the 90th day after either the original date
scheduled for completion or a rescheduled date of completion.
Subsequent to said adjustment, the municipality may require
the developer to post additional security in order to assure that
the financial security equals said 110%. Any additional security
§ 220-8 DANVILLE CODE § 220-8
1:370
shall be posted by the developer in accordance with this
subsection.
(f) The amount of financial security required shall be based upon
an estimate of the cost of completion of the required
improvements, submitted by an applicant or developer and
prepared by a professional engineer licensed as such in this
commonwealth and certified by such engineer to be a fair and
reasonable estimate of such cost. The municipality, upon the
recommendation of the Municipal Engineer, may refuse to
accept such estimate for good cause shown. If the applicant or
developer and the municipality are unable to agree upon an
estimate, then the estimate shall be recalculated and
recertified by another professional engineer licensed as such
in the commonwealth and chosen mutually by the municipality
and the applicant or developer. The estimate certified by the
third engineer shall be presumed fair and reasonable and shall
be the final estimate. In the event that a third engineer is so
chosen, fees for the services of said engineer shall be paid
equally by the municipality and the applicant or developer.
(g) If the party posting the financial security requires more than
one year from the date of posting of the financial security to
complete the required improvements, the amount of financial
security may be increased by an additional 10% for each oneyear
period beyond the first anniversary date from posting of
financial security or to an amount not exceeding 110% of the
cost of completing the required improvements as reestablished
on or about the expiration of the preceding one-year period by
using the above cost-estimating procedure.
(h) In the case where development is projected over a period of
years, the governing body may authorize submission of final
plats by sections or stages of development, subject to such
requirements or guaranties as to improvements in future
sections or stages of development as it finds essential for the
protection of any finally approved section of the development.
(i) As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds,
the party posting the financial security may request the
governing body to release or authorize the release of, from
time to time, such portions of the financial security necessary
for payment to the contractor or contractors performing the
work. Any such requests shall be in writing addressed to the
governing body, and the governing body shall have 45 days
from receipt of such request within which to allow the
Municipal Engineer to certify, in writing, to the governing body
that such portion of the work upon the improvements has been
completed in accordance with the approved plat. Upon such
certification, the governing body shall authorize release by the
bonding company or lending institution of an amount as
§ 220-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-8
1:371
estimated by the Municipal Engineer fairly representing the
value of the improvements completed, or, if the governing body
fails to act within said forty-five-day period, the governing
body shall be deemed to have approved the release of funds
as requested. The governing body shall, prior to final release
at the time of completion and certification by its Engineer,
require retention of 10% of the estimated cost of the aforesaid
improvements.
(j) Where the governing body accepts dedication of all or some of
the required improvements following completion, the
governing body shall require the posting of financial security to
secure structural integrity of said improvements as well as the
functioning of said improvements in accordance with the
design and specifications as depicted on the final plat for a
term of 18 months from the date of acceptance of dedication.
Said financial security shall be of the same type as otherwise
required in this section with regard to installation of such
improvements, and the amount of the financial security shall
be 10% of the actual cost of installation of said improvements.
(k) If water mains or sanitary sewer lines, or both, along with
apparatus or facilities related thereto, are to be installed under
the jurisdiction and pursuant to the rules and regulations of a
public utility or Municipal Authority separate and distinct from
the municipality, financial security to assure proper completion
and maintenance thereof shall be posted in accordance with
the regulations of the controlling public utility or Municipal
Authority and shall not be included with the financial security
as otherwise required by this section.
(l) If financial security has been provided in lieu of the completion
of improvements required as a condition for the final approval
of a plat as set forth in this section, the municipality shall not
condition the issuance of building, grading or other permits
relating to the erection or placement of improvements,
including buildings, upon the lots or land as depicted upon the
final plat upon actual completion of the improvements depicted
upon the approved final plat. Moreover, if said financial
security has been provided, occupancy permits for any building
or buildings to be erected shall not be withheld following the
improvement of the streets providing access to and from
existing public roads to such building or buildings to a mudfree
or otherwise permanently passable condition, as well as
the completion of all other improvements as depicted upon the
approved plat, either upon the lot or lots or beyond the lot or
lots in question if such improvements are necessary for the
reasonable use of or occupancy of the building or buildings.
(4) Release from improvement bond.
§ 220-8 DANVILLE CODE § 220-8
1:372
(a) When the developer has completed all of the necessary and
appropriate improvements, the developer shall notify the
municipal governing body, in writing, by certified mail, of the
completion of the aforesaid improvements and shall send a
copy thereof to the Municipal Engineer. The municipal
governing body shall, within 10 days after receipt of such
notice, direct and authorize the Municipal Engineer to inspect
all of the aforesaid improvements. The Municipal Engineer
shall thereupon file a report, in writing, with the municipal
governing body and shall promptly mail a copy of the same to
the developer by certified mail. The report shall be made and
mailed within 30 days after receipt by the Municipal Engineer
of the aforesaid authorization from the governing body. Said
report shall be detailed and shall indicate approval or rejection
of said improvements, either in whole or in part, and if said
improvements or any portion thereof shall not be approved by
the Municipal Engineer, said report shall contain a statement
of reasons for such nonapproval.
(b) The municipal governing body shall notify the developer,
within 15 days of receipt of the Engineer's report, in writing,
by certified mail, of the action of said municipal governing
body with relation thereto.
(c) If the municipal governing body or the Municipal Engineer fails
to comply with the time limitation provisions contained herein,
all improvements will be deemed to have been approved, and
the developer shall be released from all liability pursuant to its
performance guaranty bond or other security agreement.
(d) If any portion of said improvements shall not be approved by
the municipal governing body, the developer shall proceed to
complete the same, and, upon completion, the same procedure
of notification as outlined herein shall be followed.
(e) Nothing herein, however, shall be construed in limitation of the
developer's right to contest or question, by legal proceedings
or otherwise, any determination of the municipal governing
body or the Municipal Engineer.
(f) Where herein reference is made to the Municipal Engineer, he
shall be a duly registered professional engineer employed by
the municipality or engaged as a consultant thereto.
(g) The foregoing procedures for release from an improvement
bond shall also be applicable to requests for partial releases of
not less than 25% each; provided, however, that if the
developer requests such partial releases, he shall be
responsible for all related costs of the Municipal Engineer.
(5) Remedies to effect completion of improvements.
§ 220-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-8
1:373
(a) In the event that any improvements which may be required
have not been installed as provided in this chapter or in accord
with the approved final plat, the governing body may enforce
any corporate bond or other security by appropriate legal and
equitable remedies. If the proceeds of such bond or other
security are insufficient to pay the cost of installing or making
repairs or corrections to all the improvements covered by said
security, the governing body may, at its option, install part of
such improvements in all or part of the subdivision or land
development and may institute appropriate legal or equitable
action to recover the moneys necessary to complete the
remainder of the improvements. All of the proceeds, whether
resulting from the security or from any legal or equitable
action brought against the subdivider/developer, or both, shall
be used solely for the installation of the improvements covered
by such security and not for any other municipal purposes.
Further, the governing body shall not be obliged to expend
general revenues of the Borough to complete improvements
for which the security is or becomes inadequate.
(b) In the further event that the governing body acts to realize the
proceeds of the security and to effect the completion of
improvements, it shall do so in its governmental capacity and
shall not be deemed to be acting in the capacity of the
subdivider or developer.
(6) Approval. The Planning Commission shall recommend to the
Borough Council whether the final application shall be approved or
disapproved, and the Borough Council shall render its decision and
communicate it, in writing, to the subdivider/developer not later
than 90 days following the date of the regular meeting of the
Planning Commission next following the date the application is
filed, provided that should said next regular meeting occur more
than 30 days following the filing of the application, said ninety-day
period shall be measured from the 30th day following the day the
application has been filed.
(a) If approved, the governing body shall sign the original final
subdivision application and attach thereto a notation that it has
received approval and return it to the subdivider/developer for
compliance with the recording requirements.
(b) If disapproved, the Borough Council shall attach to the
application a statement of reasons for such action and return it
to the subdivider/developer.
(c) The decision of the Borough Council shall be communicated to
the applicant personally or mailed to him, by certified mail, at
his last known address, not later than 15 days following the
decision.
§ 220-8 DANVILLE CODE § 220-8
1:374
(d) When requested by the developer, in order to facilitate
financing, the governing body shall furnish the developer with
a signed copy of a resolution indicating approval of the final
plat contingent upon the developer obtaining a satisfactory
financial security. The final plat or record plan shall not be
signed or recorded until the financial improvement agreement
is executed. The resolution or letter of contingent approval
shall expire and be deemed to be revoked if the financial
security agreement is not executed within 90 days, unless a
written extension is granted by the governing body. Such
extension shall not be unreasonably withheld and shall be
placed in writing at the request of the developer.
(7) Changes. No changes, erasures, modifications or revisions shall be
made on any final application of a subdivision/land development
after approval has been given by the Borough Council and
endorsed in writing on the application, unless the application is
resubmitted for approval.
(8) Recording. Plats and deeds shall be recorded in accordance with
§ 220-26. [Amended 12-9-2002 by Ord. No. 447141]
(9) Effect of plat approval on Official Map. After a plat has been
approved and recorded as provided in this chapter, all streets and
public grounds on such plat shall be and become a part of the
Official Map of the municipality without public hearing.
(10) Information to be provided with final plan. Prior to final approval by
the Planning Commission and in strict accordance with the
regulations and procedures of this chapter, all final plats
(subdivision plans) shall be submitted for final approval as follows:
(a) The final plat shall be drawn on sheets not larger than 18
inches wide by 24 inches long and shall be at a scale of 100 feet
to one inch or larger. Where necessary, the plat may be on
several sheets accompanied by an index sheet showing the
entire subdivision.
(b) The final plat shall show:
[1] The location and a description of survey monuments.
[2] Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets,
easements and other rights-of-way and property lines of
residential lots and other sites with accurate dimensions,
bearings or deflection angles and radii, arcs and central
angles of all curves.
[3] The name and right-of-way width of each street or other
right-of-way.
141. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 220-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-8
1:375
[4] Accurate locations of all existing and recorded streets
intersecting the boundaries of the tract and the names of
such streets.
[5] The location, dimensions and purpose of easements,
including any limitations on such easements.
[6] A number to identify each lot and/or site and street
numbers of lots.
[7] The purpose for which sites other than residential lots are
dedicated or reserved.
[8] The minimum building setback line on all lots and other
sites.
[9] Profiles of streets and alleys showing grades at a minimum
scale of 50 feet horizontal and 10 feet vertical.
[10] Cross sections for the entire width of each right-of-way of
the streets and alleys showing the width of the right-ofway,
the width of the cartway, the location and width of
sidewalks and the location and size of utility mains.
[11] The names of record owners of adjoining unplatted land.
[12] Reference to recorded subdivision applications of
adjoining platted land by record name, date and number.
[13] Certification by a licensed surveyor or licensed engineer
certifying to the accuracy of the survey and application.
[14] In form for recording, proposed protective covenants
running with the land, if any.
[15] Proposed contours at vertical intervals as set forth in
Subsection A(5)(a)[20].
[16] Plans and profiles of proposed sanitary and/or stormwater
sewers, with grades and pipe sizes indicated, and a plan of
any proposed water distribution system showing pipe sizes
and location of valves and fire hydrants.
[17] The title, scale, North arrow and date.
[18] A map showing the exact location and elevation of all
proposed buildings, structures, roads and public utilities
to be constructed in flood-prone areas.
(c) The application shall have lettered upon it a statement
delineating the areas proposed to be dedicated for such public
uses as streets, alleys, public schools, parks or any other public
use, and there shall be attached to the application a certificate
§ 220-8 DANVILLE CODE § 220-8
1:376
of title certifying the ownership of all such lands to be so
dedicated by said application.
(11) Supporting documents. The following supporting documents shall
also be submitted in conjunction with the final plat:
(a) Evidence showing that all general taxes on the subdivision
have been paid in full to date and that all special taxes or
assessments have been paid or discharged in full or that the
court under which said assessments were made has entered an
order redistributing the assessments against the land platted.
(b) A copy of the sales contract so that the Planning Commission
can ascertain that it contains no provisions in conflict with the
approved application.
(c) A statement signed by the subdivider/developer setting forth
the public improvements he proposes to make, together with
plans, specifications and estimates of cost therefor.
(d) Bond, certification or other security:
[1] A duly completed and executed completion bond with
corporate surety posted with the Borough by the
subdivider/developer, in an amount equal to the estimate
and certified by the Borough Solicitor as good, valid and
enforceable by the Borough, securing the satisfactory
completion of the public improvements in strict
accordance with the description, plans and specifications
submitted by the subdivider/developer and approved by
the Borough Council;
[2] A certification that the improvements, utilities and
facilities have already been installed; or
[3] An acceptable instrument of financial security payable to
the Borough and adequate for the completion of these
improvements, sewage disposal facilities and other
utilities and facilities.
(e) A certification that utility companies serving the area of the
proposed subdivision have been consulted with respect to the
size, location and use of easements for utility purposes.
(f) An affidavit that the applicant is the owner or equitable owner
of the land proposed to be subdivided.
(g) The location and method of streetlighting facilities.
(h) A deed of dedication of streets and other public property.
(i) At the time of filing, the final application shall be accompanied
by a check payable to the municipality in an amount
§ 220-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-8
1:377
determined by the Municipal Engineer sufficient to cover the
cost of:
[1] Reviewing the application's engineering details.
[2] Inspecting the site for conformance to the survey.
[3] Preparing the cost estimates of required improvements.
[4] Inspection of required improvements during installation.
[5] Final inspection on completion of the installation of
required improvements.
[6] Fees charged by the County Planning Commission and fees
for other related consulting services.
(j) Such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements or dedications
as may be required by the governing body of the municipality
in the enforcement of these regulations, including but not
limited to a highway occupancy permit for any development
requiring access to a state highway.
§ 220-8 DANVILLE CODE § 220-8
1:378
ARTICLE IV
Modifications
§ 220-9. General provisions.
§ 220-10. Large-scale developments.
The standards and requirements of this chapter may be modified by the
Borough Council in the case of plans for complete communities or
neighborhood units or other large-scale developments of 10 acres or more
which, in the judgment of the Borough Council, achieve substantially the
objectives of the regulations contained herein and which are further
protected by such covenants or other legal provisions as will assure
conformity to and achievement of the plan.
§ 220-11. Reconsideration.
Any subdivider aggrieved by a finding or decision of the Borough Council
may request and receive opportunity to appear before the Borough Council,
present additional relevant information and request reconsideration of the
original findings or decision.
§ 220-12. Application procedure.
A. The governing body may grant a modification of the requirements of
one or more provisions if the literal enforcement will exact undue
hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in
question, provided that such modification will not be contrary to the
public interest and that the purpose and intent of the chapter is
observed.
B. All requests for a modification shall be in writing and shall accompany
and be a part of the application for development. The request shall state
in full the grounds and facts of unreasonableness or hardship on which
the request is based, the provision or provisions of the chapter involved
and the minimum modification necessary.
C. The request for modification may be referred to the Planning
Commission for advisory comments.
D. The governing body shall keep a written record of all action on all
requests for modifications.
A. Requests for modifications shall be submitted in writing by the
subdivider at the time the preliminary plan is filed with the
Commission. The application shall state fully the grounds and all the
facts relied upon by the applicant.
B. Applications for reconsideration shall be submitted in writing by the
subdivider not less than 10 calendar days in advance of the meeting at
which reconsideration is desired.
§ 220-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-13
1:379
§ 220-13. Record and statement of authorization.
In authorizing a modification, the governing body shall record its actions
and the grounds for authorizing the modification in its minutes. A statement
showing the date that such modification was authorized shall be affixed to
the final plan.
§ 220-14. Appeals.
Any landowner, applicant or other aggrieved party questioning the validity
of this chapter or any part hereof, including procedural matters, or any
decision made hereunder may undertake an appeal in accordance with
the procedures set forth in Article IX of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act 247, as amended.142
142. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10901 et seq.
§ 220-13 DANVILLE CODE § 220-14
1:380
ARTICLE V
Design Standards
§ 220-15. Streets.
The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets
shall conform to the General Community Plan and shall be considered in
their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographic conditions and
to public convenience and safety and in their appropriate relation to the
proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets and shall conform
to the following design standards in a manner acceptable to the Planning
Commission:
A. Where not shown on the General Community Plan, the arrangement of
streets in a subdivision shall either:
(1) Provide for the continuation or projection of existing principal
streets in surrounding areas; or
(2) Conform to a neighborhood plan to meet a particular situation
where topographic or other conditions make continuance or
projection of existing streets impracticable.
B. Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be
discouraged.
C. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial
street, railroad right-of-way or rail crossings, access thereto shall be
limited to a minimum number of intersections as is practicable, and
such major access intersections with arterial streets and/or rail
crossings shall be determined with due regard for sight distance,
distance between intersections, approach grades and requirements for
future grade separations.
D. Marginal access streets paralleling such limited access arterial streets
shall be required, in such cases where practicable, reversing the
frontage of residential properties with a screen planting contained in a
nonaccess reservation strip along the rear of and between the property
line and the arterial street right-of-way. Such reserve strips shall be
prohibited except where their control is definitely placed with the
municipality.
E. Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
avoided.
F. A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between curves on
arterial and collector streets.
G. When connecting street lines deflect from each other more than 10°,
they shall be connected with a curve with a radius adequate to ensure
sight distance.
§ 220-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-15
1:381
§ 220-16. Easements.
Easements across lots centered on rear or side lot lines or where necessary
for utilities, watercourses, drainageways, channels or streams shall be not
less than 10 feet wide.
§ 220-17. Blocks.
H. Streets shall be laid out to intersect as nearly as possible at right
angles, and no street shall intersect any other street at less than 60°.
I. Alleys shall be permitted only in cases where necessary.
J. Street right-of-way widths shall be not less than as follows:
Type of Street
Width
(feet)
Arterial 80 to 120
Collector 60 to 80
Minor 50
Marginal access 50
Alley 20
K. Dead-end streets designed to be so permanently shall not be longer
than 600 feet and shall be provided with a turnaround having an outside
road diameter of at least 80 feet and a property line diameter of at least
100 feet.
L. No street grade shall be less than 1/2 of 1% or more than 10%, unless
topographic conditions make a steeper grade necessary.
A. The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with due
regard to:
(1) The provision of adequate building sites for the special type of use
contemplated.
(2) Requirements as to lot size and dimensions.
(3) The need for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of
street traffic.
(4) Limitations and opportunities of topography.
B. Block lengths shall not exceed 1,800 feet.
C. In cases where the block length exceeds 600 feet and/or where deemed
essential to provide pedestrian circulation to schools, playgrounds,
shopping centers and other community facilities, an easement for a
crosswalk shall be provided of not less than 10 feet wide.
§ 220-15 DANVILLE CODE § 220-18
1:382
§ 220-18. Lots.
§ 220-19. Public sites and open spaces.
§ 220-20. Sewers.
A. The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation and the minimum
building setback lines shall be appropriate for the location of the
subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated.
B. Lot dimensions and area shall be as required under Chapter 260,
Zoning.
C. Corner lots for residential use shall have an extra width of at least 10%
of the above-required width to permit appropriate building setback
from and orientation to both streets.
D. The subdividing of the land shall be such as to provide, by means of a
public street, each lot with satisfactory access.
A. In reviewing subdivision plans, the Commission will consider the
adequacy of existing or proposed community facilities to serve the
additional dwellings proposed by the subdivision.
B. Where a proposed park, playground, school or other public use shown
on the Official Map is located in whole or in part in a subdivision, the
Commission may require the reservation of such area as may be
deemed reasonable. Where said area is not dedicated, it shall be
reserved for acquisition by the municipality for a period of not more
than one year.
C. Areas provided or reserved for such community facilities shall be
adequate to provide for building sites, landscaping and off-street
parking as appropriate to the use proposed.
D. The layout of the proposed subdivision shall be in general conformity
with the features or developments proposed in the Master Plan of the
Borough of Danville.
E. Streets which are obviously in alignment with existing streets shall
generally bear the name of the existing street. Street names applied to
completely new streets shall not duplicate or closely approximate,
phonetically, the names of existing streets in the Borough.
F. The subdivider shall plan the layout to preserve the natural features of
the site.
A. When a subdivision is reasonably accessible to a municipal sewer
system, the subdivider shall provide the subdivision with a complete
sanitary sewer system to be connected to the municipal sanitary sewer
system.
§ 220-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-20
1:383
§ 220-21. Improvements within flood-prone areas. [Amended
12-9-2002 by Ord. No. 447143]
B. When no municipal sewer system is available or one is not reasonably
accessible to the subdivision, the subdivider shall provide the
subdivision with a complete sanitary sewer system which shall connect
with a sanitary sewer outlet approved by the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection; except that when such approved outlet is
not available, one of the following methods of sewerage shall be used:
(1) A complete sanitary sewerage system to convey the sewage to a
treatment plant, to be provided by the subdivider in accordance
with minimum requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, with adequate provisions for the
maintenance of such plant.
(2) Private sewage disposal systems on individual lots, consisting of
septic tanks and tile absorption fields or other approved sewerage
disposal systems, when laid out in accordance with minimum
standards approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
(3) Cesspools. Under the terms of this chapter, no new installation of
cesspools for the disposal of sewage shall be permitted.
C. The plans for the installation of a sanitary sewerage system shall be
prepared by the subdivider and approved by the Engineer and the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. The Engineer
shall inspect the sewer line before it is covered over. Upon the
completion of the sanitary sewer installation, one copy each of the plans
for such system, as built, shall be filed with the Commission and the
municipality.
D. Storm sewers shall not be connected with sanitary sewers.
A. Where not prohibited by this chapter or any other laws or ordinances,
land located in flood-prone areas may be platted for development with
the provision that the developer construct all buildings and structures
to preclude flood damage in accordance with this chapter; Chapter 102,
Construction Codes, Uniform, of the Danville Borough Code; and other
laws and ordinances regulating such development.
B. If the Borough determines that only a part of a proposed plat can be
safely developed, it shall limit development to that part and shall
require that development proceed consistent with this determination.
C. When a developer does not intend to develop the plat himself and the
Borough determines that additional controls are required to ensure
safe development, it may require that developer to impose appropriate
143. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 220-20 DANVILLE CODE § 220-21
1:384
deed restrictions on the land. Such deed restrictions shall be inserted
in every deed and noted on every recorded plat.
D. All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least
50 lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in flood hazard
areas where base flood elevation data are not available, shall be
supported by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that
determine base flood elevations and floodway information. The analyses
shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer in a format
required by FEMA for a Conditional Letter of Map Revision or Letter of
Map Revision. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the
responsibility of the applicant.
§ 220-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-21
1:385

ARTICLE VI
Improvement and Construction Requirements
§ 220-22. Monuments.
Monuments shall be placed at all block corners, angle points, points or
curves in streets and at intermediate points as may be required by the
Municipal Engineer. The monuments shall be of such material, size and
length as may be approved by the Municipal Engineer.
§ 220-23. Utility and street improvements.
§ 220-24. Schedule of minimum requirements for utilities and
street improvements.
A. Utility and street improvements shall be provided in each new
subdivision in accordance with standards and requirements described
in the following schedules.
B. The standards and specifications for each general type of development
shall be as follows and as indicated in § 220-24 hereof:
(1) For apartment, row house and similar multifamily residential types,
improvements shall be in accordance with Standard A.
(2) For one-family detached dwellings with typical lot widths of less
than 100 feet, improvements shall be in accordance with Standard
B.
(3) For country homes with a lot area of 15,000 square feet or greater
and a lot width at the building line of 100 feet or greater,
improvements shall be in accordance with Standard C.
(4) For commercial, industrial and other special type uses, the
standards shall be as determined by the Planning Commission and
the Municipal Engineer.
C. Procedure for installation of required improvements. Required
improvements shall be installed by the subdivider/developer under the
supervision of the Municipal Engineer. The subdivider/developer may
elect to carry out minimum improvements by any of the following
methods:
(1) A certificate from the Municipal Engineer that all improvements
and installations to the subdivision required by this chapter have
been made or installed.
(2) An acceptable instrument of financial security filed with the
Commission in accordance with § 220-8B(3) hereof.
A. All utilities and street improvements shall be installed in a manner and
in accordance with specifications outlined as follows:
§ 220-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-24
1:387
Standard
A B C Utility or Street Improvement
x x Public water
x x Public sanitary sewer (if feasible)
x x x Arterial streets: cross sections in accordance with
General Community Plan and as determined by
Planning Commission, Municipal Engineer and
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PennDOT)
Collector streets:
x x 60-foot right-of-way; 32-foot pavement; 5-foot
sidewalk
x x 80-foot right-of-way; 40-foot pavement; 5-foot
sidewalk
x 60-foot to 80-foot right-of-way; 26-foot pavement
Minor and marginal access streets:
x x 50-foot right-of-way; 32-foot pavement; 4-foot
sidewalk
x 50-foot right-of-way; 26-foot pavement
x x x Alleys: paved full length
x x x Grading and center-line gradients of streets: per
approved plans and profiles
x x x Storm sewer system and other drainage
improvements: per approved plans and profiles
x x Curb: 24 x 6 inches, top rolled and battered to
8-inch bottom portland cement concrete
x x Alternate curb integral with gutter: 26 x 6 x 6
inches, battered and rolled portland cement
concrete
x Rolled bituminous gutter
x x x Pavement base: 6 inches slag or crushed stone,
compacted and choked
x x x Pavement wearing surface: double bituminous
surface treatment or 2 1/2 inches of screened stone
or slag chips with penetration oil (PennDOT
Standards and Specifications)
x x x Sidewalks: 4 inches portland cement concrete
x x x Street trees: 1 1/2 inches caliper, 40 to 60 feet apart
(accepted shade trees)
x x x Seeding of planting strips
§ 220-24 DANVILLE CODE § 220-24
1:388
Standard
A B C Utility or Street Improvement
x x x Street name signs at all intersections to conform to
PennDOT
B. In cases where the above requirements are deemed not appropriate by
the Planning Commission and the Borough Engineer to serve in the
public interest, the right is reserved to increase, change, alter or
substitute materials, manner and specifications for utility and street
improvements.
§ 220-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-24
1:389

ARTICLE VII
Conditions of Acceptance
§ 220-25. Strict compliance required.
No land development or subdivision of any lot, tract or parcel of land shall
be effected and no street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water main or other
facilities in connection therewith shall be laid out, constructed, opened or
dedicated for public use and travel or be in common use of occupants of
buildings abutting thereon except in strict accordance with the provisions
of this chapter.
§ 220-26. Recording of approved final plat; acceptance of
improvements.
A. Upon the approval of the final plat, the developer shall, within 90 days
of such final approval, or 90 days after the date of delivery of an
approval plat signed by the governing body following completion of
conditions imposed for such an approval, whichever is later, record
such plat in the office of the Montour County Recorder of Deeds and
forthwith file with the Commission a Recorder’s certificate that the
approved application has been recorded, with the deed book and page
numbers indicated, and two copies of the application as recorded. The
Recorder of Deeds shall not accept any plat for recording unless such
plat officially notes the Borough's approval and review by the Montour
County Planning Commission.144
B. The recording of the plat shall not constitute grounds for assessment
increases until such time as lots are sold or improvements are installed
on the land included within the subject plat.
C. After an approved subdivision plan shall have been officially recorded,
the streets, parks and other public improvements shown thereon shall
be considered to be a part of the Official Plan of the municipality.
D. Streets, parks and other public improvements shown on a subdivision
plan to be recorded may be offered for dedication to the municipality by
formal notation thereof on the plan, or the owner may note on such plan
that any such improvements have not been offered for dedication to the
municipality.
E. Every street, park or other improvement shown on a subdivision plan
that is recorded as provided herein shall be deemed to be a private
street, park or improvement until such time as the same shall have been
offered for dedication to the municipality and accepted by ordinance or
resolution or until it shall have been condemned for use as a public
street, park or other improvement.
144. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 220-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-27
1:391
§ 220-27. Lot sales or building in unapproved subdivision
prohibited; exceptions.
No lot in a subdivision may be sold and no permit to erect or alter any
building upon land in a subdivision may be issued unless and until a plan of
such subdivision shall have been approved and properly recorded and until
improvements required by the governing body shall have been constructed
or guaranteed as herein provided. Where, owing to special conditions, a
literal enforcement of this provision would result in unnecessary hardship,
the governing body may make such reasonable exception thereto as will not
be contrary to the public interest and may permit the sale of a lot, issuance
of a permit or erection of a building subject to conditions necessary to
assure adequate streets and other public improvements.
§ 220-28. General requirements for approval.
A. The governing body shall not approve any land development or
subdivision plan except in strict conformance with the provisions of this
chapter.
B. The governing body may alter any land development or subdivision plan
and specify alterations, changes or modifications therein which it
deems necessary and may make its approval subject to such alterations,
changes or modifications.
C. No road, street, lane, alley or related improvement shall be accepted as
a part of the highway system of the municipality or for maintenance
unless opened, laid out, graded and improved in strict accordance with
the standards and specifications of the municipality.
D. Before acting to approve any subdivision plan, the governing body may
arrange a public hearing thereon after giving such notice as may be
deemed desirable in each case.
E. Before approving any land development or subdivision plan, the
governing body shall require a written agreement that the necessary
grading, paving, street improvements, curbs, sidewalks, streetlights,
fire hydrants, water mains, sanitary sewers and other improvements as
may be required by the governing body shall be installed by the
subdivider/developer in strict accordance with the standards and
specifications of this chapter and in accordance with the procedures
and requirements set forth in § 220-8B(3) hereof.
§ 220-27 DANVILLE CODE § 220-28
1:392
ARTICLE VIII
Fees, Enforcement and Penalties
§ 220-29. Fees.
A. With the exception of minor subdivisions, at the time of filing the
preliminary application and the final application, the applicant shall
include a check payable to the Borough of Danville in the amount
specified in Schedule I hereof. Said fee shall be treated as a deposit
against the final review fee for the preliminary application and the final
application. Review fees shall include the reasonable and necessary
charges by the Borough's professional consultants for review and
report thereon to the Borough of Danville. Such fees shall also cover the
cost of inspection of improvements; provided, however, that the
applicant shall not be required to reimburse the Borough for any
inspection which is duplicative of inspections covered by other
governmental agencies or public utilities; the burden of proving that
any inspection is duplicative shall be on the applicant. In addition, fees
charged to the Borough relating to any appeal of a decision shall not be
considered review fees and may not be charged to the applicant.
Review fees shall be reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary
and customary charges for similar service in the community, but in no
event shall the fees exceed the rate or cost charged by the professional
consultant for comparable services to the Borough for services which
are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on applicants. [Amended
12-9-2002 by Ord. No. 447; 1-9-2007 by Ord. No. 479]
(1) The governing body shall submit to the applicant an itemized bill
showing work performed, identifying the person performing the
services and the time and date when each task was performed.
Nothing in this subparagraph shall prohibit interim itemized billing
or municipal escrow or other security requirements. In the event
the applicant disputed the amount of any such review fees, the
applicant shall, no later than 30 days after the date of transmittal of
the bill to the applicant, notify the municipality and the
municipality's professional consultant that such fees are disputed
and shall explain the basis of their objection to the fees charged, in
which case the municipality shall not delay or disapprove the
applicant's application based on a dispute over fees. Failure of the
applicant to dispute a bill within 30 days shall be a waiver of the
applicant's right to arbitration of that bill under Section 510(g) of
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.145,146
(2) In the event that the municipality's professional consultant and the
applicant cannot agree on the amount of the review fees which are
able and necessary, then the applicant and the municipality shall
follow the procedure for dispute resolution set forth in Section
145. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10510(g).
146. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 220-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-29
1:393
510(g) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code; provided
that the arbitrator resolving such dispute shall be of the same
profession or discipline as the professional consultant whose fees
are being disputed.
(3) Subsequent to a decision on the application, the Borough Council
shall submit to the applicant an itemized bill for review fees,
specifically designated as a final bill. The final bill shall include all
review fees incurred at least through the date of the decision on the
application. If for any reason additional review is required
subsequent to the decision, including the conditions of the
approval, the review fees shall be charged to the applicant as a
supplement to the final bill.147
Schedule I
Fee Deposits
Preliminary Application
Number of Lots Deposit Per Lot Minimum Deposit
Fewer than 10 $20 $100
10 to 19 $20 $200
20 to 49 $20 $400
50 to 99 $20 $1,000
100 or more $20 $2,000
Final Application
Number of Lots Deposit Per Lot Minimum Deposit
Fewer than 10 $20 $200
10 to 19 $20 $250
20 to 49 $20 $500
50 to 99 $20 $1,000
100 or more $20 $2,000
B. Review fee deposit for land developments. At the time of filing, the
preliminary application and the final application shall be accompanied
by a check payable to the municipality in the amount specified below.
Said fee shall be treated as a deposit against the final review fee for the
preliminary application and the final application, respectively.
(1) All land development fees shall be subject to the review fee
provisions of Subsection C(2) hereof.
147. Editor's Note: Former § 118-29B, Review fee deposit for subdivisions, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 1-9-2007 by Ord. No. 479, with the exception of the
Schedule of Fee Deposits, which is retained in this chapter.
§ 220-29 DANVILLE CODE § 220-29
1:394
§ 220-30. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
(2) The amount of the review fee to be deposited for all land
development applications shall be in accordance with the following
schedule:
Area
(square feet) Amount of Fee
2,000 or less $200
2,001 or more $0.10 per square foot, up to a
maximum fee of $1,000
C. Processing fee. In addition to the above, each application for a
subdivision/land development shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
fee to cover the cost of administration required to process applications.
Such fees shall be $5 per lot, but not less than $50 per application,
including applications for minor subdivisions. In addition, all applicants
shall pay the fee of the Montour County Planning Commission.
D. Resolution of fee disputes. The municipality may prescribe that the
applicant shall reimburse the municipality for the reasonable and
necessary expense incurred in connection with the inspection of
improvements. The applicant shall not be required to reimburse the
governing body for any inspection which is duplicative of inspections
conducted by other governmental agencies or public utilities. The
burden of proving that any inspection is duplicative shall be upon the
objecting applicant. Such reimbursement shall be based on a schedule
established by ordinance or resolution. Such expense shall be
reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary and customary fees
charged by the municipality's professional consultants to the
municipality for work performed for similar services in the community,
but in no event shall the fees exceed the rate or cost charged by the
professional consultant to the municipality for comparable services
when fees are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on applicants, as
specified in the following schedule of professional consultants' fees.
[Added 1-9-2007 by Ord. No. 479148]
A. Enforcement authorization. In addition to all those who may by law
have the authority to enforce and/or prosecute, it is specifically
designated that it shall be the duty of the Borough Council of the
Borough of Danville to enforce this chapter.
B. Enforcement remedies. Any person, partnership or corporation who or
which has violated the provisions of this chapter shall, upon being
found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by
the municipality, pay a judgment of not more than $500, plus all court
costs, including reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the municipality
148. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 220-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-30
1:395
as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, be
levied or be payable until the date of the determination of a violation by
the Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment, the municipality may enforce the judgment
pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the
Magisterial District Judge, determining that there has been a violation,
further determines that there was a good-faith basis for the person,
partnership or corporation violating the chapter to have believed that
there was no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to
have been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date
of the determination of a violation by the Magisterial District Judge,
and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation.
C. Preventive remedies.
(1) In addition to other remedies, the municipality may institute and
maintain appropriate actions by law or in equity to restrain, correct
or abate violations; to prevent unlawful construction; to recover
damages; and to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure
or premises. The description by metes and bounds in the
instrument of transfer or other documents used in the process of
selling or transferring shall not exempt the seller or transferor
from such penalties or from the remedies herein provided.
(2) The municipality may refuse to issue any permit or grant any
approval necessary to further improve or develop any real property
which has been developed or which has resulted from a subdivision
of real property in violation of this chapter. This authority to deny
such a permit or approval shall apply to any of the following
applicants:
(a) The owner of record at the time of such violation.
(b) The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such
violation without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee
had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(c) The current owner of record who acquired the property
subsequent to the time of violation without regard as to
whether such current owner had actual or constructive
knowledge of the violation.
(d) The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who
acquired the property subsequent to the time of violation
without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had actual
or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(3) As an additional condition for issuance of a permit or the granting
of an approval to any such owner, current owner, vendee or lessee
for the development of any such real property, the municipality may
§ 220-30 DANVILLE CODE § 220-30
1:396
require compliance with the conditions that would have been
applicable to the property at the time the applicant acquired an
interest in such real property.
§ 220-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-30
1:397
Chapter 225
TAXATION
§ 220-30 DANVILLE CODE § 220-30
1:398
ARTICLE I
Amusement Devices Tax
[Adopted 1-21-1957 by Ord. No. 123 (Ch. 121, Art. I, of the 1975
Code)]
§ 225-1. Definitions; word usage.
§ 225-2. Tax imposed; by whom payable; amount of tax. [Amended
3-21-1957; 1-12-1971149]
There is hereby imposed a tax for general Borough purposes upon the
privilege of using for profit, within the Borough of Danville, any jukebox or
mechanical amusement device, as herein defined. Such tax shall be payable
by the person owning and/or operating the establishment in which such
device is installed for use. The tax shall be payable at the rate of $35 on
each jukebox for the calendar year or any portion thereof, and shall be
payable at the rate of $35 on each mechanical amusement device for the
calendar year or any portion thereof.
§ 225-3. When tax payable; refunds; substitution of equipment.
[Amended 5-14-1975 by Ord. No. 258]
The tax imposed under this article shall be payable to the Borough
Secretary on or before the 15th day of June 1957, and each year thereafter.
No deduction or refund of any tax payable under this article shall be
A. Words and terms defined. As used in this article, the following terms
shall have the meanings indicated:
DEVICE — Any jukebox or mechanical amusement device for the use of
which for profit a tax is levied under this article.
JUKEBOX — Any music vending machine, contrivance or device which,
upon the payment and/or insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc or
key into any slot, crevice or other opening, operates or may be operated
for the emission of song, music or similar amusement.
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any device other than a
jukebox which, upon the payment and/or insertion of a coin, slug, token,
plate or disc, may be operated for use as a game, entertainment or
amusement, whether or not registering a score and whether or not a
prize is offered, provided that such term shall not include any gambling
device or any mechanism that has been judicially determined to be a
gambling device.
PERSON — Any natural person, association, copartnership, firm or
corporation.
B. Word usage. In this article, the singular shall include the plural and the
masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
149. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-3
1:399
granted in the case of any tax payable for less than a full calendar year
or in case of any device destroyed, stolen, sold or otherwise disposed of or
transferred after the payment of such tax; provided, however, in the case of
the substitution of any device in the same class, the use of which is taxable
under this article, no additional tax shall be paid, provided that the total
number of devices of the same class in use upon the premises remains no
greater than that upon which such tax was paid.
§ 225-4. Issuance of certificates and seals; transfer of location.
A. The Borough Secretary shall procure, at the expense of the Borough, a
sufficient number of certificates, upon each of which the following
information shall be printed or inserted in ink or by typewriter:
(1) The name of the Borough.
(2) The number of the certificate.
(3) The name and address of the person paying the tax.
(4) The year for which the tax shall have been paid.
(5) The date on which such tax shall have been paid.
(6) The type of device for which the tax shall have been paid.
(7) The amount of tax paid.
B. Whenever any tax shall have been paid under this article, the Borough
Secretary shall prepare in duplicate a certificate, as herein prescribed.
The original of such certificate, to which the Borough Seal shall be
affixed, shall be given to the person paying such tax, and the duplicate
shall be kept on file by the Borough Secretary. The Borough Secretary
shall also procure and give to each person paying such tax a seal to be
affixed to each device for the use of which such tax shall have been
paid. Such seal shall indicate the year for which such tax shall have
been paid, the type of device and the certificate number.
C. In case of the loss, defacement or destruction of any original certificate
or seal, the person to whom such certificate or seal was issued shall
apply to the Borough Secretary, who may issue a new certificate or seal
in replacement thereof upon payment of a fee of $5 and who shall
amend the duplicate of the certificate first issued in case a new
certificate has been issued.150
D. In case of the removal of any establishment in which any device for the
use of which a tax shall have been paid under this article to another
location in the Borough, or in case of a change in the identity of the
person operating or owning any such establishment, the person
operating such establishment shall report such fact within five days of
150. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-3 DANVILLE CODE § 225-4
1:400
§ 225-5. Delinquent taxes; penalty.
If any tax levied in pursuant of this article shall not be paid when due, a
penalty of 10% of the amount of the tax due and unpaid shall be added
thereto.
§ 225-6. Information to be confidential; exceptions.
Any information gained by the Borough Secretary or any other official
or agent of the Borough as a result of any returns, investigations or
verifications required or authorized by this article shall be confidential,
except for official purposes, and except in accordance with proper judicial
order, or as otherwise provided by law. Any disclosure of any information
contrary, to the provisions of this section shall constitute a violation of this
article.
§ 225-7. Taxes recoverable by Borough Solicitor.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with all penalties, interest and
costs, shall be recoverable by the Borough Solicitor as debts of like amount
are by law recoverable.
§ 225-8. Taxes to be paid into Borough treasury.
All taxes, interest and penalties collected or recovered by the Borough
Secretary or any other Borough officer or person for or in behalf of the
Borough shall be paid into the Borough treasury as general revenue to be
used for general revenue purposes.
§ 225-9. Expenses to be paid by Borough.
All expenses incurred in the administration of this article shall be paid by
the Borough.
§ 225-10. Nonapplicability.
This article shall not apply to any person or property as to whom or which
it is beyond the legal power of the Borough Council to impose the tax or
duties herein provided for.
such change in location or personnel, and the Secretary shall
immediately amend the certificate and duplicate certificate.
E. Before the removal of any device from any establishment, the person
operating such establishment shall remove the seal issued under this
article from such device. Such seal may be affixed to any other device of
the same class used in such establishment during the current year.
§ 225-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-11
1:401
§ 225-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-14-1975 by Ord. No.
258151]
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more than $600 and costs
of such proceedings or, upon default of payment of such fines and costs,
by imprisonment in the county jail for a term of not more than 30 days.
The continuation of such violation for each successive day shall constitute
a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or permitting the
continuation of the violation may be punished as provided above for each
separate offense.
§ 225-12. Taxes imposed annually. [Amended 5-14-1975 by Ord. No.
258]
This article shall go into effect on the first day of March 1957, and the tax
levied hereunder shall be imposed for the calendar year 1957 and for each
calendar year thereafter.
151. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-11 DANVILLE CODE § 225-12
1:402
ARTICLE II
Per Capita Tax
[Adopted 2-16-1959 by Ord. No. 138 (Ch. 121, Art. II, of the 1975
Code)]
§ 225-13. Tax levied; amount of tax. [Amended 3-19-1962 by Ord.
No. 164; 5-14-1975 by Ord. No. 258152]
A per capita tax of $10 for general Borough purposes is hereby levied and
assessed under the authority of the Act of December 31, 1965 (Pamphlet
Law 1257), and its amendments,153 upon each resident and inhabitant of the
Borough of Danville over the age of 18 years, which tax shall be in addition
to all other taxes levied and assessed by the said Borough pursuant to any
other laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 225-14. Collection of taxes.
The tax shall be collected by the duly elected or appointed Tax Collector of
Borough Taxes for the Borough of Danville in the same manner and at the
same time or times as other Borough taxes are collected, as provided by the
Local Tax Collection Law of 1945,154 as amended and supplemented.
§ 225-15. Tax Collector to provide surety bond.
The Tax Collector shall give bond secured and conditioned for the collection
and payment of such taxes as provided by law for other Borough taxes.
§ 225-16. Warrant for collection.
The entry of the per capita tax in the tax duplicate and the issuance of the
duplicate to the Tax Collector shall constitute his warrant for the collection
of the per capita tax hereby levied and assessed.
§ 225-17. Expenses and compensation of Tax Collector.
The expenses of collection and the compensation of the Tax Collector shall
be paid and allowed as provided in the Local Tax Collection Law of 1945,155
as amended and supplemented, which compensation shall be the same as
fixed from time to time by the Borough of Danville for the collection of other
Borough taxes.
152. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Amendments noted where applicable.
153. Editor's Note: See now 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
154. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5511.1 et seq.
155. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5511.1 et seq.
§ 225-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-18
1:403
§ 225-18. Notice to taxpayers.
The Tax Collector shall give notice to the taxpayers at the same time and in
the same manner as provided by the Local Tax Collection Law of 1945,156 as
amended and supplemented.
§ 225-19. Addition of names to duplicate.
In case the Tax Collector or a Deputy Tax Collector shall at any time
find within the Borough of Danville any resident or inhabitant above the
age of 21 years whose name does not appear upon the tax duplicate,
he shall report the name of such person forthwith to the Assessor, who
shall thereupon certify the same unto the Borough of Danville, which shall
promptly certify the same to the Tax Collector reporting said name,
whereupon the Tax Collector shall add the name and the assessment of
this per capita tax against such person to the duplicate of the Borough of
Danville and proceed to collect the same.
§ 225-20. Collection of tax by distress.
The Tax Collector shall be and is hereby empowered with the authority to
collect said tax by distress and sell all goods and chattels of the taxpayer as
provided therefor by the Local Tax Collection Law of 1945, as amended and
supplemented.157
§ 225-21. Collection of tax from employer.
There is hereby conferred upon the Tax Collector the power and authority
to demand, receive and collect from all corporations, political subdivisions,
associations, companies, firms or individuals employing persons owing per
capita taxes, or whose wife owes per capita taxes, or if in possession
of unpaid commissions or earnings belonging to any person owing per
capita taxes or whose wife owes per capita taxes, upon the presentation of
written notice and demand containing the name of the taxable, or husband
thereof, and the amount of the tax due. Upon the presentation of such
written notice and demand, it shall be the duty of such corporation, political
subdivision, association, company, firm or individual to deduct from the
wages, commissions or earnings of such individual employees then owing
or that shall within 60 days thereafter become due, or from any unpaid
commissions or earnings of any taxable in its or his possession, or that shall
within 60 days thereafter come into its or his possession, a sum sufficient
to pay the respective amount of the per capita taxes and costs shown upon
the written notice of demand, and to pay the same to the Tax Collector of
the Borough of Danville within 60 days after such notice shall have been
given. The employer shall be entitled to deduct not more than 2% for his
expenses for such moneys paid over to the Tax Collector. Upon the failure
of such employer to make such deduction when properly notified, as herein
156. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5511.1 et seq.
157. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5511.1 et seq.
§ 225-18 DANVILLE CODE § 225-21
1:404
provided, such employer shall forfeit and pay the amount of such tax for
each such taxable whose taxes are not withheld and paid over to the Tax
Collector, as herein provided, which amount may be recovered by an action
of assumpsit in a suit to be instituted by the Tax Collector on behalf of the
Borough of Danville.
§ 225-22. Keeping of account; remission of taxes to Borough
Treasurer.
The Tax Collector shall keep a correct account of all per capita taxes
collected by authority of this article. He shall mark the same "paid" on
each duplicate at the name of each taxable, and the date on which payment
was made. The Tax Collector shall remit said taxes to the Treasurer of the
Borough of Danville by a separate statement at the same time as other taxes
are remitted to the Borough of Danville.
§ 225-23. Discount for prompt payment; penalty for overdue
payment.
All taxpayers subject to the payment of the per capita taxes herein levied
and assessed shall be entitled to a discount of 2% of the amount of such tax
upon making payment of the whole amount thereof within two months after
the date of the tax notice. All taxpayers who fail to make payment of any
such taxes charged against them for a period of four months after the date
of the tax notice shall be charged with a penalty of 5%, which penalty shall
be added to the taxes by the Tax Collector and be collected by him.
§ 225-24. Powers and duties of Tax Collector.
It is the intent of this article and there is hereby conferred upon the Tax
Collector all the powers, together with all the duties and obligations, to the
same extent and as fully as provided for in the local Tax Collection Law of
1945, as amended and supplemented.158
158. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5511.1 et seq.
§ 225-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-24
1:405

ARTICLE III
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 11-19-1962 by Ord. No. 167 (Ch. 121, Art. III, of the 1975
Code)]
§ 225-25. Definitions; word usage.
A. Words and terms defined. As used in this article, the following terms
shall have the meanings indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other form
of unincorporated enterprise owned by two or more persons.
BUSINESS — Any enterprise, activity, agency, profession, trust or
undertaking of any nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted
for profit, whether by an individual, agent, broker, copartnership,
association or other entity.
COMPENSATION EARNED, COMPENSATION PAID or EARNINGS —
All salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses, incentive payments and/or
other forms of compensation or remuneration, in cash or in property,
received by an individual and paid, directly or through an agent, by an
employer for services rendered.
CORPORATION — Any corporation or joint stock association organized
under the laws of the United States, the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or any other state, territory or foreign country or
dependency.
DANVILLE AREA EARNED INCOME TAX COMMITTEE — The joint
committee established to administer the collection, administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this article and a similar resolution
adopted by other municipalities of Montour County and
Northumberland County, Pennsylvania, in participation with this
Borough.
EMPLOYER — Any individual, copartnership, association, corporation,
governmental body or unit or agency or any other entity who or that
employs one or more persons on a salary, wage, commission or other
compensation basis.
INCOME TAX ADMINISTRATOR — Such person as may be empowered
by said Council to administer the provisions of this article.
NET PROFITS — The net gain from the operation of a business,
profession or enterprise after provision for all costs and expenses
incurred in the conduct thereof, either paid or accrued in accordance
with the accounting system used, and without deduction of taxes based
on income.
NONRESIDENT — An individual, copartnership, association or other
entity domiciled outside the Borough of Danville.
PERSON — Natural person, copartnership, association, firm or
fiduciary, except any corporation which is exempt from this tax under
§ 225-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-25
1:407
§ 225-26. Imposition and amount of tax.
the Act of Assembly 481, approved June 25, 1947, P.L. 1145, as
amended.159 Whenever used in any section prescribing and imposing
a penalty, the term "person," as applied to associations, shall mean
the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the
officers thereof.
RESIDENT — An individual, copartnership, association or other entity
domiciled in the Borough of Danville.
TAXPAYER — A person, whether an individual, copartnership,
association or any other entity, required hereunder to file a return on
earnings or net profits or to pay a tax thereon.
B. The singular shall include the plural and the masculine shall include the
feminine and the neuter.
A. The following annual taxes are hereby imposed for general Borough
purposes:160
(1) One-half of one percent of all compensation earned or received or
on after January 1, 1963, by residents.
(2) One-half of one percent of all compensation earned or received on
or after January 1, 1963, by nonresidents for work done or services
rendered in the Borough of Danville.
(3) One-half of one percent of the net profits earned on or after January
1, 1963, of businesses, professions and other activities engaged in
or conducted by residents.
(4) One-half of one percent of the net profits earned on or after January
1, 1963, of businesses, professions and other activities engaged in
or conducted in the Borough of Danville by nonresidents.
B. The taxes levied under Subsection A(1) and (2) shall relate to and be
imposed upon revenue or compensation paid by an employer or
principal for or on his behalf to any person who is employed by or
renders services to him. The taxes levied under Subsection A(3) and (4)
shall relate to and be imposed upon the net profits of any business,
profession or enterprise carried on by any person or owner or
proprietor, either individually or in association with some other person
or persons.
C. Said tax shall first be levied, collected and paid with respect to the
salaries, wages and commissions and other compensations earned from
and after January 1, 1963, and with respect to the net profits of
businesses, professions or other activities earned during that part of
159. Editor's Note: Superseded by Act of December 31, 1985, P.L. 1257. See 53 P.S. § 6901 et
seq., especially 53 P.S. § 6913.
160. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-25 DANVILLE CODE § 225-26
1:408
§ 225-27. Duties of taxpayer.
the calendar year 1963 beginning from and after January 1, 1963;
provided, however, that where the fiscal year of a business, profession
or other activity differs from the calendar year, the tax shall be
applicable only to that part of the net profits for the fiscal year as shall
be earned from and after January 1, 1963.
A. Every taxpayer who can reasonably be expected to earn taxable net
profits during the taxable period or who is employed on a salary, wage
or commission or other compensation basis and can reasonably be
expected to earn, during the taxable period, taxable earnings not
subject to the provisions of § 225-28 of this article relating to collection
at source, shall make and file with the Income Tax Administrator, on or
before April 15, 1963, on a form prescribed by the Income Tax
Administrator, a declaration of the estimated tax imposed thereon by
this article, the amount of the estimated tax to be withheld at source
and such other relevant information as the Income Tax Administrator
may require.
B. Every taxpayer who after April 15, 1963, can reasonably be expected to
earn taxable net profits during the taxable period or who is employed
on a salary, wage, commission or other compensation basis and can
reasonably be expected to earn, during the taxable period, taxable
earnings not subject to the provisions of § 225-28 of this article relating
to the collection at source, shall make and file, on or before June 15,
1963, September 15, 1963, and January 15, 1964, whichever of these
dates next follows the date on which the taxpayer could first reasonably
be expected to earn such net profits or earnings, a declaration similar
to that required under Subsection A.
C. The taxpayer making the declaration required hereinabove shall, at the
time of the filing thereof, pay to the Income Tax Administrator on behalf
of the Borough the estimated tax shown as due thereon; provided,
however, that he shall have the right to pay the tax in equal installments
on or before the remaining quarterly installment dates.
D. Where the taxpayer who has filed a declaration required hereinabove
shall thereafter reasonably be expected to earn, during the taxable
period, additional taxable net profits or earnings not subject to
collection at source, or finds that he has overestimated his net profits or
earnings, he may file an amended declaration with the Income Tax
Administrator setting forth such relevant information as the Income Tax
Administrator may require.
E. Every taxpayer who, during the taxable period, has earned taxable net
profits or who has received taxable earnings, shall make and file with
the Income Tax Administrator, on a form prescribed by the Income Tax
Administrator, on or before the 15th day of the fourth month after the
end of the taxable period, a final return showing all such net profits and
earnings during the taxable period, the total amount of tax due thereon,
§ 225-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-27
1:409
§ 225-28. Duties of employer.
the amount of the estimated tax paid under the provisions of this
section, the amount of the tax that has been withheld pursuant to the
provisions of § 225-28 and the balance of the tax due.
F. When the taxpayer's return of net profits or net earnings is made on a
calendar year basis or on a fiscal year basis, the final return for such
portion of taxable period as shall come within such calendar or fiscal
year shall be made and filed with the Income Tax Administrator on or
before the 15th day of the fourth month after the end of such calendar
or fiscal year.
G. The percentage of the total net profits of any calendar or fiscal year of a
taxpayer beginning or ending within the taxable year to which the tax
imposed by this article shall be applicable shall be equal to the same
percentage of such total net profits as the number of days in any such
year within such period bears to the total number of days in any such
year.
H. At the time of filing the final return, the taxpayer shall pay the balance
of the tax due or shall make demand for refund or credit in the case of
overpayment.
I. In the event of the death of taxpayer during the taxable period, his
personal representative, or in the absence of a personal representative,
his heirs, as designated by the Pennsylvania Intestate Act of 1947, as
amended, or as hereafter amended or supplemented,161 shall file his
final return within 90 days after the taxpayer's death and pay the tax
due or demand refund in the case of overpayment.
J. In the event that this article or a similar earned income tax ordinance
shall not be reenacted for a like taxable period immediately following
the taxable period of this article, then every taxpayer shall file a final
return on or before the 15th day of the fourth month following the end
of the current taxable period.
K. Declaration of estimated tax required by the preceding subsections
shall not be required from individuals whose estimated gross income
from farming for the taxable year is at least 2/3 of the total estimated
gross income from all sources for the taxable year.
A. Every employer within the Borough of Danville who employs one or
more employees on a salary, wage, commission or other compensation
shall deduct, at the time of the payment thereof, the tax imposed by this
article on the earnings due to his employee or employees within 30 days
after March 31, 1963, and within 30 days after each quarter of a year
thereafter shall make and file a return with the Income Tax
Administrator on a form prescribed by the Income Tax Administrator,
161. Editor's Note: Superseded by Chapter 21 of Act No. 164 of June 30, 1972. See 20 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 2101 et seq.
§ 225-27 DANVILLE CODE § 225-28
1:410
setting forth the taxes so deducted and such other relevant information
as the Income Tax Administrator may require, and shall pay to the
Income Tax Administrator, on behalf of the Borough, the amount of
taxes so deducted.
B. On or before the 15th day of February of the years 1964 and 1965,
every such employer shall make and file with the Income Tax
Administrator on a form prescribed by the Income Tax Administrator:
(1) A return, similar to form W-3 of the Internal Revenue Service of the
United States Treasury Department, showing the total amount of
the earnings of his employees during the portion of the preceding
calendar year embraced within the taxable period, the total amount
of the tax deducted and the total amount of the tax paid to the
Borough.
(2) A return for each employee, similar to form W-2 of the Internal
Revenue Service of the United States Treasury Department,
showing the total amount of the employee's earnings during the
portion of the preceding year embraced within the taxable period
and such other relevant information as the Income Tax
Administrator may require. Such employer, on or before February
15 of each of said years, shall furnish a copy of such return to the
employee named in the return.
C. Every employer who discontinues business prior to the close of the
taxable year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of business,
file the returns hereinabove required and pay the tax due. Where
discontinuance of business is due to the death of the employer, his
personal representative or, in the absence of a personal representative,
his heirs, as designated by the Pennsylvania Intestate Act of 1947, as
amended, or as hereafter amended or supplemented,162 shall within 90
days after the death of the employer file his return and pay the tax due
or demand a refund in the case of overpayment.
D. The failure or omission of any employer to make the deductions
required by this section shall not relieve any employee from the
payment of the tax or from complying with the requirements of this
article relating to the filing of declarations and returns.
E. If an employer makes a deduction of tax as required by this section, the
amount deducted shall constitute, in the hands of such employer, a trust
fund held for the account of the Borough as beneficial owner thereof,
and the employee from whose earnings such tax was deducted shall be
deemed to have paid such tax.
F. The withholding of earnings and the payment and return thereof by the
employer under the provisions of this section shall not be required in
respect to the earnings of domestic servants, farm laborers and casual
162. Editor's Note: Superseded by Chapter 21 of Act No. 164 of June 30, 1972. See 20 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 2101 et seq.
§ 225-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-28
1:411
§ 225-29. Establishment of Danville Area Earned Income Tax
Committee; powers.
§ 225-30. Administration of tax.
laborers not in the course of the employer's business. This section shall
not be construed to exempt such employees from the requirements of
filing a declaration and a return of such earnings and the payment of
tax thereon under the provisions of § 225-30.
A. There is hereby established the Danville Area Earned Income Tax
Committee which shall consist of representatives appointed according
to separate agreement as to numbers from each participating municipal
board, council or other executive and legislative board which has or
which will adopt a similar earned income tax ordinance or resolution in
participation with the Borough of Danville, Montour County,
Pennsylvania. In no event shall this committee exceed seven members.
B. There is hereby delegated to the Danville Area Earned Income Tax
Committee all of the powers of this Borough permissible under the laws
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for the administration, collection
and enforcement of the provisions of this article.
A. It shall be the duty of the Income Tax Administrator to collect and
receive the taxes, fines and penalties imposed by this article. It shall
also be his duty to keep a record showing the amount received by him
from each person paying the tax and, if paid by such person in respect
of another person, the name of such other person and the date of such
receipt.
B. The Income Tax Administrator shall account monthly to the Borough the
amount of money received by him and shall monthly pay over to the
Borough the money so received.
C. The Income Tax Administrator is hereby charged with the
administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and is
hereby empowered, subject to approval by those responsible for his
appointment and the Danville Area Income Tax Committee, to
prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating
to any matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this
article, including provisions for the reexamination and correction of
declarations and of returns and payments alleged or found to be
incorrect or as to which an overpayment is claimed or found to have
occurred, and to prescribe forms necessary for the administration of
this article.
D. The Income Tax Administrator and agents designated in writing by him
are hereby authorized to examine the books, papers and records of any
person in order to verify the accuracy of any declaration or return, or, if
no declaration or return was filed, to ascertain the tax due. Every
person is hereby directed and required to give to the Income Tax
§ 225-28 DANVILLE CODE § 225-30
1:412
§ 225-31. Suits for recovery of unpaid taxes.
§ 225-32. Interest rate for overdue taxes; collection; penalties.
Administrator or to any agent so designated by him the means, facilities
and opportunity for such examinations and investigations as are hereby
authorized.
E. Any information gained by the Income Tax Administrator, his agents or
any other official, agent or employee of the Borough, as a result of any
declarations, returns, investigations, hearings or verifications required
or authorized by this article, shall be confidential and shall not be
disclosed to any person except for official use in connection with the
administration or enforcement of this article or as otherwise provided
by law.
F. Any person aggrieved by any action of this Income Tax Administrator
shall have the right to appeal as provided by law.
A. The Income Tax Administrator may sue in the name of the Borough for
the recovery of taxes due and unpaid under this article.
B. Any suit brought to recover the tax imposed by this article shall be
begun within six years after such tax is due or within six years after the
declaration or return has been filed, whichever date is later; provided,
however, that this limitation shall not prevent the institution of a suit for
the collection of any tax due or determined to be due in the following
cases:
(1) Where no declaration or return was filed by any person although a
declaration or return was required to be filed by him under the
provisions of this article.
(2) In the case of a false or fraudulent declaration or return with the
intent to evade tax.
(3) Where any person has deducted taxes under the provision of this
article and has failed to pay the amounts so deducted to the
Borough.
A. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
per annum on the amount of said tax and an additional penalty of 1/2 of
1% of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction thereof
during which the tax remains unpaid shall be added and collected.
Where suit is brought for the recovery of any such tax, the person liable
therefor shall be liable, in addition, for the costs of collection and the
interest and penalties herein imposed.
B. Should any amount of the tax not be paid by a taxpayer when due,
because of his negligence or intentional disregard of the provisions of
this article and the rules and regulations thereunder, without the intent
§ 225-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-32
1:413
§ 225-33. Disputed payments.
The Income Tax Administrator is hereby authorized to accept payment of
the amount of tax claimed by the Borough in any case where any person
disputes the validity or amount of the Borough's claim for the tax. If it is
thereafter judicially determined by a court of competent jurisdiction that
there has been an overpayment to the Income Tax Officer, the amount of the
overpayment shall be refunded to the person who paid.
§ 225-34. Exempted activities and income.
to defraud, then in that event the Income Tax Administrator shall assess
and collect 5% of the deficiency as an added penalty.
C. Should any amount of tax not be paid by a taxpayer when due because
of fraud of the taxpayer, then in that event 50% of the deficiency shall
be assessed and collected by the Income Tax Administrator as a
penalty; provided, however, that should a penalty be imposed
hereunder for fraud, no penalty for failure to file a return shall be
imposed for the same deficiency.
D. In case of any failure to make and file a return required by this article
within the time prescribed by this article, unless it is shown that such
failure is due to reasonable cause and not due to willful neglect, there
shall be added to the tax 5% if the failure is for not more than 30 days,
and an additional 5% for each additional 30 days or fraction thereof
during which such failure continues, not to exceed 25% in the
aggregate. The amount so added to any tax shall be collected at the
same time and in the same manner as part of the tax, unless the tax has
been paid before the discovery of the neglect, in which case the amount
so added shall be collected in the same manner as the tax.
A. The tax imposed by this article shall not apply:
(1) To any person as to whom it is beyond the legal power of the
Borough to impose the tax herein provided for under the
Constitution and laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(2) To any institution or organization operated for public, religious,
educational or charitable purposes, to any institution or
organization not organized or operated for private profit or to a
trust or a foundation established for any of the said purposes.
(3) To the net profits of any corporation which is subject to the
Pennsylvania Corporate Net Income Tax or exempt from the
Pennsylvania Corporate Net Income Tax, and any foreign
corporation which is subject to the Pennsylvania Franchise Tax or
exempt from the Pennsylvania Franchise Tax.
B. This section shall not be construed to exempt any person who is an
employer from the duty of collecting the tax at source from his
§ 225-32 DANVILLE CODE § 225-34
1:414
§ 225-35. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-14-1975 by Ord. No.
258]
employees and paying the amount collected to the Borough under the
provisions of § 225-28.
A. Any person who fails, neglects or refuses to keep necessary records and
supply the information required by this article or the rules and
regulations pertaining thereto, to make any declaration or return
required by this article; any employer who fails, neglects or refuses to
deduct and/or to pay the tax deducted from his employees; any person
who refuses to permit the Income Tax Administrator or any agent
properly designated by him to examine his books, records and papers
and any person who makes any incomplete, false or fraudulent return to
avoid the payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed by this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $500 for each offense and costs, and in default of payment of
said fine and costs, to be imprisoned in the Montour County Jail for a
period not exceeding 30 days.163
B. Any person who, except as permitted by the provisions of § 225-30,
divulges any information which is confidential under the provisions of
said section, shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $500 for each offense and costs, and in default of
payment of said fine and costs, to be imprisoned in the Montour County
Jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.164
C. The penalties imposed under this section shall be in addition to any
other penalty imposed by any other section of this article.
D. The failure of any person to receive or procure the forms required for
making any declaration or return required by this article shall not
excuse him from making such declaration or return.
163. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
164. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-35
1:415

ARTICLE IV
Real Estate Transfer Tax
[Adopted 6-14-1983 by Ord. No. 296 (Ch. 121, Art. V, of the 1975
Code)]
§ 225-36. Legislative authority.
This article is enacted under the authority of the Act of Assembly No. 511,
1965, December 31, P.L. 1257, effective January 1, 1966, entitled the "Local
Tax Enabling Act."165
§ 225-37. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Danville, County of Montour and State of
Pennsylvania.
PERSON — Any natural person, association, copartnership, firm or
corporation.
RECORDER — The Recorder of Deeds of Montour County, her successors in
office and their respective deputies.
TRANSFEREE — The person buying, acquiring or otherwise receiving
ownership of real property or of any interest therein.
TRANSFEROR — The person selling, conveying or otherwise transferring
ownership of real property or any interest therein.
VALUE OF REAL PROPERTY or PROPERTY INTEREST — The actual
consideration paid or payable, including the amount of any mortgage, bond,
note or other obligation forming a part of the consideration, for any real
property or interest in real property. If no consideration is stated in the
instrument of transfer, or the transfer shall be a gift, except as hereinafter
otherwise stated, then the value shall be the fair market value thereof.
§ 225-38. Levy and imposition of tax.
There is hereby levied, assessed and imposed for the year beginning
January 1, 1984, a tax, at the rate hereinafter provided, upon the transfer
of real property and any interest in real property situate in the Borough
of Danville, regardless of where the instruments affecting the transfers are
made, executed or delivered or where actual settlement on such transfers
takes place.
165. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 225-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-39
1:417
§ 225-39. Amount of tax.
The tax hereby levied, assessed and imposed shall be at the rate of 1/2 of
1% of the value of the real property transferred, whether or not such value
is stated in the document evidencing the transfer.
§ 225-40. Obligation to pay.
The tax hereby levied, assessed and imposed shall be paid by the transferee,
but nothing herein contained shall be construed as prohibiting the payment
of the tax by the transferor. Payment of the tax by the transferor shall
discharge the transferee's obligation and liability for payment of the tax.
§ 225-41. When tax is payable.
The tax hereby levied, assessed and imposed shall be payable when the
transfer of the real property or of the interest in real property shall be
completed and must be paid at the time of the recording of the deed or other
instrument evidencing the transfer.
§ 225-42. Exemptions.
The following transfers of real property or of interest in real property are
exempt from the payment of the tax hereby imposed as follows:
A. All transfers to religious, charitable or nonprofit educational
organizations.
B. When the transfer is by will or mortgage.
C. When the transfer is by inheritance under the Intestate Laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
D. On a transfer by the owner of previously occupied residential premises
to a builder of new residential premises when such previously occupied
residential premises is taken in trade by such builder as part of the
consideration from the purchase of a new, previously unoccupied
single-family residential premises.
E. On the transfer between corporations operating housing projects
pursuant to the housing and redevelopment assistance law and the
shareholders thereof.
F. On a transfer between nonprofit industrial development agencies and
industrial corporations purchasing from them.
G. On a transfer to nonprofit industrial development agencies.
H. On a transfer between husband and wife.
I. On a transfer between persons who were previously husband and wife,
but who have since been divorced, provided that such transfer is made
within three months of the date of the granting of the final decree in
§ 225-39 DANVILLE CODE § 225-42
1:418
§ 225-43. Collection; recording of tax paid.
The Recorder of Deeds of Montour County is hereby appointed the agent
for the Borough of Danville to collect the tax hereby imposed. The Recorder
shall refuse to accept or record any instrument for the transfer of real
property or of any interest in real property unless and until the tax hereby
imposed shall have been paid. Upon the payment of the tax to the Recorder,
said officer is authorized to note on the instrument of transfer the receipt
of the tax by him, the date thereof and the amount of tax paid. No other
receipt for the payment of the tax shall be required. The Recorder shall
account to the Borough monthly for all taxes received by her during the
preceding month, with the name or names of the grantors and grantees,
the consideration stated in the instrument or, in the absence of a stated
consideration, the market value placed thereon at the time of the recording
by the grantee.
§ 225-44. Unpaid taxes.
All taxes under this article which are due and unpaid shall bear interest at
the rate of 10% per year, and such taxes and interest and any penalties may
divorce, and the property or interest therein subject to such transfer
was acquired by the husband and wife, or husband or wife, prior to the
granting of the final decree in divorce.
J. On a transfer between parent and child or the spouse of such child.
K. On a transfer between parent and trustee for the benefit of a child or
the spouse of such child.
L. On a transfer between a principal and straw party for the purpose of
placing a mortgage or ground rent upon said premises.
M. On a transfer of a correctional deed without consideration.
N. On a transfer to the United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
or to any of their instrumentalities, agencies or political subdivisions by
gift, dedication or deed in lieu of condemnation or deed of confirmation
in connection with condemnation proceedings, or reconveyance which
may include property line adjustments, provided that said
reconveyance is made within one year from the date of condemnation.
O. On any leases on real estate or on a conveyance to a trustee under a
recorded trust agreement for the express purpose of holding title in
trust as security for a debt contracted at the time of the conveyance,
under which the trustee is not the lender and requiring the trustee to
make reconveyance to the grantor/borrower upon the repayment of the
debt.
P. On a privilege, transaction, subject, occupation or personal property
which is not or does hereafter become subject to a state tax or license
fee.
§ 225-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-44
1:419
be collected as other taxes are collected, or a municipal lien may be filed
against the real estate so transferred, in accordance with the Municipal
Lien Act of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.166
§ 225-45. Penalty for late payment.
If any tax levied pursuant to this article shall not be paid when due, there
shall be added to the tax a penalty of 10% of the amount of the tax due, in
addition to the interest hereinabove provided.
§ 225-46. Effective date.
This article shall become effective July 1, 1983, and shall apply to all
transfers of real property or interest in real property which occur on or after
January 1, 1984.
166. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 225-44 DANVILLE CODE § 225-46
1:420
ARTICLE V
Tax Collector Fees
[Adopted 4-12-2005 by Ord. No. 465; amended in its entirety at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 225-47. Returned checks.
A fee in an amount as set by resolution of the Borough Council is hereby
imposed on all returned checks.
§ 225-48. Issuance of tax certifications.
A fee in an amount as set by resolution of the Borough Council is hereby
imposed for the issuance of tax certifications.
§ 225-49. Duplicate tax bills.
A fee in an amount as set by resolution of the Borough Council is hereby
imposed on all requests for a duplicate bill.
§ 225-49.1. Copy fee. [Added 5-12-2015 by Ord. No. 526]
A fee in an amount as set by resolution of the Borough Council is hereby
imposed on all copies that are requested.
§ 225-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-49.1
1:421

ARTICLE VI
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 12-11-2007 by Ord. No. 487]
§ 225-50. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
EMERGENCY AND MUNICIPAL SERVICE TAX — A tax per year levied on
each engagement in any occupation, as herein defined, within the corporate
limits of the Borough of Danville during the fiscal year 2008 and in each and
every year thereafter.[Amended 11-8-2011 by Ord. No. 507]
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, corporation,
governmental body, agency or other entity employing one or more persons
on a salary, wage, commission or other compensation basis, including a selfemployed
person.
INCOME — Earned income and net profits from sources within the Borough
of Danville.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation,
trade or profession within the corporate limits of the Borough of Danville
who attains or is over the age of 18 years on the first day of January, 2008,
and on the first day of January in each and every year thereafter.
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, carried on or
performed within the corporate limits of the Borough of Danville for which
compensation is charged or received whether by means of salary, wages,
commissions, net profits, retained earnings or fees for services rendered.
TAX RECEIVER — The person designated by the Borough of Danville for the
collection of the local services tax.[Amended 11-8-2011 by Ord. No. 507]
§ 225-51. Levy and amount of tax.
The Borough of Danville hereby levies and imposes, on each individual
engaged in an occupation during the fiscal year of 2008 and during each
and every year thereafter within the corporate limits of the Borough of
Danville, a Local Services Tax. Each individual engaged in an occupation,
as hereinbefore defined within the Borough of Danville, shall be required
to pay a Local Services Tax in the amount of $52 per annum. The revenue
derived from this tax shall be used for police, fire or road maintenance
purposes. This tax is in addition to all other taxes of any kind or nature
heretofore levied by the Borough of Danville.
§ 225-52. Exemptions and refunds.
§ 225-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-52
1:423
A. Exemptions. Individuals earning less than $12,000 per annum shall be
exempt from this tax. In addition, the following persons are exempt
from payment of the tax:
(1) Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which
the United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or double
or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or its
successor to be a total 100% disability.
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. For the purposes of this subsection, "reserve
component of the armed forces" shall mean the United States Army
Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air
Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
B. Procedure to claim exemption.
(1) A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax
may annually file an exemption certificate with the political
subdivision and with the person's employer affirming that the
person reasonably expects to receive earned income and net profits
from all sources within the political subdivision of less than
$12,000 in the calendar year for which the exemption certificate is
filed. The exemption certificate shall have attached to it a copy of
all the employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms from employment
within the political subdivision for the year prior to the fiscal year
for which the employee is requesting to be exempted from the tax.
Upon receipt of the exemption certificate and until otherwise
instructed by the political subdivision or except as required by
Subsection B(2), the employer shall not withhold the tax from the
person during the calendar year or the remainder of the calendar
year for which the exemption certificate applies. Employers shall
ensure that the exemption forms are readily available to employees
at all times and shall furnish each new employee with a form at the
time of hiring. The exemption certificate form shall be the uniform
form provided by the political subdivision.
(2) With respect to a person who claimed an exemption for a given
calendar year from the tax, upon notification to an employer by the
person or by the political subdivision that the person has received
earned income and net profits from all sources within the political
subdivision equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or
that the person is otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for that
calendar year, or upon and employer's payment to the person of
earned income within the municipality in an amount equal to or in
§ 225-52 DANVILLE CODE § 225-52
1:424
§ 225-53. Duty of employers.167
Each employer within the Borough of Danville, as well as those employers
situated outside the Borough of Danville but who engage in business within
the Borough of Danville, is hereby charged with the duty of collecting from
each of his employees engaged by him and performing for him within the
Borough of Danville the annual local services tax and making a return and
payment thereof to the Tax Receiver. Said tax should be withheld from
each employee pro rated as total tax divided by number of payroll periods
established by the employer for the calendar year. Further, each employer
is hereby authorized to deduct this tax from each employee in his employ,
whether said employee is paid by salary, wages or commission and whether
or not part of or all of such services are performed within the Borough of
Danville.
excess of $12,000 in that calendar year, an employer shall withhold
the local services tax from the person under Subsection B(3).
(3) If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year
from the tax becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year under
Subsection B(2), the employer shall withhold the tax for the
remainder of that calendar year. The employer shall withhold from
the person, for the first payroll period after receipt of the
notification under Subsection B(2), a lump sum equal to the amount
of tax that was not withheld from the person due to the exemption
claimed by the person under this subsection, plus the per payroll
amount due for the first payroll period. The amount of tax withheld
per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in that
calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for other
employees. In the event the employment of a person subject to
withholding of the tax under this subsection is subsequently
severed in that calendar year, the person shall be liable for any
outstanding balance of tax due, and the political subdivision may
pursue collection under this article.
(4) Except as provided in Subsection Blause (2), it is the intent of this
subsection that employers shall not be responsible for investigating
exemption certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or
exempting any employee from the local services tax.
C. Refunds. The Tax Receiver, in consultation with DCED, shall establish
procedures for the processing of refund claims for any tax paid by any
person who is eligible for exemption, which procedures shall be in
accord with provision of the general municipal law relating to refunds
of overpayments and interest on overpayments. Any refunds made shall
not be subject to interest. No refunds shall be made for amounts
overpaid in a calendar year that do not exceed $1. The Tax Receiver
shall determine eligibility for exemption and provide refund to exempt
persons.
167. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-54
1:425
§ 225-54. Return.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of
the tax on forms to be supplied to him/her by the Borough of Danville.
It is further provided that if the employer fails to file said return and
pay said tax, whether or not he makes collection thereof from the salary,
wages or commissions paid by him to said employee, the employer shall be
responsible for the payment of the tax in full as though the tax had originally
been levied against him/her.
§ 225-55. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
In each tax year, each employer shall use his or her employment records to
determine the number of employees from whom such tax shall be deducted
and paid over to the Tax Receiver on or before the 30th day following the
end of each calendar quarter of each such calendar tax year.
§ 225-56. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation.
§ 225-57. Self-employed individuals.
All self-employed individuals who perform services of any type or kind or
engage in any occupation or profession within the Borough of Danville
shall be required to comply with this article and pay the tax to the Tax
Receiver on or before April 30, 2008, or thereafter in accordance with
A. Each individual who shall have more than one occupation within the
Borough of Danville shall be subject to the payment of this tax on his
principal occupation, and his principal employer shall deduct this tax
and deliver to him evidence of deductions on a form to be furnished to
the employer by the Tax Receiver, which form shall be evidence of
deductions having been made, and when presented to any other
employer shall be authority for such employer to not deduct this tax
from the employee's wages, but to include such employee on his return
by setting forth his name, address and the name and account number of
the employer who deducted this tax.
B. The situs of such tax shall be the place of employment, but, in the event
a person is engaged in more than one occupation, or an occupation
which requires his working in more than one political subdivision
during the calendar year, the priority of claim to collect such local
services tax shall be in the following order:
(1) First. The political subdivision in which a person maintains his
principal office or is principally employed;
(2) Second. The political subdivision in which the person resides and
works, if such tax is levied by that political subdivision;
(3) Third. The political subdivision in which the person is employed
and which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home.
§ 225-54 DANVILLE CODE § 225-57
1:426
the payment schedule specified in § 225-55 above in the event that said
individual becomes subject to this article after March 31, 2008.
§ 225-58. Employers and self-employed individuals residing outside
of Borough.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places
of business outside of the Borough of Danville, but who perform services
of any type or kind or engage in any occupation or profession within the
Borough of Danville, do by virtue thereof agree to be bound by and subject
themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under
this article with the same force and effect as though they were residents of
the Borough of Danville. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation
within the Borough of Danville and an employee of a nonresident employer
may, for the purpose of this article, be considered a self-employed person,
and in the event this tax is not paid, the Borough shall have the option of
proceeding against either the employer or employee for the collection of
this tax, as hereinafter provided.
§ 225-59. Administration of tax.
§ 225-60. Suits for collection.
A. It shall be the duty of the Tax Receiver to accept and receive payments
of this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the amount received by
him/her from each employer or self-employed person, together with the
date the tax was received.
B. The Tax Receiver is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby charged and empowered to
prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules and regulations relating to any
matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this article,
including provisions for the examination of the payroll records of any
employer subject to this article, the examination and correction of any
return made in compliance with this article and any payment alleged or
found to be incorrect or as to which overpayment is claimed or found to
have occurred. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Tax
Receiver shall have the right to appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of
Montour County, as in other cases provided.
C. The Tax Receiver is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer, in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by an employer, or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax
due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the Tax
Receiver the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due date above set forth, the Tax Receiver may sue for
the recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article, together
with interest and penalty.
§ 225-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-60
1:427
§ 225-61. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article, or who refuses inspection of his books, records or accounts in
his custody and control setting forth the number of employees subject to
this tax who are in his employment, or whoever fails or refuses to file any
return and pay the tax as required by this article, shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300 for each offense
and in default of payment of said fine be imprisoned in Montour County
Prison for a period not exceeding 30 days for each offense. It is further
provided that the action to enforce the fine and penalty herein provided may
be instituted against any person in charge of the business of any employer
who has failed or refuses to file a return required by this article.
§ 225-62. Validity.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
on the amount of said tax shall be calculated beginning with the due
date of said tax and, a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat rate of
said tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery
of this tax, the individual liable therefor shall, in addition, be
responsible and liable for the costs of collection.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
Borough of Danville to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any
occupation not within the taxing power of the Borough under the
Constitution of the United States and the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of
the tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
§ 225-60 DANVILLE CODE § 225-62
1:428
ARTICLE VII
Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance (LERTA)
[Adopted 7-12-2016 by Ord. No. 535]
§ 225-63. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of terms and phrases used in this article shall be as follows:
ACT or LERTA — The Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance Act of
the Commonwealth, Act No. 1977-76, as amended and supplemented.168
BOROUGH — The Borough of Danville, Montour County, Pennsylvania,
acting by and through its Borough Council or, in appropriated cases, acting
by and through its authorized representatives.
COMMONWEALTH — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
COUNTY — The County of Montour, Pennsylvania, acting by and through
its Board of County Commissioners, or, in appropriate cases, acting by and
through its authorized representatives.
DESIGNATED AREA — The area within the Borough identified in § 225-64
of this article.
ELIGIBLE PROPERTY — Any industrial, commercial or other business
property located in the designated area.
IMPROVEMENT — Repair, construction or reconstruction, including
alterations and additions, having the effect of rehabilitating any industrial,
commercial or other business property owned by an individual, association
or corporation and located in the designated area. "Improvements" does not
include any ordinary upkeep or maintenance.
LOCAL TAXING AUTHORITY — Shall mean and include the Borough, the
county and the school district.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, society, trust,
corporation, municipality, municipality authority or other group or entity.
SCHOOL DISTRICT — The Danville School District, Montour County,
Pennsylvania, acting by and through its Board of School Directors, or, in
appropriate cases, acting by and through its authorized representatives.
§ 225-64. Designated area.
A. This Borough does hereby designate the area located within the
following boundaries as a "deteriorated area" within the meaning of the
Act, and one in which the local taxing authorities may grant a tax
exemption pursuant to the provisions of the Act: The Neighborhood
Commercial District, the Central Business District, the General
Business District, the Highway Commercial District, the Industrial
District, Tax Parcel No. 12-89-141, a designated brownfield consisting
168. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 4722 et seq.
§ 225-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-64
1:429
§ 225-65. Exemptions.
of 7.428 acres (as defined by the Danville Borough Zoning Map,
Ordinance No. 5142013, adopted September 10, 2013).
B. Any discrepancy between the description of the designated area in this
§ 225-64 and the area designated for the purposes of LERTA in the
LERTA District Ordinance shall be resolved in favor of the LERTA
District Ordinance, it being the intent of the local taxing authority to
grant exemption to all new construction and improvements to the
eligible property within the area designated by the municipality.
A. There is hereby exempted from all real property taxation of this local
taxing authority that portion of the additional assessment attributable
to the actual costs of new construction upon, or improvements to,
eligible property for which proper application has been made in
accordance with this article, subject to the limitations hereinafter set
forth.
B. The exemption authorized by this article shall be in accordance with the
provisions and limitations hereinafter set forth.
C. The schedule of the real property taxes to be exempted shall be in
accordance with the following percentage of the assessed valuation of
new construction or improvements to eligible property:
Tax Year(s) Following Completion
of Construction
Exempt Portion of Assessed
Valuation
1st year 100%
2nd year 90%
3rd year 75%
4th year 60%
5th year 45%
6th year 30%
7th year 15%
D. A tax exemption granted under this article shall first apply in the tax
year of this local taxing authority immediately following the tax year in
which the eligible new construction or improvements is or are
completed. Nothing in this article is intended to limit or prohibit, nor
shall it be construed as limiting or prohibiting, the levy of interim real
property taxes upon new construction or improvements prior to
completion thereof.
E. A tax exemption granted under this article shall be upon the property
exempted and shall not terminate upon the sale or exchange of the
property.
§ 225-64 DANVILLE CODE § 225-65
1:430
F. Any person who is an owner of eligible property and who desires tax
exemption pursuant to this article with respect to new construction or
improvements on an eligible property shall apply in writing for such
exemption on a form to be provided by this local taxing authority at the
address set forth on such form, or if no address is set forth thereon, at
the principal office of this local taxing authority, and must be received
by this local taxing authority within 60 days following the date of
issuance of a building permit for the new construction or improvements
with respect to which exemption is desired or, if no building permit is
required and no other notification of new construction or improvements
is required to be given to the Borough, within 60 days following
commencement of construction.
G. This local taxing body shall make available to any person desiring to
apply for a tax exemption in accordance with this article an application
form (the "application"), which shall require such person to supply the
following information:
(1) The name of the owner or owners of the eligible property;
(2) The location of the eligible property, including the tax parcel
identification number or numbers assigned to such property for
real property tax purposes;
(3) The type of new construction or improvements to be made on the
eligible property;
(4) The nature of the improvements to be made to the eligible
property;
(5) The date on which the relevant building permit was issued or, if no
building permit is required, the date on which construction
commenced or the estimated date on which it shall commence, as
appropriate;
(6) The cost or estimated cost of the new construction or
improvements;
(7) Such additional information as this local taxing authority may
reasonably require.
H. The Borough Manager or another appropriate official of this local
taxing authority shall forward a copy of such completed application to
the county and school district within 60 days following the date on
which such application is filed with this local taxing authority, together
with a request or authorization to such board or other appropriate
assessment agency that, following completion of the new construction
or improvements in accordance with LERTA, the application be
approved, and give appropriate notice to this local taxing authority and
the taxpayer.
§ 225-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-65
1:431
§ 225-66. Termination of exemption.
The tax exemption shall be forfeited by the original applicant and/or any
subsequent owner for failure to pay nonexempt real estate taxes by their
due date on the exempt property.
§ 225-67. When effective.
This article shall become effective immediately.
§ 225-68. Severability.
In the event any provision, section, sentence, clause or part of this article
shall be held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect or impair any
remaining provision, section, sentence clause or part of the article, it being
the intent of the Borough that such remainder shall be and shall remain in
full force and effect.
§ 225-69. Declaration of purpose.
It is declared that enactment of the article and the provisions hereof are
necessary for the protection, benefit and preservation of the health, safety
and welfare of inhabitants of this Borough.
I. Appeals from the reassessment of an eligible property and the amounts
eligible for exemption may be taken by the taxpayer or this local taxing
authority as provided by law.
J. The cost of new construction or improvements to be exempted and the
schedule of taxes exempted at the time of an initial request for tax
exemption made in accordance with the further provisions of this
article shall be applicable to that exemption request, and any
subsequent amendment to this article, if any, shall not apply to
applications filed with this local taxing authority prior to their adoption.
§ 225-65 DANVILLE CODE § 225-69
1:432
Chapter 231
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 180. Streets, sidewalks and driveways — See Ch.
216.
§ 231-1. Injuring trees; cutting or trimming.
§ 231-2. Killing trees; removal.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, without
permission from the Borough Code Officer to cut, break, climb or injure
any tree or portion of a tree planted or growing in any public highway
or public park of the Borough of Danville, or cause, authorize or
procure any person to cut, climb, break, or injure any such tree or
portion thereof; or to injure, misuse or remove, or cause, authorize or
procure any person to injure, misuse or remove, any device set for the
protection of any tree or plant in any public highway or public park in
the Borough of Danville. Any person, firm or corporation desiring for
any lawful purpose to cut, prune or trim any tree in any public highway
or public park of the Borough of Danville may apply to the Borough
Code Office; and if, in the judgment of the Borough Code Officer, the
desired cutting, pruning or trimming shall appear necessary, the
Borough Code Officer may authorize such work.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, without
permission from the Borough Council to cut, break, climb, or injure any
tree or portion of a tree planted or growing in any public highway or
public park within the Central Business District of the Borough of
Danville, or cause, authorize or procedure any person to cut, climb,
break, or injure any such tree or portion thereof; or to injure, misuse or
remove, or cause, authorize or procure any person to injure, misuse or
remove, any device set for the protection of any tree or plant in any
public highway or public park within the Central Business District in
the Borough of Danville. Any person, firm or corporation desiring for
any lawful purpose to cut, prune or trim any tree in any public highway
or public park within the Central Business District of the Borough of
Danville may apply to the Borough Council; and if, in the judgment of
the Borough Council, the desired cutting, pruning or trimming shall
appear necessary, the Borough Council may authorize such work.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to kill or remove,
or cause, authorize or procure the death or removal of, any tree planted
or growing in any public highway or public park of the Borough of
Danville. Any person, firm or corporation desiring for any lawful
purpose to take down or remove any tree in any public highway or park
§ 225-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 231-2
1:433
§ 231-3. Injurious substances.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning, using
or having control or charge of gas, hot water, steam or other substance
deleterious to tree life to allow such gas, hot water, steam or other
substances to come into contact with the soil surrounding the roots of any
tree in any public highway or of any tree or plant in any public park of the
Borough of Danville in such manner as may injure such tree or plant.
§ 231-4. Injuring soil around trees.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning, using
or having control or charge of gas, hot water, steam or other substance
deleterious to tree life to allows such gas, hot water, steam or other
substance to come in contact with the soil surrounding the roots of any tree
in any public highway or tree or plant in any public par in the Borough of
Danville in such manner as shall kill or destroy such tree or plant.
§ 231-5. Injurious liquids.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to cause or authorize
or procure any brine water, oil, liquid dye or other substance deleterious to
tree life to lie, leak, pour, flow or drip on or into the soil about the base of a
tree in any public highway or public park of the Borough of Danville or on a
sidewalk, road or pavement therein at a point whence such substance may
be lying on or flowing, dripping or seeping into such soil, or in any other
manner whatever injure such trees, or cause to procure such soil, or in any
other manner whatever injure such trees, or to cause or procure such lying,
leaking, flowing, seeping, dripping or injury.
§ 231-6. Obstructing access of air and water to roots.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation except with the
authorization of the Borough Code Officer, to place or maintain upon the
ground of any public highway or public park, within the Borough of Danville
any stone, cement or other material or substance in such manner as may
obstruct free access of air and water to the roots of any tree in any such
of said Borough may apply to the Borough Code Officer; and if, in the
judgment of the Code Officer, the desired taking down or removal shall
appear necessary, the Code Officer may thereupon authorize such work.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to kill or remove,
or cause, authorize or procure the death or removal of, any tree planted
or growing in any public highway or public park within the Central
Business District of the Borough of Danville. Any person, firm or
corporation desiring for any lawful purpose to take down or remove any
tree in any public highway or park within the Central Business District
of said Borough may apply to the Borough Council; and if, in the
judgment of the Borough Council, the desired taking down or removal
shall appear necessary, the Council ay thereupon authorize such work.
§ 231-2 DANVILLE CODE § 231-6
1:434
highway or park. Unless otherwise provided by the Code Officer, there must
be maintained about the base of the trunk of each shade tree in the public
highways and public parks of the Borough at lest six square feet of open
ground for a tree of three inches in diameter, and for every two inches of
increase of such diameter there must be in increase of at least one square
foot of open ground.
§ 231-7. Interfering with authorized personnel.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to interfere or to
cause or authorize or procure an interference with the Borough Council
or any of its employees, agents or servants while they are engaged in and
about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing
of any tree in any public highway or public park within the Borough of
Danville, or in the removing of any device attached to said tree or in such
removing of stone, cement sidewalk or other material or substance as may
be necessary for the protection and care of any such tree in accordance with
the requirements set forth in § 231-6 hereof as to the area of open ground to
be maintained about the base of the trunk of each shade tree in the public
highways and public parks of the Borough.
§ 231-8. Electrical wires injuring trees.
It shall be unlawful for any person firm or corporation to cause, authorize
or procure a wire or other conductor, charged with electricity, to come in
contact with any tree in a public highway or with any tree or plant in any
public park of the Borough of Danville in such manner as may injure or
abrade such tree or plant.
§ 231-9. Electrical wires destroying trees.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to cause or authorize
or procure a wire or other conductor, charged with electricity, to come into
contact with any tree in any public highway or tree or plant in any public
park in the Borough of Danville in such manner as shall destroy or kill such
tree or plant.
§ 231-10. Attaching articles to trees.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, to attach or keep
attached to any tree in any public highway or public park in the Borough of
Danville, or to the guard or stake intended for the protection of such tree,
any rope, wire, sign or other device whatsoever.
§ 231-11. Fastening animals to trees.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to tie any animal to
any tree in any public highway or public park in the Borough of Danville, or,
having charge of such animal, to allow or cause or procure it to injure any
such tree, or for any person to charge of such animal to cause or allow it to
stand so that it can injure such tree.
§ 231-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 231-12
1:435
§ 231-12. Planting.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to plant or set out
any shade tree, or cause or authorize or procure any person to plant or set
out any shade tree, in or on any part of the public highway or public park
within the said Borough of Danville, without first obtaining permission from
the Borough Code Officer.
§ 231-13. Protecting the trees during building construction.
During the erection, repair, alteration or removal of any building or
structure within the Borough of Danville, it shall be unlawful for the person
or persons in charge of such repair, alteration or removal to leave any street
tree in the vicinity of such building without good and sufficient guards or
protectors as shall prevent injury to said tree arising out of or by reason of
said erection, repair, alteration or removal.
§ 231-14. Planting of certain trees adjacent to streets.
On and after the enactment of this chapter, it shall be unlawful to plant or
maintain any poplar or willow trees in the footwalks, streets, or other public
places, or immediately adjacent thereto, in the Borough of Danville.
§ 231-15. Certain trees declared nuisances.
Any and all trees growing in footwalks, streets or other public places of
the Borough, or immediately adjacent thereto, which now have become or
threaten to hereafter become destructive or injurious to pavements, curbs,
sewers, walls or other public or private structure, are hereby declared to
be a public nuisance, to be abated according to law and as hereinafter
provided.
§ 231-16. Approval for planting in certain places.
Persons desiring to plant trees in footwalks, streets or other public places,
or immediately adjacent thereto, shall first secure the approval and consent
of the Borough Code Officer in respect to the kind of tree and the location
of planting, which approval and consent shall be refused if, in the opinion of
the Code Officer, such trees may hereafter become destructive or injurious
to walks, pavements, sewers or other public or private structures.
§ 231-17. Removal of injurious trees; costs.
A. All such existing poplar, willow or other trees which the Borough Code
Officer, upon inspection, shall find and declare to be injurious or
destructive to walks, pavements, curbs, walls or other public or private
structures shall be removed, below grade and including stump by the
abutting property owner at the expense of the abutting property owner.
B. All such existing poplar, willow or other trees which the Superintendent
of the Sewage Treatment Plant, upon inspection, shall find and declare
§ 231-12 DANVILLE CODE § 231-17
1:436
§ 231-18. Obstruction of streets and sidewalks.
It shall not be lawful for any owner or owners of property or properties
to permit the limbs, broken tops or branches of any tree or trees, either
along the public streets, pavements, sidewalks or alleys or in lots adjacent
thereto or elsewhere within the limits of the Borough of Danville, to grow
or remain so near the ground thereunder as to obstruct in any manner
free passage upon and over such public streets, pavements, sidewalks or
alleys, respectively. It shall be the duty of the Borough Code Officer, or other
persons duly authorized by the Borough Council, after five days' notice to
such owner or owners of such property or properties, in such behalf, to cut
away and remove such obstruction or obstructions at the proper charge and
expense of such owner or owners.
§ 231-19. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 237
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Reckless driving — See Ch. 188. Junked vehicles — See Ch. 243.
to be injurious or destructive to the sewer system, including laterals,
shall be removed, below grade and including stump, by the abutting
property owner at the expense of the abutting property owner.
A. Any person, firm or corporation which shall violate or authorize or
procure a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, forfeit and pay a fine not exceeding $300 for each
and every such offense.
B. Every violation by the same person, firm or corporation of any provision
or of any section of this chapter which continues on any day or days
succeeding the first violation thereof shall constitute an additional
violation for each of the succeeding days.
C. All fines, penalties, charges or expenses whatsoever imposed or
incurred by any of the provisions of this chapter may be sued for,
collected and recovered before any Magisterial District Judge of the
Borough of Danville, as debts of like amount and fines and penalties
imposed for the violation of Borough ordinances are now by law
collectible and recoverable, and shall be paid over to the Treasurer of
the Borough the use of the said Borough.
§ 231-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 231-19
1:437

ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 237-1. Definitions and interpretation.
§ 237-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances or parts of ordinances or as amendments to ordinances of
the Borough of Danville, except for stop intersections, which shall be as
designated by resolution of the Borough Council.
§ 237-3. Temporary and emergency regulations.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania, as now in force,
or as hereafter amended, enacted or reenacted,169 except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning.
B. As used in this chapter, the following additional terms and term uses
shall have the meanings indicated:
COMMUTER VEHICLE — A motor vehicle parked in a residential area
by a person not a resident of that residential area.
GUEST — A person on the premises with the actual or implied consent
of an occupant.
MANAGER — An adult individual designated by the owner of a
residential rental unit.
OCCUPANT — Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having
possession of a space within a building.
OWNER — Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a
legal or equitable interest in a business, church, nonprofit organization
or property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county
or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having
control of the business, church, nonprofit organization or property,
including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the
executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take
possession of real property by a court.
C. The term "legal holidays," as used in this chapter, shall mean and
include: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas, or days celebrated as such.
D. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
169. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 237-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-3
1:439
§ 237-4. Experimental regulations.
§ 237-5. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the police officers of the Borough of
Danville, who are hereby given authority to direct traffic on the highways
and intersections of the Borough in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter and the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
A. The Mayor shall have the following powers to regulate traffic and
parking temporarily and in times of emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations;
(2) In the case of an emergency or to facilitate public works, or in the
conduct of parades, processions or public events, to restrict or
prohibit traffic and/or parking in limited areas for periods of not
more than 72 hours.
B. Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Mayor and Police Department in the same manner as permanent
regulations. Any person who shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in
violation of any such regulation, or who shall move, remove, destroy,
injure or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made to give
notice of any such regulation, shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to
the penalty set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a
violation of such nature.
A. The Borough Council may, from time to time, designate places upon and
along the highways in the Borough where, for a period of not more than
90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations, prohibitions and
restrictions shall be in force and effect, and shall designate such
locations by proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions
and restrictions shall be effective just as if they had been specified in
this chapter. No person shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in
violation of any such regulation, prohibition or restriction, and no
person shall move, remove, destroy or deface any sign or marking
erected, posted or made by authority of this section.
B. The purpose of this section is to allow for the test and experimental
determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent changes
in the ordinances of the Borough relative to traffic and parking.
§ 237-3 DANVILLE CODE § 237-5
1:440
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 237-6. Operation of vehicles in certain locations.
§ 237-7. Speed limits established.
The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the highways or parts
thereof described below is hereby established at the rate of speed indicated.
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Beaver Place [Added
1-10-2017 by Ord. No.
540]
25 From Montour Street South
to Montour Street North
Bloom Street 35 From Ferry Street to Line
Street
Bloom Street 25 From Mill Street to Ferry
Street
Cedar Street 15 From East Market Street to
Front Street
Chamber Street 25 From Ferry Street to Lower
Street
Continental Boulevard 35 From Mahoning Street to the
Borough line
First Street 15 From Leighow Street to
Route 54
Friendship Alley 15 From Cedar Street to Iron
Street
Front Street 15 From Mill Street to Railroad
Street
Iron Street 15 From East Market to Front
Street
Line Street 15 From Bloom Street to Center
Street
A. No person shall operate a motor vehicle or tractor upon any sidewalk in
the Borough; nor shall any person operate a motor vehicle upon or
across any sidewalk except in order to gain access to or egress from a
driveway or alley at such locations where the curb, if such sidewalk is
curbed, shall have been properly cut down for the purpose.
B. No person shall operate any vehicle upon the flood control dike in the
Borough of Danville which is adjacent to and parallel with the
Susquehanna River, except where a Borough street is part of the dike.
§ 237-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-7
1:441
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Mahoning Street, West 15 From Front Street to dead
end
Market Street, East 35 From Mill Street to Wall
Street
Market Street, East 25 From Wall Street to the
Borough line
Market Street, West 15 From Front Street to Mill
Street
Mill Street 25 From Flint Street to Spruce
Street
Northumberland Street 25 From Continental Boulevard
to Mill Street
Northumberland Street 35 From Continental Boulevard
to the Borough line to the
west
Railroad Street 25 From East Market Street to
Walnut Street
Spruce Street [Added
11-8-2016 by Ord. No.
537]
25 From Cherry Street to Pine
Street
Wall Street [Added
12-12-2017 by Ord. No.
545]
25 From State Hospital Drive to
Franklin Street
Walnut Street 35 From Church Street to point
708 feet east from the
southeast corner of the
intersection of Railroad
Street and Walnut Street
Walnut Street 35 From Ferry Street to the
Borough line
Walnut Street 25 From Ferry Street to Church
Street
§ 237-8. Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection of
those highways described below:
§ 237-7 DANVILLE CODE § 237-8
1:442
Intersection
Continental Boulevard and Northumberland Street
Ferry Street and Bloom Street
Mill Street and Bloom Street
Mill Street and Market Street
Walnut Street and Railroad Street
§ 237-9. One-way highways established.
The highways or parts of highways described below are hereby designated
as one-way streets in the direction indicated:
Name of Highway
Direction of
Travel Limits
Ash Street North From Bloom Street to Center
Street
B Street North From A Street to A Street
B Street South From Bloom Street to Green
Street
C Street South From Bloom Street to Green
Street
C Street West From B Street to A Street
Canal Street East From Mill Street to Ferry
Street
Cherry Street North From Bloom Street to Center
Street
Chestnut Street South From West Mahoning Street
to West Market Street
Cross Keys Place North From Water Street to Front
Street
D Street East From A Street to B Street
E Street West From B Street to A Street
Eagles Alley West From Mill Street to Factory
Street
Faust Street North From Cooper Street to East
Market Street
Franklin Street West Wall Street to Alton Street (a
distance of 400 feet)
Friendship Alley East From Cedar Street to Iron
Street
§ 237-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-9
1:443
Name of Highway
Direction of
Travel Limits
Front Street East From Mill Street to Railroad
Street
Front Street, East East From Nassau Street to
Honeymoon Street
Grand Street East From Mowery Street to
Faust Street
Honeymoon Street North From Cooper Street to East
Market Street
Jacob Street South From Bloom Street to East
Mahoning Street
Jacobs Alley South From Bloom Street to Lower
Mulberry Street
Kline Street South From Center Street to Bloom
Street
Line Street North From Bloom Street to Center
Street
Lower Mulberry Street East From Mill Street to Church
Street
Mahoning Street, West West From Mill Street to Chestnut
Street
Market Street, West East From Chestnut Street to Mill
Street
Market Street, West West From Railroad Street to Mill
Street
Mowery Street South From East Market Street to
Cooper Street
Memorial Park Alley South From Center Street to Bloom
Street
Park Avenue, east lane North From Market Street to its
terminus
Park Avenue, west lane South From East Market Street to
its terminus
Pine Street North From Walnut Street to
Bloom Street
Railroad Street North From East Front Street to
East Market Street
School Alley (between
Snyder Lane and
Honeymoon Street)
South From East Market Street to
an unnamed alley, a distance
of approximately 150 feet
§ 237-9 DANVILLE CODE § 237-9
1:444
Name of Highway
Direction of
Travel Limits
Steeb Street South From Bloom Street to Green
Street
Unnamed alley East From Mowery Street to
Faust Street
Vine Street South From Center Street to Bloom
Street
Water Street West From Church Street to Cross
Keys Place
§ 237-10. U-turns.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of a motor vehicle or tractor to make a
U-turn on any of the highways or parts thereof described below:
Name of Highway Location
(Reserved)
§ 237-11. Turns at intersections.
No person shall make a turn of the kind designated (left, right, all) at any of
the intersections described below:
Name of
Highway
Direction of
Travel Prohibited Turn
At Intersection
of
Bloom Street West Left on Ferry
Street
Bloom Street,
Ferry Street and
Walnut Street
Walnut Street West Left on Ferry
Street
Bloom Street,
Ferry Street and
Walnut Street
§ 237-12. Center structures at intersections.
All vehicular traffic shall keep to the right of the following structures or
barriers located in the center of the specified intersections:
Structure on
(Name of Highway) At Intersection of
(Reserved)
§ 237-13. Through highways.
The highways described below are hereby established as through highways,
and the operator of every vehicle or tractor, upon approaching any such
§ 237-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-13
1:445
highway at any intersection thereof (except for such intersections where
there are now or shall hereafter be located official traffic signals), shall
come to a full stop, within a reasonable distance, before entering any such
through highway.
Name of Highway Limits
Bloom Street Entire length
Continental Boulevard Entire length
Market Street, East Entire length
Mill Street Entire length
Northumberland Street Entire length
Walnut Street Entire length
§ 237-14. Stop intersections.
The intersections described below are hereby established as stop
intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected in such a position upon
the first-named highway as to face traffic approaching the second-named
highway in the direction or directions indicated. All vehicles and tractors
approaching any such intersection upon the first-named highway, in the
direction or directions indicated in each case, shall come to a full stop,
within a reasonable distance, before entering any such intersection.
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
In locations heretofore or hereafter designated by resolution of the
Borough Council
§ 237-15. Yield-right-of-way intersections.
The intersections described below are hereby established as yield-right-ofway
intersections, and official yield signs shall be erected in such a position
upon the first-named highway as to face traffic approaching the secondnamed
highway in the direction or directions indicated. All vehicles and
tractors approaching any such intersection upon the first-named highway,
in the direction or directions indicated, shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicle in the intersection or approaching on the second-named highway
so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time that the
operator of such vehicle or tractor is moving across or within such
intersection.
Yield Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
(Reserved)
§ 237-13 DANVILLE CODE § 237-16
1:446
§ 237-16. No-passing zones.
The zones described below are hereby established as no-passing zones, and
it shall be unlawful for any person driving a vehicle to pass any other vehicle
which is proceeding in the same direction:
Name of Highway Limits
(Reserved)
§ 237-17. Closing of certain highways to certain vehicles. [Amended
6-9-2015 by Ord. No. 527]
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle or tractor except
a passenger vehicle (but not including any passenger vehicle drawing any
trailer or towing any other vehicle) upon any of the portions of the highways
described below; provided, however, that nothing herein shall prohibit the
operation of any commercial vehicle or tractor upon any highway or portion
thereof listed below where such operation thereon shall be necessary in
order to pick up or deliver any goods, wares, merchandise or material from
or to any premises located upon any such highway or portion thereof.
Name of Highway Limits
Wall Street From State Hospital Drive to
Franklin Street
§ 237-18. Vehicle weight limits established.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any commercial vehicle or
other tractor, trailer or tractor-trailer combination having a gross weight
in excess of that herein respectively prescribed upon any of the highways,
streets or alleys or portions thereof described below.
Name of Highway,
Street or Alley
Maximum Gross
Weight
(in pounds) Location
Little Ash Street 10,000 From Ash Street to
Cherry Street
§ 237-19. Operation of vehicles on closed highways.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle or tractor upon
any highway in the Borough that is under construction, resurfacing or
repair, in disregard of any official sign, barricade or notice that the same is
closed to vehicular traffic.
§ 237-20. Play highways.
A. The Mayor is hereby authorized to designate as play highways
whenever he shall deem such action advisable, and for whatever period
§ 237-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-20
1:447
§ 237-21. Accident reports.
The operator of any motor vehicle involved in an accident in the Borough
and required by law to report such accident to any department or agency of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any other person required to make
such report, shall, at the time of making such report to the commonwealth,
make a written report to the Chief of Police of the Borough containing the
same information.
of time directed by him, any portion of any highway in the Borough,
whereon sledding and coasting shall be permitted. Such highway shall
be set apart for the purpose under the direction of the Mayor.
B. No person shall operate any motor vehicle or tractor upon any play
highway at any time when such highway shall be so designated, except
in case of emergency, with special permission of the Mayor or of the
police officer in charge, who shall first clear such play highway of all
persons using such highway for the purpose for which it was set aside.
C. The portions of highways described below are hereby established as
play highways during the times designated.
Name of
Highway Days Hours Location
(Reserved)
§ 237-20 DANVILLE CODE § 237-21
1:448
ARTICLE III
Parking Regulations
§ 237-22. Parking without lights authorized.
The boundary limits of the Borough of Danville are hereby established as a
zone in which motor vehicles may remain standing without lights, and all
highways within such boundary limits are hereby designated as highways
where motor vehicles may remain standing without lights.
§ 237-23. Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces.
Wherever a space shall be marked off on any highway for the parking of
an individual vehicle, every vehicle there parked shall be parked within the
lines bounding such space.
§ 237-24. Angle parking.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the highways or parts thereof
described below except at the angle designated and only within the painted
stall lines. On all highways or portions thereof where angle parking is now
or shall hereafter be authorized, all vehicles parked thereon shall be parked
with the front thereof nearest the curb.
Name of
Highway Side Angle Location
(Reserved)
§ 237-25. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the highways or parts
thereof described below.
Name of Highway Side Location
Bloom Street North From Mill Street east to the
Borough line
Center Street North From Ferry Street east to the
Borough line
Center Street South 70 feet east measuring from the
southeast corner of Cherry Street
and Center Street and west from
Cherry Street to an unnamed alley
Church Street East From Walnut Street to southernmost
point of the Caldwell Development,
Inc., property line
§ 237-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-25
1:449
Name of Highway Side Location
Church Street [Added
3-1-2016 by Ord. No.
534]
West From the southwest intersection
corner of Walnut Street (Route 11)
and Church Street and measuring
78.8 feet south toward Lower
Mulberry Street
Continental Boulevard Both From Mahoning Street north to the
Borough line
Cooper Street South From Faust Street to Railroad
Street
Dey Street Both From the southeast and southwest
corners of the intersection of Dey
Street and Liberty Street, south a
distance of 70 feet
East Market Street South From the southeast corner of
Church Street and East Market
Street, east a distance of 85 feet
Faust Street
[Amended 6-9-2015
by Ord. No. 527]
Both From Cooper Street to Kooher Court
Faust Street [Added
6-9-2015 by Ord. No.
527]
West From Kooher Court to East Market
Street
Ferry Street East From the southeast corner of Ferry
Street and East Market Street,
south a distance of 76 feet
Ferry Street West From Maple Alley to Continental
Boulevard
Front Street North From Mill Street to Railroad Street
Front Street, East North From Snyder's Lane to Honeymoon
Street
Liberty Street Both From McCarthy Lane south a
distance of 525 feet
Little Ash Street South From Cherry Street to Ferry Street
Market Street, East North From Mill Street east to the
Borough line
Mill Street East From the northeast corner of the
intersection of Mill Street and
SR0011 going north 156 feet toward
the southeast corner of the Center
Street and Mill Street intersection
§ 237-25 DANVILLE CODE § 237-25
1:450
Name of Highway Side Location
Mowery Street East From East Market Street to Cooper
Street
McCarthy Lane Both Entire length
Nassau Street East From East Front Street to Cooper
Street
Northumberland Street North From the Mahoning Creek Street
Bridge east to Mill Street
Pine Street East From Center Street to Spruce Street
Railroad Street East From Walnut Street to the Borough
line traveling north
Rooney Avenue Both From West Front Street to Canal
Street
Spring Street [Added
4-10-2018 by Ord.
No. 548]
Both From Jefferson Court to the Danville
Borough line
Spring Street [Added
4-10-2018 by Ord.
No. 548]
South From Steeb Street to Jefferson
Court
Unnamed Alley
between Nassau Street
and Railroad Street
[Added 11-8-2016 by
Ord. No. 537]
Both From Nassau Street to Railroad
Street
Unnamed alley
between Pine Street
and Ferry Street
running north and
south from DL&W
Avenue to Walnut
Street
East From DL&W Avenue to Lower
Mulberry Street
Unnamed alley
between West
Mahoning Street and
West Market Street
Both From Factory Street to Rooney
Avenue
Walnut Street Both From Ferry Street east to the
Borough line
§ 237-26. Parking prohibited during certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified below of any day
upon any of the highways or parts of highways described below:
§ 237-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-26
1:451
Name of Highway Side Hours/Days Location
Mill Street Both 4:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./all
From Front Street
to Center Street
Pine Street Parking
Lot
Entire lot 7:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
Entire lot bounded
by Ferry Street,
DL&W Avenue,
Pine Street and
Montgomery
§ 237-27. Parking time limited.
No person shall park a vehicle or allow the same to remain parked upon any
of the highways or parts of highways described below between the hours
specified for longer than the time indicated below:
Name of
Highway Side Hours/Days Time Limit Location
Mill Street Both 6:00 a.m. to
4:00 a.m./all
2 hours From Front
Street to
Center Street
Nassau
Street
[Added
4-10-2018
by Ord. No.
550]
West 6:30 a.m. to
5:30 p.m.
15 minutes 77-foot
portion
located 35
feet from
East Market
Street to 112
feet from
East Market
Street
West
Mahoning
Street
[Added
7-14-2015
by Ord. No.
528]
North All 15 minutes 75-foot
portion
between Mill
Street and
Rooney
Avenue
§ 237-28. Chocking of wheels required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or allow to stand, any
commercial vehicle, trailer, tractor, or tractor-trailer combination upon any
of the highways, streets or alleys, or portions thereof described below,
without chocking the rear wheels while parked or standing:
Name of Highway Side Location
Ferry Street East From Spruce Street to Continental
Boulevard
§ 237-26 DANVILLE CODE § 237-29
1:452
§ 237-29. Parking for disabled persons.
A. Designation of parking space for disabled persons. At the request of a
person with a disability or severely disabled veteran, the Police
Department is authorized to designate a parking space near that
person's place of residence with a sign or signs indicating that such
parking space is reserved for a person with a disability or a severely
disabled veteran, that no parking is allowed there by others, and that
any unauthorized person parking there shall be subject to a fine and
may be towed. The request for designation of such a parking space shall
be made upon such form or forms as may be designed by the Police
Department for such purpose. The application fee shall be as
established by resolution of the Borough.
B. Signs on designated spaces. A reserved space shall be identified by a
sign. Such sign designating a reservation of a parking space for a
person with a disability or a severely disabled veteran shall contain the
following information:
(1) The word "Reserved."
(2) The international symbol for access for persons with disabilities.
(3) A statement that "No parking is allowed by others."
(4) A statement: "Unauthorized parking subject to towing and/or a fine
of up to $200."
C. Disability parking placard and plates.
(1) Vehicles utilizing parking spaces designated for persons with a
disability or severely disabled veterans shall display a current
disability plate or a disability parking placard issued by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Transportation.
(2) The exception to Subsection C(1) above is that persons who are
dropping off or picking up a person with a disability or a severely
disabled veteran may utilize the reserved parking space designated
for such person with a disability or severely disabled veteran for a
period of not greater than 15 minutes. The burden shall be upon
such person to prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that he
or she was engaged in dropping off or picking up a person with a
disability or a severely disabled veteran.
D. Costs of signage. The cost of erecting and maintaining signs
designating reservation of parking spaces for persons with a disability
or severely disabled veterans shall be borne by the person for whom
such space is being reserved, in an amount as established by resolution
of the Borough.
E. Termination of reserved space. Upon the death or change of domicile of
the person with a disability or severely disabled veteran, or upon the
failure to utilize the reserved space, the reservation of the parking
§ 237-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-29
1:453
§ 237-30. Residential districts permit parking.
space shall terminate. Removal of the signage indicating reservation of
the space shall be by the Borough of Danville. Persons for whom the
space is reserved shall notify the Borough in the event of change of
domicile or utilization of reserved space.
F. Fines, penalties and payment for towing costs. Fines, penalties and
payment for towing costs shall be imposed as set forth in the
Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3354.
A. Purpose and intent. The Borough finds that:
(1) Certain residential areas in the Borough of Danville are subjected
to commuter vehicle parking, thereby depriving the residents of
those areas of spaces in which to park their own vehicles.
(2) The establishment of a permit parking program for certain affected
residential areas should facilitate efficient movement of traffic by
providing for residential parking preference during certain hours
of the day and days of the week while also ensuring primary access
of available parking spaces to neighborhood residents.
B. Permits required. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor
vehicle or trailer or any other type of motor vehicle without a proper,
valid parking permit placard displayed thereon between the hours
specified below during the days specified below and upon any of the
highways or parts of highways indicated and described below,
hereinafter referred to as the "permit area":
Name of
Highway Side Hours/Days Location
Ash Street Both 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Little Ash
Street to Center
Street
Ash Street East 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Center Street
to Bloom Street
Center Street South 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Line Avenue
to Ash Street
Cherry Street East 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Little Ash
Street to Bloom
Street
Vine Street Both 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Little Ash
Street to Center
Street
§ 237-29 DANVILLE CODE § 237-30
1:454
Name of
Highway Side Hours/Days Location
Vine Street East 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Center Street
to Bloom Street
C. Certain parking spaces exempted.
(1) Parking spaces within the permit area as defined in § 237-30B that
have been designated time-limited customer parking for identified
nonconforming businesses within the permit area's residential
district are exempt from the residential permit parking placard
requirements as defined in this section.
D. Legal holidays exempted. Residential permit parking placard
requirements as defined in this section do not apply during all legal
holidays identified in § 237-1.
E. Issuance of parking permit placards. Upon application to the Danville
Administration Office, on a form to be provided therefor, and upon
payment of an annual nonrefundable fee in an amount to be
established, from time to time, by resolution of the Borough Council for
the use of the Borough of Danville, the owner, manager, or occupant of
each residential dwelling unit along the permit area shall be issued a
maximum of two residential parking permit placards for use by the
occupants of the dwelling unit to which the application refers in
accordance with the following terms and conditions:
(1) The owner, manager or occupant of the dwelling unit shall present
one valid proof of registration of one motor vehicle belonging to an
occupant of the dwelling unit for each residential parking permit
placard issued.
(2) Any residential parking permit placards issued hereunder shall be
used only by the occupants of a dwelling unit located along the
permit area who desire to park their motor vehicle for which a
parking permit placard has been issued within the permit area.
(3) Any residential parking permit placards issued hereunder shall be
valid for one calendar year from January 1 through December 31.
Residential parking permit placards issued after January 1 of a
given calendar year are only valid through December 31 of the
same calendar year. Discounted fees for residential parking permit
placards issued after January 1 are in an amount to be established,
from time to time, by resolution of the Borough Council for the use
of the Borough of Danville.
(4) Residential parking permit placards for a given calendar year
cannot be applied for earlier than 60 days prior to the start of said
year.
§ 237-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-30
1:455
(5) Issuance of residential parking permit placards shall not guarantee
or reserve to the holder a parking space within the designated
permit area.
(6) In the case of residential dwelling units along the permit area that
are not owner-occupied, the property must be in compliance with
the Borough of Danville Code Chapter 141, Residential Rental
Registration, in order to be eligible for residential parking permit
placards under this section.
(7) Any residential parking permit placards issued under this section
shall not be considered as fulfilling off-street parking space
requirements as detailed in § 260-32, Automotive services; offstreet
parking and loading.
(8) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as prohibiting
motor vehicles displaying a residential parking permit placard
issued pursuant to this section from being parked in other areas of
the Borough of Danville outside of the permit area.
(9) Any other regulations or restrictions upon parking imposed by the
Borough or its ordinances shall continue with full force and effect
in the permit area, including but not limited to snow and ice
emergencies and street sweeping.
F. Temporary parking permit placards. Upon application to the Danville
Administration Office on a form to be provided therefor, and upon
payment of an annual nonrefundable fee in an amount to be
established, from time to time, by resolution of the Borough Council for
the use of the Borough of Danville, the owner, manager, or occupant of a
residential dwelling unit along the permit area may be issued
temporary parking permit placards. The use of temporary parking
permit placards is restricted to guests who desire to park their motor
vehicles at curbside within the permit area for the duration of such
guest's stay and in accordance with the following terms and conditions:
(1) Any temporary parking permit placards issued hereunder shall be
used only by the guests of residents of a dwelling unit within the
permit area who desire to park their motor vehicle at curbside on
the streets, alleys or public ways within the permit area.
(2) Any temporary parking permit placards issued hereunder shall be
valid only for the period of time indicated by the Danville
Administration Office upon approval.
(3) The maximum authorized duration of a temporary parking permit
placard shall be 14 days.
(4) Issuance of temporary parking permit placards shall not guarantee
or reserve to the holder a parking space within the designated
permit area.
§ 237-30 DANVILLE CODE § 237-30
1:456
(5) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as prohibiting
motor vehicles displaying a temporary parking permit placard
issued pursuant to this section from being parked in other areas of
the Borough of Danville outside of the permit area.
(6) Any other regulations or restrictions upon parking imposed by any
other ordinance shall continue with full force and effect in the
permit area, including but not limited to snow and ice emergencies
and street sweeping.
G. Certain nonresidential uses allowed permits. Upon application to the
Danville Administration Office, on a form to be provided therefor, and
upon payment of an annual nonrefundable fee in an amount to be
established, from time to time, by resolution of the Borough Council for
the use of the Borough of Danville, the owner of each business,
nonprofit organization and church located along the permit area shall
be issued a maximum of two residential parking permit placards for the
use of the owners, employees, associates, volunteers, patrons,
members, congregants or customers of the said business, nonprofit
organization or church to which the application refers in accordance
with the following terms and conditions:
(1) Any residential parking permit placards issued hereunder shall be
used only by the owners, employees, associates, volunteers,
patrons, members, congregants or customers of businesses,
nonprofit organizations and churches located along the permit area
who desire to park their motor vehicle for which a parking permit
placard has been issued within the permit area.
(2) Any residential parking permit placards issued hereunder shall be
valid for one calendar year from January 1 through December 31.
Residential parking permit placards issued after January 1 of a
given calendar year are only valid through December 31 of the
same calendar year. Discounted fees for residential parking permit
placards issued after January 1 are in an amount to be established,
from time to time, by resolution of the Borough Council for the use
of the Borough of Danville.
(3) Residential parking permit placards for a given calendar year
cannot be applied for earlier than 60 days prior to the start of said
year.
(4) Issuance of residential parking permit placards shall not guarantee
or reserve to the holder a parking space within a designated permit
area.
(5) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as prohibiting
motor vehicles displaying a residential parking permit placard
issued pursuant to this section from being parked in other areas of
the Borough of Danville outside of the permit area.
§ 237-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-30
1:457
(6) Any other regulations or restrictions upon parking imposed by the
Borough or its ordinances shall continue with full force and effect
in the permit area, including but not limited to snow and ice
emergencies and street sweeping.
H. Placement of placards. The residential parking permit placards and
guest parking permit placards issued pursuant to this section shall be
affixed to the center (or as near thereto as possible) of the motor
vehicle's front windshield, at the top thereof or hung from the back of
the motor vehicle's center inside rearview mirror, so that the placard so
affixed or hung shall be clearly visible through the front windshield
from the outside of the vehicle. Failure to display or properly display
parking permit placards shall constitute a violation of this article.
I. Duplicate or replacement placard. Any residential parking permit
placard which has been issued pursuant to this section which has been
lost, stolen or destroyed shall be replaced in accordance with the
following terms and conditions:
(1) The owner, manager or occupant of each residential dwelling unit,
business, nonprofit organization or church along the permit area
for which the residential parking permit placard was issued shall
apply to the Danville Administration Office for a duplicate or
replacement placard. Thereupon, the Danville Administration
Office shall issue a duplicate or replacement decal for a fee in an
amount to be established, from time to time, by resolution of the
Borough Council for the use of the Borough of Danville.
(2) The previously issued residential parking permit placard that has
been lost, stolen or destroyed shall thenceforth be invalid. Use of a
residential parking permit placard that has been reported as lost,
stolen or destroyed shall constitute a violation of this section.
(3) Any duplicate or replacement placard issued pursuant to the terms
of this section shall be valid only for the remainder of the calendar
year for which the original placard was issued.
J. Falsification of placards. Any person who, under false pretenses,
falsifies, duplicates, forges or alters any residential parking permit
placards or guest parking permit placards issued pursuant to this
section, whether original, duplicate or replacement, shall be subject to
arrest and prosecution under applicable provisions of the Crimes Code
of Pennsylvania.170
K. Reselling prohibited. The trading, leasing, subleasing, reselling, or
gifting of residential parking permit placards is prohibited and subject
to invalidation of all placards issued to the responsible owner, manager
or occupant.
170. Editor's Note: See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 237-30 DANVILLE CODE § 237-31
1:458
§ 237-31. C-2 District permit parking.
A. Purpose and intent. The Borough finds that:
(1) While the Borough has no responsibility to provide parking for
employers or employees of businesses within its C-2 District,
opportunity exists in certain areas to meet some of the parking
demand created as a result of such employers and employees.
(2) Facilitating some of the parking needs of employers and employees
of businesses within the Borough's C-2 District by utilizing spaces
that are less convenient for shopping purposes may help ensure
that employers and employees do not instead utilize prime
customer spaces intended for downtown clientele.
(3) While the Borough has no responsibility to provide parking for
residents living within its C-2 District, opportunity exists in certain
areas to meet some of the parking demand created as a result of
such residents.
(4) Facilitating some of the parking needs of residents living within the
Borough's C-2 District may help encourage the development and
rehabilitation of upper floor vacant spaces that could be utilized for
residential living.
(5) While the provision of off-street parking for dwelling units in the
C-2 District is required as detailed in § 260-32, Automotive
services; off-street parking and loading, facilitating some of the
parking needs of residents living within the Borough's C-2 District
may help meet any demand in excess of the parking supply
provided as a result of the regulations of Chapter 260 or as a result
of nonconforming properties that do not meet said regulations.
B. Permit parking permitted. Parking of a motor vehicle with a proper,
valid permit parking placard displayed thereon shall be permitted in
lieu of payment of the metered rate as defined in § 237-40, Parking
meter zones and rates established, at brown-colored meter spaces in
the municipal parking lots indicated and described below, hereinafter
referred to as the "permit area":
Name of Municipal
Lot
Number of Brown-
Metered Spaces Location
Municipal Lot No. 1 65 Rear of 291 Mill Street
Municipal Lot No. 3 35 Rear of 298 Mill Street
C. Issuance of parking permit placards. Upon application to the Danville
Administration Office, on a form to be provided therefor, and upon
payment of a quarterly nonrefundable fee in an amount to be
established, from time to time, by resolution of the Borough Council for
the use of the Borough of Danville, the owner, manager or occupant of
each business or residential dwelling unit within the C-2 District shall
§ 237-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-31
1:459
be issued commercial parking permit placards for the use of the
employers and employees of the said business or for the use of the
occupants of the said dwelling unit to park their vehicles within the
permit area in accordance with the following terms and conditions:
(1) The owner, manager or occupant of the business or dwelling unit
shall present one valid proof of registration of one motor vehicle
belonging to an employer, employee or occupant for each
commercial parking permit placard issued.
(2) Any commercial parking permit placards issued hereunder shall be
used only by the owners, employees or occupants of a business or
dwelling unit located within the C-2 District who desire to park
their motor vehicle for which a parking permit placard has been
issued within the permit area.
(3) Commercial parking permit placards shall be valid on a quarterly
basis as per the following schedule:
(a) January 1 through March 31.
(b) April 1 through June 30.
(c) July 1 through September 30.
(d) October 1 through December 31.
(4) The number of commercial parking permit placards made available
for sale shall be based upon the number of brown-metered spaces
existing in the permit area as defined in § 237-31B, Permit parking
permitted.
(a) No commercial parking permit placards in excess of 10% of the
total number made available for sale shall be issued for use by
residents of dwelling units within the C-2 District.
(5) Existing holders of commercial parking permit placards in any
given quarter shall be automatically reissued placards for the
following quarter unless prior notice to cease issuance is given to
the Borough or payment is not made within the first 30 days of the
quarter, at which point the permit placards are considered
forfeited. All remaining, available commercial parking permit
placards will be issued on a first-come, first-served basis.
(6) Commercial parking permit placards for a given calendar quarter
cannot be applied for earlier than 30 days prior to the start of said
quarter.
(7) In the case of residential dwelling units within the C-2 District that
are not owner-occupied, the owner must be in compliance with the
Borough of Danville Code Chapter 141, Residential Rental
Registration, in order to be eligible for commercial parking permit
placards under this section.
§ 237-31 DANVILLE CODE § 237-31
1:460
(8) Any commercial parking permit placards issued under this section
shall not be considered as fulfilling off-street parking space
requirements as detailed in § 260-32, Automotive services; offstreet
parking and loading.
(9) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as prohibiting
motor vehicles displaying a commercial parking permit placard
issued pursuant to this section from being parked in other areas of
the Borough of Danville outside of the permit area.
(10) Any other regulations or restrictions upon parking imposed by the
Borough or its ordinances shall continue with full force and effect
in the permit area, including but not limited to snow and ice
emergencies and street sweeping.
D. Placement of placards. The commercial parking permit placards issued
pursuant to this section shall be affixed to the center (or as near thereto
as possible) of the motor vehicle's front windshield, at the top thereof or
hung from the back of the motor vehicle's center inside rearview mirror,
so that the placard so affixed or hung shall be clearly visible through
the front windshield from the outside of the vehicle. Failure to display
or properly display parking permit placards shall constitute a violation
of this article.
E. Duplicate or replacement placard. Any commercial parking permit
placard which has been issued pursuant to this section which has been
lost, stolen or destroyed shall be replaced in accordance with the
following terms and conditions:
(1) The owner, manager or occupant of each business or residential
dwelling unit within the C-2 District for which the commercial
parking permit placard was issued shall apply to the Danville
Administration Office for a duplicate or replacement placard.
Thereupon, the Danville Administration Office shall issue a
duplicate or replacement decal for a fee in an amount to be
established, from time to time, by resolution of the Borough
Council for the use of the Borough of Danville.
(2) The previously issued commercial parking permit placard that has
been lost, stolen or destroyed shall thenceforth be invalid. Use of a
commercial parking permit placard that has been reported as lost,
stolen or destroyed shall constitute a violation of this section.
(3) Any duplicate or replacement placard issued pursuant to the terms
of this section shall be valid only for the remainder of the quarter
for which the original placard was issued.
F. Falsification of placards. Any person who, under false pretenses,
falsifies, duplicates, forges or alters any commercial parking permit
placards issued pursuant to this section, whether original, duplicate or
replacement, shall be subject to arrest and prosecution under
applicable provisions of the Crimes Code of Pennsylvania.171
§ 237-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-31
1:461
G. Reselling prohibited. The trading, leasing, subleasing, reselling, or
gifting of commercial parking permit placards is prohibited and subject
to invalidation of all placards issued to the responsible owner, manager
or occupant.
171. Editor's Note: See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 237-31 DANVILLE CODE § 237-31
1:462
ARTICLE IV
Metered Parking
§ 237-32. Designation of parking spaces.
The Police Department is hereby authorized to provide for the marking off
of individual parking spaces in the parking zones and areas designated and
described in § 238-40, said parking spaces to be designated by lines painted
or marked on the curbing or surface of the highway or area. At each space
so marked off, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in such a way that said
vehicle shall not be entirely within the limits of the space so designated.
§ 237-33. Installation of meters; operation.
§ 237-34. Manner of parking.
A. In said parking meter zones, parking meters shall be installed upon the
curb, sidewalk or pavement immediately adjacent to the parking spaces
provided in § 237-40 of this article. The Police Department shall be
responsible for the regulation, control, operation, maintenance and use
of such parking meters.
B. Each device shall be so set as to display a signal showing legal parking
upon the deposit of the appropriate coin for the period of time
hereinafter prescribed. Each device shall be so arranged that upon the
expiration of the lawful time limit it will indicate by a proper, visible
signal that the lawful parking period has expired, and in such case the
right of such vehicle to occupy such space shall cease, and the operator,
owner, possessor or manager thereof shall be subject to the penalties
hereinafter provided.
A. When a parking space in any parking meter zone is parallel with the
adjacent curb or sidewalk, any vehicle parked in such parking space
shall be parked so that the foremost part of such vehicle shall be
nearest to the parking meter; provided, however, that where double
parking meters are installed upon one standard so as to serve two
parking spaces, any vehicle parked in the space just beyond the parking
meters shall be parked so that the rear bumper of such vehicle shall be
nearest to the parking meters. When a parking space in any parking
meter zone is diagonal to the curb or sidewalk, any vehicle parked in
such parking space shall be parked with the foremost part of such
vehicle nearest to such meter.
B. Where lines or markings are painted or placed upon the curb, sidewalk,
highway and/or paved surface adjacent to each parking meter providing
for parking at an angle and not parallel or perpendicular to the curb, it
shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to cross the
center line of the highway to enter or leave said parking area.
§ 237-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-35
1:463
§ 237-35. Deposit of coins.
When any vehicle shall be parked in any space adjacent to which a parking
meter is located in accordance with the provisions of this article, the
operator shall, upon entering said parking space, immediately deposit or
cause to be deposited such coin or coins of the United States as are required
for such parking meter and as are designated by proper instructions on
the parking meter, and failure to deposit such coin or coins shall constitute
a breach of this article and shall subject each person to the penalty
prescribed hereafter. Upon the deposit of such coin or coins and placing
said meter in operation, the parking space may be lawfully occupied by such
vehicle during the period of parking time which has been prescribed for the
zone in which said parking space is located, and for which a coin or coins
is or are deposited, as indicated on the parking meter. If said vehicle shall
remain parked in any such parking space beyond the parking time limit
so fixed for such parking space, the parking meter shall, by its violation
signal, dial or pointer, indicate such illegal parking, and in that event, such
vehicle shall be considered as parked overtime and beyond the period of
legal parking time. The parking of a vehicle overtime or beyond the period
of legal parking time in any such space where any such parking meter is
located shall be a violation of this article and punishable as hereinafter set
forth.
§ 237-36. Violations.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this article for any
person:
A. To cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of or
operated by such person to be parked overtime or beyond the period of
legal parking time established for any parking meter zone as herein
described, or to deposit in any parking meter any coin for the purpose
of parking beyond the maximum legal parking time for the particular
parking meter zone.
B. To permit any vehicle to remain or be placed in any parking space
adjacent to any parking meter while said meter is displaying a signal
indicating that the vehicle occupying such parking space has already
been parked beyond the period prescribed for such parking space.
C. To park any vehicle across any line or marking of a parking meter space
or in such position that the vehicle shall not be entirely within the area
designated by such lines or markings.
D. To deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair
the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provisions of
this article.
E. To deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug,
device or metal substance or other substitute for lawful coins.
§ 237-35 DANVILLE CODE § 237-36
1:464
§ 237-37. Report of violations; citations.
It shall be the duty of the police officers of the Borough of Danville and
such other persons as may be designated and authorized by the Chief of
Police, acting in accordance with instructions issued by the Chief of Police,
to report:
§ 237-38. Collection of coins from meters.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to designate some proper person or
persons to make regular collections of the moneys deposited in said meters.
§ 237-39. General provisions.
F. To park or permit the parking of any vehicle in any parking meter space
where the meter does not register lawful parking.
A. The number of each parking meter which indicates that the vehicle
occupying the parking space and adjacent to such parking meter is or
has been parked in violation of any of the provisions of this article.
B. The state license number of such vehicle.
C. The length of time during which such vehicle is parked in violation of
any of the provisions of this article at the time of his inspection.
D. Any other facts, a knowledge of which is necessary to a thorough
understanding of the circumstances attending such violation.
A. Temporary suspension of provisions. The provisions of this article may
be temporarily suspended by the Borough Council, and it may prescribe
temporarily such other rules and regulations as traffic conditions may
require.
B. Suspension of provisions on designated holidays. The use of parking
meters throughout the Borough of Danville be and the same is hereby
dispensed with on the following holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial
Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving and Christmas.
C. Erection of signs. The Borough Council is authorized to erect or cause
to be erected appropriate signs notifying the operators of motor
vehicles of the provisions of this article.
D. Tokens. Where the deposit of any coin or coins is required under the
provisions of this article, it shall be permissible to use such token or
tokens for that deposit as shall be designated and approved by the
Borough Council.
E. Temporary permits for contractors. [Added 5-9-2017 by Ord. No.
543]
§ 237-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-39
1:465
§ 237-40. Parking meter zones and rates established.
(1) The Borough of Danville may offer temporary parking permits for
contractors working in metered parking zones. The contractor
must provide the following information:
(a) Name.
(b) Contractor ID number.
(c) Vehicle registration number to be operated while working.
(d) Location where work is being performed.
(e) On-site contact information.
(2) Permits are valid in metered parking areas only for a maximum
time period of two weeks. If additional time is required, said
contractor must apply for a new permit.
(3) Fees will be charged as follows:
(a) Mill Street metered parking: $22.
(b) Off-street metered parking: $11.
A. On-highway parking zones. Parking meter zones are hereby established
upon the highways or parts of highways described below with maximum
parking time periods as indicated between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and
Saturday; except Sundays and holidays. Where red-colored meters exist
within each zone, the maximum parking time period shall be 15 minutes
for that parking space, and the rate shall be $0.25 per 15 minutes.
Name of Street Side
Time
Limit Location Rate
Ferry Street Both 10 hours From Bloom
Street to
Market
Street
$0.15/hour
Lower Mulberry
Street
Both 2 hours From Mill
Street to
Ferry Street
$0.25/hour
Mahoning Street,
East
Both 10 hours From Ferry
Street to
alley and
property of
First Ward
School
$0.15/hour
§ 237-39 DANVILLE CODE § 237-40
1:466
Name of Street Side
Time
Limit Location Rate
Mahoning Street,
East
South 10 hours From Mill
Street to
Ferry Street
$0.15/hour
Mahoning Street,
West
Both 2 hours From Mill
Street to
Rooney
Avenue
$0.25/hour
Mahoning Street,
West
Both 10 hours From
Rooney
Avenue to
Continental
Boulevard
$0.15/hour
Market Street,
East
South 10 hours From Mill
Street to
Ferry Street
$0.15/hour
Market Street,
West
Both 10 hours From
Factory
Street to Mill
Street
$0.15/hour
Mill Street Both 2 hours From Front
Street to
Bloom Street
$0.25/hour
Mill Street East 2 hours From Bloom
Street to
Center
Street
$0.25/hour
B. Off-highway parking areas and rates. Parking meter areas and rates
hereby established as described below with maximum parking time
periods as indicated between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday of each
week, except on Sundays and holidays. Where red-colored meters exist
within off-highway parking meter areas, the maximum parking time
period shall be 15 minutes for that parking space, and the rate shall be
$0.25 per 15 minutes. Where brown-colored meters exist within offhighway
parking meter areas, the maximum parking time period shall
be two hours for that parking space, and the rate shall be $0.15 per
hour. Motor vehicles displaying a commercial parking permit placard
may park at any brown-colored meter without paying the hourly rate as
per the regulations of § 237-31, C-2 District permit parking.
§ 237-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-40
1:467
Area Time Limit Location Rate
Municipal
Parking Lot
10 hours Rooney Avenue $0.15/hour
Municipal
Parking Lot
10 hours Ferry Street $0.15/hour
§ 237-40 DANVILLE CODE § 237-40
1:468
ARTICLE V
Snow and Ice Emergencies
§ 237-41. Declaration of emergency.
In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards of
excessive snow and ice on the highways or portions of highways named in
§ 237-42 below, the Mayor, in his discretion, may declare an emergency due
to such hazards.
§ 237-42. Parking prohibited on certain streets.
A. After any such emergency shall have been declared, it shall be
unlawful, during the period of such emergency, for any person to park a
motor vehicle or tractor or to allow the same to remain parked on any
highway or portion thereof named in Subsection B below, or to operate
any motor vehicle or tractor on any such highway or portion thereof,
unless such vehicle or tractor shall be equipped with adequate
equipment to provide sufficient traction to keep such vehicle or tractor
in motion so that other traffic on such highways will not be blocked or
seriously impeded.
B. The highways or portions thereof to which the provisions of this article
shall be applicable during all periods of emergency declared as
provided in § 237-41 above shall be as described below.
Name of Highway Limits
Bloom Street From Ferry Street to the
Mahoning Township line
Center Street From Mill Street to the Mahoning
Township line
East Front Street From Mill Street to Railroad
Street
East Market Street From the Mahoning Township line
to Mill Street
Ferry Street From Continental Boulevard to
East Front Street
Mill Street From Spruce Street to the
Susquehanna River bridge
Railroad Street From East Front Street to Route
11
Spruce Street From Continental Boulevard to
Mill Street
West Front Street From Factory Street to Mill Street
West Market Street From Factory Street to Mill Street
§ 237-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-43
1:469
§ 237-43. Placement of signs.
§ 237-44. Violations and penalties.
A. In order to assist the operators of motor vehicles and tractors in
determining the highways affected by this article, the Mayor or the
Chief of Police shall place around the utility poles, on the highways or
portions thereof designated in § 237-42B above, signs reading as
follows:
Snow Emergency Route
Snow Tires or Chains Required
No Parking During Emergency
Vehicles Towed Away
B. The Mayor or the Chief of Police shall also, through radio, newspaper or
other available media, disseminate information as to the existence of
such emergency.
A. Any person who shall park a motor vehicle or tractor upon or along any
of the highways or portions thereof listed in § 237-42B, at any time
during a period of emergency declared as provided in § 237-41, shall be
guilty of a violation of this article.
B. Any person who shall operate a vehicle or tractor upon any highway or
portion thereof listed in § 237-42B and such vehicle or tractor shall
become stalled upon any of such highways during a period of
emergency declared as provided in § 237-41 of this article, if such
stalling shall have been by reason of the failure to have such vehicle or
tractor equipped with the equipment hereinabove prescribed, shall be
guilty of a violation of this article.
§ 237-43 DANVILLE CODE § 237-44
1:470
ARTICLE VI
Removal and Impounding of Illegally Parked Vehicles
§ 237-45. Authorization for removal and impoundment.
The Chief of Police of the Borough is hereby authorized to remove and
impound, or to order the removal and impounding, of any vehicle parked on
any of the streets, highways or public property in the Borough in violation
of any provision of the law or of any ordinance of the Borough; provided,
however, that no such vehicle shall be removed or impounded except in
strict adherence to the provisions of this article.
§ 237-46. Approved storage garages designated.
The following garages located in the Borough are hereby designated as
approved storage garages, as pounds for the storage of such impounded
vehicles:
Name of Garage Address
(Reserved)
§ 237-47. Bonding of garages.
Every such approved storage garage or pound shall be bonded in an amount
as set by the Borough Council for the indemnifying of the owner of every
such impounded vehicle against the loss thereof, or injury or damage
thereto, while in the custody of such poundkeeper.
§ 237-48. Towing and storage charges.
The towing charge to be collected by every such poundkeeper shall be in an
amount as set by the Borough Council, and the storage charge for the first
day and for each additional day shall be in amounts as set by the Borough
Council.
§ 237-49. Notification of removal and impounding.
Within 12 hours from the time of removal of any vehicle under authority
granted by this article, notice of the fact that such vehicle has been
impounded shall be sent by the Chief of Police of the Borough to the owner
of record of such vehicle. Such notice shall designate the place from which
such vehicle was removed, the reason for its removal and impounding and
the pound in which it shall have been impounded.
§ 237-50. Payment of charges; protests.
A. The payment of any towing and impounding charges authorized by this
article shall, unless such payment shall have been made under protest,
be final and conclusive, and shall constitute a waiver of any right to
recover the money so paid.
§ 237-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-50
1:471
§ 237-51. Records of vehicles removed and impounded.
The Chief of Police shall keep a record of all vehicles impounded and shall
be able at all reasonable times to furnish the owners or the agents of the
owners thereof with information as to the place of storage of such vehicles.
§ 237-52. Liability of owner or operator for fine or penalty.
The payment of towing and storage charges authorized by this article shall
not operate to relieve the owner or operator of any vehicle from liability for
any fine or penalty for violation of any law or ordinance on account of which
such vehicle was removed and impounded.
§ 237-53. Restrictions upon removal of vehicles.
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this article if, at the time
of the intended removal thereof, the owner or person for the time being in
charge of such vehicle is present and expresses a willingness and intention
to remove such vehicle immediately.
B. In the event that any towing and impounding charges so imposed shall
be paid under protest, the offender shall be entitled to a hearing before
a Magisterial District Judge or court of record having jurisdiction, in
which case such defendant shall be proceeded against and shall receive
such notice as is provided in the Vehicle Code172 in other cases of
summary offenses, and shall have the same rights as to appeal and
waiver of hearing.
172. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 237-50 DANVILLE CODE § 237-53
1:472
ARTICLE VII
Interpretation and Repeal; Penalties
§ 237-54. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter shall be severable, and if any of its provisions
shall be held to be unconstitutional, illegal or otherwise invalid, such
decision shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining provisions of
this chapter. It is hereby declared as a legislative intent that this chapter
would have been adopted and such unconstitutional, illegal or otherwise
invalid provision not been included herein.
§ 237-55. Repeal of previous ordinances; effect.
§ 237-56. Violations and penalties.
A. All previous ordinances of the Borough of Danville pertaining to the
regulation of traffic and parking are hereby repealed.
B. The repeal of ordinances provided for in Subsection A above shall not
affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for any
act done or liability incurred in violation of any ordinance or regulation
in force immediately prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
C. The provisions of this chapter, insofar as they are the same as those of
ordinances and regulations in force immediately prior to the enactment
of this chapter, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and
regulations and not as new enactments.
A. Unless another penalty is specifically provided for in Subsection B of
this section, any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$300, and costs of prosecution, and in the event of nonpayment of such
fine and costs of prosecution, such person shall be subject to
imprisonment for a period not exceeding five days.
B. Any person who shall violate any provision of a section listed below
shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than that
specified for a violation of said section and, in the event of nonpayment
of such fine and costs of prosecution, such person shall be subject to
imprisonment for a period not exceeding that indicated for said section.
Article/Section
Maximum
Fine
Maximum
Imprisonment
(days)
Article I
§§ 237-3 and 237-4 $10 1
Article II
§ 237-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-56
1:473
Article/Section
Maximum
Fine
Maximum
Imprisonment
(days)
§§ 237-7, 237-9, 237-10,
237-11, 237-12, 237-20 and
237-21
$10 1
§§ 237-8 and 237-13, 237-14
and 237-15
$10 1
§ 237-19 $25 2
Article III
§§ 237-23 through 237-28 $25 1
§ 237-30B $35 1
§ 237-30H $25 1
§ 237-30I $35 1
§ 237-31D $25 1
§ 237-31E $35 1
Article IV
§ 237-36A, B, C and F $5 to $10 1
§ 237-36D and E $300 8
Article V
§ 237-44A $15 1
§ 237-44B $25 2
C. A notice of violation of any provision of §§ 237-23 through 237-28 and
§§ 237-30 and 237-31 of Article III of this chapter shall be placed on the
vehicle parked in violation, such notice to contain instructions to the
owner or operator of such vehicle that, if he shall report to the Police
Department of the Borough of Danville within five days of the time such
notice was given and pay as a penalty for and in full satisfaction of such
violation the sum of $25, the same shall save the violator from
prosecution and from payment of the fine and costs above prescribed.
D. A notice of violation of any provision of § 237-36A, B, C or F of Article IV
of this chapter shall be placed on the vehicle parked in violation, such
notice to contain instructions to the owner or operator of such vehicle
that, if he shall report to the Police Department within five days of the
time such notice was given and pay as a penalty for and in full
satisfaction of such violation the sum of $5, or if he shall report to the
Police Department after five days of the time such notice was given and
pay as a penalty for and in full satisfaction of such violation the sum of
$10, the same shall save the violator from prosecution and from
payment of the fine and costs above prescribed.
§ 237-56 DANVILLE CODE § 237-56
1:474
Chapter 243
VEHICLES, JUNKED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 180. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 237.
§ 243-1. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall be applicable:
JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE — A motor vehicle or trailer which is partially
dismantled, unused, unusable or wrecked and which cannot safely or legally
be operated on the streets or highways of this Borough or commonwealth.
Currently licensed, registered and inspected vehicles shall not be included
within this definition.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any self-propelled land vehicle which can be used for
towing or transporting people or materials, including, but not limited to,
automobiles, trucks, buses, motor homes, motorized campers, motorcycles,
motor scooters, tractors, snowmobiles, dune buggies and other off-the-road
vehicles.
MOTOR VEHICLES ACCESSORIES — Any part or parts of any motor
vehicle.
PERSON(S) — Any individual, partnership, company, association, society,
trust, corporation or other group or entity, whether an owner or lessee of
residences, commercial or institutional establishments.173
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Any real property not owned by the federal
government, state, county, school district or other political subdivisions.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — The unsheltered storage of a junked motor vehicle
as otherwise defined in this chapter which constitutes a hazard or threat or
potential threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the Borough's citizens.
REMOVAL — The physical location or relocation of a motor vehicle to an
authorized location.
TRAILER — Any wheeled device used as a means of carrying, hauling or
conveying any vehicle, person, animal, boat or other object.
UNSHELTERED STORAGE — Any storage except storage inside a building
or in an area completely surrounded by a solid fence of a height not less
than the height of the motor vehicle or trailer being sheltered.
§ 243-2. Prohibited storage.
173. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 237-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-2
1:475
§ 243-3. Prohibited storage exceptions.
§ 243-4. Investigation of premises.
The Danville Police Department, on routine inspection or upon receipt of
a complaint, may enter upon private property to investigate a suspected
junk motor vehicle or motor vehicle accessories stored or maintained in
violation of this chapter and record the make, model, style and identification
numbers and its situation and condition.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having custody of any
junked motor vehicle or motor vehicle accessories which creates a
hazard or threat or potential threat to the health, safety or welfare of
the Borough's citizens to store or permit any such vehicle or
accessories to remain in unsheltered storage on any private property or
public street or highway within the Borough for a period of more than
30 days after the expiration of the thirty-day period following receipt of
a notice requiring such removal, and it shall be further unlawful for any
person owning any private property in the Borough or leasing any such
property to store or to permit to remain any such vehicles or
accessories on his property for more than a like period.
B. It shall further be unlawful for any person, after notification to remove
any junked motor vehicle or motor vehicle accessories constituting a
public nuisance hereunder from any private property has been given, to
move the same to any other private property upon which such storage is
not permitted or onto any public highway or other public property for
purposes of storage.
A. The prohibitions of § 243-2 hereof shall not apply to a junked motor
vehicle in an area completely surrounded by a solid fence of a height
not less than the height of the motor vehicle, and the prohibitions of
§ 243-2 hereof shall not apply to the premises of a business enterprise
otherwise operated in a lawful place and manner when necessary to the
operation of such business enterprise, in a storage place or depository
maintained in a lawful place and manner, or seasonal use vehicles such
as snowmobiles, motorcycles, motor scooters and nonmotorized
campers. Such business enterprises shall include auto repair and auto
body shops, but shall not include tire, battery and accessory sales
stores, and the provisions hereof extending to permitted storage shall
not extend to the storage at such business enterprises of more than five
junked vehicles or trailer at any one time.
B. The prohibition of § 243-2 hereof shall likewise not be applicable to
salvors holding a current certificate of authorization issued by the
Department of Transportation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania;
provided, however, that such salvor is otherwise operating in a lawful
place and manner.
§ 243-2 DANVILLE CODE § 243-5
1:476
§ 243-5. Notice of removal.
Whenever the Danville Police Department finds or is notified that any
junked motor vehicle or motor vehicle accessories have been stored or
permitted to remain on any private property or public street or highway
within the Borough and in violation of the provisions of this chapter, the
Danville Police Department shall send by certified or registered mail a
notice to the owner of record or person having custody of such motor
vehicle or accessories, if such owner can be ascertained by the exercise
of reasonable diligence, and also to the owner of the private property,
as shown on the tax assessment records of the Borough, on which the
same is located, to remove the junked motor vehicle, trailer or motor
vehicle accessories within 30 days. Such notice shall contain the following
additional information:
§ 243-6. Violations and penalties.174
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $1,000 and/or to be committed to the county jail for a
period not exceeding 30 days, plus costs of prosecution, an each day that a
violation is committed shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 250
WATER
A. Nature of complaint,
B. Description and location of the motor vehicle and/or motor vehicle
accessories;
C. Statement that the motor vehicle or motor vehicle accessories shall be
removed from the premises no later than 30 days from the date of
notification;
D. Statement that removal from the location specified in the notification to
another location upon which such storage is not permitted is prohibited
and shall subject the person to additional penalties;
E. Statement that if removal is made within the time limits specified,
notification thereof shall be given in writing to the Danville Police
Department; and
F. Statement of the penalties provided for noncompliance with such
notice.
174. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 243-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-6
1:477

ARTICLE I
Violation of Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 12-6-2016 by Ord. No. 538]
§ 250-1. Prohibited actions.
The Danville Municipal Authority's Rules and Regulations, as revised on July
18, 2016, disallows:
§ 250-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-11-2017 by Ord. No.
544]
§ 250-3. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Danville Borough employees to enforce the terms
of this article and secure compliance with the requirements thereof.
§ 250-4. Severability.
The provisions of this article are severable, and if any section, clause,
sentence, part or provision thereof shall be held illegal, invalid or
A. Any customer or person not authorized by the Authority to operate any
curb stop, valve, or hydrant in any Authority line or main;
B. The Authority's curb box/lid to be covered over (by sod, stone,
pavement, concrete, etc.) or otherwise tampered with;
C. Any customer or person not authorized by the Authority to remove and/
or tamper with any meter, meter seal or meter seal wire.
A. Any person who shall violate any provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, for each and every offense, be punishable by an
issuance of a nontraffic citation of not less than $100 or not more than
$300 and costs of such proceedings, or upon default of payment of such
fines and costs, by imprisonment in the county jail for a term of not
more than 30 days.
B. In the event that it is found evident that any customer or person has
damaged any curb stop, valve, hydrant, meter seal or meter seal wire,
the Borough may proceed to correct such damages and shall charge the
cost thereof, plus 20%, to the customer or person causing such damage.
C. In the event that an Authority's curb box/lid is covered over by sod,
stone, pavement, concrete, etc., it shall be at the discretion of the
Borough of Danville employees that said curb box/lid shall be
uncovered. Upon proper notice to the property owner serviced by said
curb box, the curb box shall be uncovered at the property owner's
expense. In the event that said curb box is not uncovered by the
property owner in the stated time frame, the Borough may proceed to
uncover said curb box and shall charge the cost thereof, plus 20%, to
the property owner.
§ 250-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-4
1:479
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision of the
court shall not affect, impair or invalidate any of the remaining sections,
clauses, sentences, parts or provisions of the article. The provisions of any
prior ordinance which are inconsistent with the provisions of this article are
hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
§ 250-5. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon adoption.
§ 250-4 DANVILLE CODE § 250-5
1:480
Chapter 252
WATER EMERGENCIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal authority — See Ch. 13.
§ 252-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORITY — The Danville Municipal Authority.
DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN — A plan developed to define the actions
required at various stages of a drought emergency in order to protect public
health and safety, ensure essential water uses, equitably share available
supplies and conserve water resources.
WATER EMERGENCY DECLARATION — A declaration by the Chairman or
Vice Chairman of the Danville Municipal Authority, or in their absence, the
Danville Borough Water Superintendent, that due to any cause, including
but not limited to flood, fire, power failure, chemical or biological
contamination or lack of rainfall, there is a reasonable probability that the
water supply may not be adequate to meet the needs of the Danville area.175
§ 252-2. Compliance with water emergency declaration.
In the event of a water emergency declaration, all users of the municipal
water system shall immediately curtail water usage as provided by the
water emergency declaration. In the event that the water emergency
declaration is triggered by drought conditions, then the drought
contingency plan shall take effect and water usage shall be curtailed in
accordance with said plan.
§ 252-3. Termination of water service.
In the event that any user does not comply with the terms of any water
emergency declaration, such user may be subject to termination of water
service by the Authority, in addition to the penalties provided in § 252-5 of
this chapter and the penalties provided in any drought contingency plan and
its appendixes.
§ 252-4. Enforcement.
The Borough Police Department is authorized to enforce the terms of this
chapter.
175. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 250-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-5
1:481
§ 252-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more than $100 for
a first offense, $200 for a second offense and $300 for a third or subsequent
offense, together with court costs or, upon default of payment of such fines
and costs, by imprisonment in the county jail for a term of not more than
30 days. The continuation of such violation for each successive day shall
constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 260
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 94.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 102.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 120.
Historic District — See Ch. 129.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 212.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
220.
§ 252-5 DANVILLE CODE § 252-5
1:482
ARTICLE I
Title and Purposes
§ 260-1. Long title.
This chapter shall be entitled "An ordinance to limit and restrict to specified
districts or zones, and to regulate therein, buildings and structures
according to their construction and the nature and extent of their use, and
the nature and extent of the uses of land in the Borough of Danville, and
providing for the administration and enforcement of the provisions herein
contained and fixing penalties for the violation thereof."
§ 260-2. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Danville Borough
Zoning Ordinance."
§ 260-3. Community development objectives.
A. The intent of this chapter is to establish a precise and detailed plan for
the use of land in Danville Borough based on the municipality's Master
Plan, including but not limited to those aspects of the Master Plan
relating to land use, density of population and location and function of
streets and other community facilities and utilities. This chapter has
been further enacted in order to promote and protect the general
health, welfare, safety and convenience of the municipality.
B. The Borough of Danville has enacted a Zoning Ordinance, of which this
statement is a part, in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.176 The adoption and enforcement of these regulations is
intended to provide the municipality with procedures which will assist
in directing its growth and development in accordance with local needs
and goals.
C. Pertinent local goals which these regulations are intended to bring to
fruition relate to such factors as land use, population density, streets
and traffic and other community facilities and utilities, generally as
defined in the Danville Borough Master Plan.
D. More specifically, it is intended to:
(1) Create a pattern of land uses which is compatible and harmonious,
where a suitable environment may be created for residential,
commercial and industrial functions. The protection of our present
and future residential areas is a prime concern, as well as the
reservation and protection of lands which are considered desirable
and suitable for commercial and industrial uses, but not those
industrial uses which will emit nuisances which would have an
adverse affect on any part of the community.
176. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 260-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-3
1:483
§ 260-4. Scope of regulations.
(a) Residential land use goals. The Borough will pursue policies
which will permit a wide variety of residential densities and
housing types in order to meet the physical, social and
economic needs of the Borough's current residents as well as
potential future residents.
(b) Commercial land use goals. Expansion of commercial
development is desired, including a greater variety of
commercial establishments to meet the needs of the residents.
Regardless of the location of future commercial development,
it should be designed and developed in a manner which would
not create an adverse environmental effect on existing or
developing residential areas.
(c) Manufacturing land use goals. Manufacturing development
should be located in a suitable area (or areas) and it should be
regulated to minimize noise, odors and other potentially
adverse environmental impacts on the residential areas of the
Borough.
(2) Maintain a density of population which can feasibly be served by
the streets and other public facilities which presently exist or can
be reasonably provided by the municipality.
(3) Direct the types of development and the intensity of development in
such a manner as will not place an unreasonable burden on the
capacity of local streets and other public facilities.
(4) Preserve the character, appearance and integrity of the community
in keeping with the present pattern and character of development.
(5) Protect the floodplain by prohibiting the forms of development
which would restrict the flow of the streams and/or result in
extensive loss of life or property.
A. Administration and enforcement. This chapter includes provisions for
the administration and the enforcement of the chapter and such other
provisions as are deemed necessary to implement the purposes of this
chapter and the purposes of Act 247, as amended.177
B. Flexibility and innovation. This chapter includes provisions to
encourage innovation and to promote flexibility, economy and ingenuity
in development, including subdivisions and land developments as
defined in Act 247, as amended. Such regulations provide authorization
to increase the permissible density of population and intensity of uses
based upon expressed standards and criteria set forth herein.
177. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 260-3 DANVILLE CODE § 260-4
1:484
§ 260-5. Purposes.
These regulations are deemed necessary to achieve the following purposes:
C. Development features regulated. This chapter includes provisions
regulating:
(1) Uses of land, watercourses and other bodies of water.
(2) Size, height, bulk, location, erection, construction, repair,
maintenance, alteration, razing, removal and use of structures.
(3) Areas and dimensions of land and bodies of water to be occupied by
uses and structures, as well as areas, courts, yards and other open
spaces and distances to be left unoccupied by uses and structures.
(4) Density of population and intensity of use.
(5) Protection and preservation of natural resources.
(6) Special exceptions.
(7) Variances.
(8) Conditional uses.
A. To promote, protect and facilitate any or all of the following: the public
health, safety, morals and the general welfare; coordinated and
practical community development and proper density of population;
emergency management preparedness and operations, airports and
national defense facilities; the provision of adequate light and air;
access to incident solar energy; police protection; vehicle parking and
loading space; transportation; water; sewerage; schools; recreation
facilities; public grounds; the provision of a safe, reliable and adequate
water supply for domestic, commercial or industrial use and other
public requirements; as well as preservation of the natural, scenic and
historic values in the environment and preservation of forests,
wetlands, aquifers and floodplains.
B. To prevent one or more of the following: overcrowding of land, blight,
danger and congestion in travel and transportation, loss of health, life
or property from fire, flood, panic or other dangers.
C. To provide for the use of land within the municipality for residential
housing of various dwelling types encompassing all basic forms of
housing, including single-family and two-family dwellings and a
reasonable range of multifamily dwellings in various arrangements.
D. To accommodate reasonable overall community growth, including
population and employment growth, and opportunities for development
of a variety of residential dwelling types and nonresidential uses.
E. To adopt and enforce effective land use controls in areas subject to
flooding in order to prevent the loss of property and life, the creation of
§ 260-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-5
1:485
health and safety hazards, the disruption of commerce and
governmental services, the extraordinary and unnecessary expenditure
of public funds for flood protection and relief and the impairment of the
tax base by:
(1) Regulating uses, activities and development which, acting alone or
in combination with other existing or future uses, activities and
development, will cause unacceptable increases in flood heights,
velocities and frequencies.
(2) Restricting or prohibiting certain uses, activities and development
from locating within areas subject to flooding.
(3) Requiring all those uses, activities and developments that do occur
in flood-prone areas to be protected and/or floodproofed against
flooding and flood damage.
(4) Protecting individuals from buying lands and structures which are
unsuited for intended purposes because of flood hazards.
§ 260-5 DANVILLE CODE § 260-5
1:486
ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 260-6. Word usage.
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall be
used in the interpretation and construction of this chapter. Words used in
the present tense include the future; the singular number shall include
the plural, and the plural the singular; the word "building" shall include
the word "structure"; the word "used" shall include "arranged, designed,
constructed, altered, converted, rented, leased or intended to be used"; the
word "shall" is mandatory and not optional; the word "abut" shall include
the words "directly across from."
§ 260-7. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure subordinate to
the principal use of a building on the same lot and serving a purpose
customarily incidental to the use of the principal building.
AGENT OF OWNER — Any person who can show written proof that he has
authority to act for the property owner.
ALLEY — A public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of
access to abutting property.
ALTERATION (OF BUILDING OR STRUCTURE) — Any change in the
structural members of a building, such as walls, columns, beams or girders.
AUTOMOBILE OR TRAILER SALES AREA — An open area, other than a
street, used for the display, sale or rental of new or used motor vehicles or
trailers in operable condition and where no repair work is done.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION OR FILLING STATION — A building
or place of business where gasoline, oil and greases, batteries, tires and
automobile accessories are supplied and dispensed directly to the motor
vehicles trade at retail and where the following services may be rendered:
Minor repair:
(1) Sale and servicing of spark plugs and batteries.
(2) Tire repair and servicing, no recapping.
Replacement of mufflers and tailpipes, water hose, fan belts, brake
and transmission fluids, light bulbs, floor mats, seat covers (where
this shall not be the principal use), windshield wipers, grease
retainers and wheel bearings.
(3)
(4) Radiator cleaning and flushing.
A.
§ 260-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-7
1:487
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING — The dismantling or disassembling of used
motor vehicles or trailers; or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled,
partially dismantled, obsolete or wrecked vehicles or their parts.
BAKERIES — Bakeries which are first permitted in the C-1 District,
including such baking establishments which manufacture quantities of
goods for retail only on the premises.
BASEMENT — An area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BOARD — The Zoning Hearing Board of the Borough of Danville.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The Borough Council of the Borough of Danville.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls,
used or intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals
or property. Included shall be all manufactured homes and trailers to be
used for human habitation. When such a structure is divided into separate
parts by one or more unpierced walls extending from the ground up, each
part is deemed a separate building, except as regards minimum side yard
requirements.178
BUILDING GROUP — Any building, such as a store group, which is divided
into separate parts by one or more unpierced walls extending from the
ground up.
Washing and polishing, not including mechanical and/or automatic
car wash establishments.
(5)
(6) Installation of fuel pumps and fuel lines.
(7) Minor servicing and replacement of carburetors.
(8) Adjustment and installation of brakes.
Tuning engines, except for grinding valves, cleaning carbon or
removing the head of engines and/or crankcases.
(9)
(10)Greasing and lubrication.
(11)Emergency wiring repairs.
Any similar minor service or repair not listed below under "major
repair."
(12)
Major repair. In addition to those repairs and services listed above
as "minor repair," any general repair, rebuilding or reconditioning not
listed above; collision service including body, frame or fender
straightening or repair; painting or paint shops; mechanical car wash
establishments; but not including any operations which require the
heating or burning of rubber.
B.
178. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 260-7 DANVILLE CODE § 260-7
1:488
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the mean level
of the ground surrounding the building to a point midway between the
highest and lowest point of the roof, but not including chimneys, spires,
towers, elevator penthouses, tanks and similar projections.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted the principal use
of the building site on which it is situated. In any residential district, any
dwelling shall be deemed to be a principal building on the zone lot on which
the same is located.
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION — Organizations that have secured status
as a private, nonprofit organization under Section 501(c)3 of the Federal
Internal Revenue Code.[Added 12-9-2002 by Ord. No. 448]
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — An area to be developed as a single entity
according to a plan containing residential housing units in which the
individual lots have a common or public open space as an appurtenance.
Such common or public open space shall be assured of continued operation
and maintenance either through the dedication of such area to the
municipality and the municipality's acceptance thereof or through the
creation of a homeowners' association or the developer's acceptance of
such responsibility, including such legally binding agreements as may be
required to achieve such assurances.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Any vehicle other than a private passenger
vehicle, including trucks, trailers and construction equipment.
COMMISSION — The Borough Planning Commission of the Borough of
Danville.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use which because of its unique characteristics
requires individual consideration in each case by the governing body. In
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the governing body may
require certain conditions and safeguards before such a use is
permitted.[Added 5-5-2009 by Ord. No. 496]
COURT — Any open, unoccupied area which is bounded by three or more
attached building walls.
CUSTOMARY HOUSEHOLD PETS — Include animals, fish and birds which
are generally considered to be domestic animals, such as hamsters, dogs,
cats and birds, including ducks which shall not be for human consumption.
Farm fowl such as chickens and turkeys and other farm animals not
specifically designated shall not be considered as "customary household
pets."
DAY-CARE FACILITIES —
CHILD DAY-CARE CENTER — A day-care center is a state licensed
facility in which care is provided for seven or more children at any
one time, where the child-care areas are not being used as a family
residence.
A.
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — Any state-registered premises other than
the child's own home, operated for profit or not for profit, in which child
B.
§ 260-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-7
1:489
DEVELOPMENT SECTION — Within any large-scale development, the
developer may select a portion of the entire approved large-scale
development area to be developed in stages or phases; any such area shall
be considered as a "development section."
DISTRICT — A district or a zone shall be any portion of the territory of the
municipality within which certain uniform regulations and requirements or
various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this chapter.
DWELLING — Any building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively
as the residence or sleeping place of a family, except as otherwise provided
herein. The use of any building or portion thereof for congregate housing
for a halfway house, juvenile delinquents, convicts, ex-convicts or other
alternative forms of incarceration, an emergency shelter or mission or for
the housing of transient persons or other similar uses shall not constitute a
"dwelling."
day care is provided at any one time to four, five or six children who are
not relatives of the caregiver, provided that such facility is registered
by the Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare.
GROUP DAY-CARE HOME — A facility with a Pennsylvania Certificate
of Compliance in which care is provided for more than six but fewer
than 12 children, at any one time, if care is provided in a facility where
the child-care areas are being used as a family residence.
C.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A detached building, designated for or
occupied exclusively by one family and containing not more than one
dwelling unit.
A.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A detached or semidetached building
where not more than two individual family or dwelling units are entirely
separated by vertical walls or horizontal floors, unpierced except for
access to the outside or to a common cellar.
B.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE — A townhouse shall include a group of
not more than eight single-family attached dwellings separated from
each other by common walls, where each unit contains a separate and
private entrance to the outside.
C.
DWELLING, GARDEN APARTMENTS — A group of rental units,
generally under single ownership (but a condominium is not precluded)
where there shall not be more than eight dwelling units contained
within each structure; such structures containing garden apartment
units are generally less than four stories in height although in the
municipality they shall not exceed a height of 2.5 stories or 35 feet.
D.
DWELLING GROUP — A group of two or more residential buildings on
a single zone lot.
E.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A structure containing three or more
dwelling units, including but not limited to garden apartments,
condominiums and townhouses.
F.
§ 260-7 DANVILLE CODE § 260-7
1:490
DWELLING STRUCTURE — Any structure which shall contain one or more
dwelling units, not including a hotel, hospital, nursing home, dormitory,
fraternity or sorority house, rooming house or boardinghouse.
DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.179
ELDERLY HOUSING — Housing designed and used exclusively for persons
60 years of age or older.[Added 6-14-2005 by Ord. No. 467]
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance, by public utilities or municipal or other governmental
agencies, of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water
transmission or distribution systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains,
sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic
light signals, hydrants and other similar equipment and accessories in
connection therewith reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate
service by such public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies
or for the public health or safety or general welfare, including buildings, but
not including sanitary landfills or other means of solid waste disposal.
FAMILY — Any number of individuals living together as a single
housekeeping unit and doing their cooking on the premises, as
distinguished from a group occupying a boarding or rooming house or hotel.
Notwithstanding the definition in the preceding sentence, a "family" shall
also be deemed to include unrelated persons occupying a dwelling unit
and living as a single, nonprofit housekeeping unit, if said occupants are
handicapped persons, as defined herein. Such unrelated individuals shall
have the right to occupy a dwelling unit in the same manner and to the
same extent as any family unit as defined in the first sentence of this
definition. A "family" does not include a group living in a boardinghouse or
hotel or fraternities, sororities and clubs or other forms of congregate living
arrangements, such as nursing homes and personal care homes, except as
otherwise provided herein.[Amended 12-9-2002 by Ord. No. 448]
FENCES — Any freestanding and uninhabitable structure constructed of
wood, glass, metal, plastic materials, wire, wire mesh or masonry, singly
or in combination, erected for the purpose of screening or dividing one
property from another to assure privacy or to protect the property so
screened or divided or to define and mark the property line of any front,
side or rear lot line; for the purpose of this chapter, a freestanding masonry
wall when so located is considered to be a "fence"; also, for the purpose of
this chapter, when the term "lot line" is used in relation to fences, it shall be
synonymous with "rear yard lot lines," "side yard lot lines" and "front yard
lot lines."
FLOOD-FRINGE AREA — The remaining portions of a floodplain which
are located outside of the floodway as indicated in the Flood Insurance
Study (FIS) dated May 16, 2008 and the accompanying maps or the most
179. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 260-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-7
1:491
recent revision thereof as issued by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.180
FLOODPLAIN AREA, GENERAL — The areas identified in the Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) dated May 16, 2008 and the accompanying maps
or the most recent revision thereof as issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency. When available, information from other federal, state
and other acceptable sources shall be used to determine the one-hundredyear
elevation, as well as a floodway area, if possible. When no other
information is available, the one-hundred-year elevation shall be
determined by using a point on the boundary of the identified floodplain
areas which is nearest the construction site in question.181
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas required to carry and discharge a one-hundred-year flood. The
areas identified as "floodway" in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated May
16, 2008 and the accompanying maps or the most recent revision thereof as
issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.182
FLOOR AREA — For the purposes of applying the requirements for off-street
parking and loading, "floor area," in the case of offices, merchandising or
service type of uses, shall mean the gross floor area used or intended to be
used by tenants or for service to the public as customers, patrons, clients
or patients, including areas occupied by fixtures and equipment used for
display or sales or merchandise. It shall not include areas used principally
for nonpublic purposes such as storage, incidental repair, processing or
packaging of merchandise, for shop windows, for offices incident to the
management or maintenance of stores or buildings, for toilet or rest rooms,
for utilities or for dressing rooms, fitting or alteration rooms.
FORESTRY — The management of forests and timberlands when practiced
in accordance with accepted silvicultural principles, through developing,
cultivating, harvesting, transporting and selling trees for commercial
purposes, which does not involve any land development.[Added 12-9-2002
by Ord. No. 448]
GARAGE, PRIVATE PARKING — A detached accessory building or a portion
of a principal building used only for the storage of automobiles by the
families resident upon the premises, provided that such garage shall not be
used for storage of more than one commercial vehicle per family, and such
vehicle shall not exceed a one-ton rated capacity.
GARAGE, PUBLIC PARKING — A structure or portion thereof, other than a
private garage, used for the storage, sale, hire, care, repair or refinishing of
automobiles, not including a structure or part thereof used only for storage
or display of automobiles for other than transients.
GOVERNING BODY — The Borough Council of the Borough of Danville.
180. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
181. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
182. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 260-7 DANVILLE CODE § 260-7
1:492
GROUP HOME FOR THE HANDICAPPED — A dwelling shared by
handicapped persons, including resident staff, who live together as a single
housekeeping unit and in a long-term, family-like environment in which staff
persons residing on the premises provide care, education and participation
in community activities for the residents with the primary goal of enabling
the residents to live as independently as possible in order to reach their
maximum potential. The term "group home for the handicapped" shall not
include alcoholism or drug treatment center, work-release facilities for
convicts or ex-convicts or other housing facilities serving as an alternative
to incarceration.[Amended 12-9-2002 by Ord. No. 448]
HALFWAY HOUSE — A licensed home for inmates on release from more
restrictive custodial confinement or initially placed in lieu of such more
restrictive custodial confinement, wherein supervision, rehabilitation and
counseling are provided to mainstream residents back into society, enabling
them to live independently.
HANDICAPPED PERSON —
HEALTH CARE FACILITIES — Health care facilities consist of several
different types of facilities such as hospitals, medical centers, nursing
homes, hospice institutions, personal care facilities, and other similar uses
where people can receive medical treatment and related support services
due to their inability to meet their own physical care needs. Rooming
and boarding houses, and drug rehabilitation facilities and drug treatment
centers other than for the medical treatment of persons requiring medical
treatment for traumatic conditions resulting from overdosing on controlled
substances, are not considered to be health care facilities.[Added
12-9-2002 by Ord. No. 448]
HOTEL — A building designed for occupancy as the temporary residence of
individuals who are lodged with or without meals and in which no provision
is made for cooking in individual rooms or suites.
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — The one-hundred-year flood area as
indicated in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated May 16, 2008 and the
accompanying maps or the most recent revision thereof as issued by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.183
As used herein, regarding "group home for the handicapped," the term
"handicapped" shall mean having:
A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or
more of such person's major life activities so that such person is
incapable of living independently;
(1)
(2) A record of having such an impairment; or
(3) Being regarded as having such an impairment.
A.
However, "handicapped" shall not include current illegal use of or
addiction to a controlled substance, nor shall it include any person
whose residency in the home would constitute a direct threat to the
health and safety of other individuals.
B.
§ 260-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-7
1:493
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — The coverage of land by buildings and other
impervious materials such as asphalt.
JUNKYARD — An area of land, with or without buildings, used for the
storage, outside a completely enclosed building, of used and discarded
materials, including but not limited to wastepaper, rags, metal, building
materials, house furnishings, machinery, vehicles or parts thereof, with
or without the dismantling, processing, salvage, sale or other use or
disposition of the same. The deposit or storage on a lot of two or more
wrecked or disabled vehicles, or the major part thereof, without current
inspection stickers shall be deemed to be a "junkyard"; provided, however,
that such use shall not be deemed to be a "junkyard" if they are stored in an
enclosed building.
LARGE-SCALE DEVELOPMENT —
LIMITED-ACCESS HIGHWAY — A highway designed in such a manner
so as to provide no direct access to properties abutting its right-of-way
and including all highways designated as limited access highways by the
Planning Commission.
LOT or ZONE LOT — A piece or parcel of land occupied or intended to be
occupied by a principal building or a group of such buildings and accessory
buildings or utilized for a principal use and uses accessory or incidental to
the operation thereof, together with such open spaces as required by this
chapter, and having frontage on a public street.
COMMERCIAL — A large-scale commercial development shall be
planned for a site of not less than three acres.
A.
MANUFACTURING — A large-scale manufacturing development shall
be planned for a site of not less than 10 acres.
B.
RESIDENTIAL — A large-scale residential development shall be
planned for a site of not less than three acres.
C.
LOT, CORNER — A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their
intersection or upon two parts of the same street, such streets or parts
of the same street forming an interior angle of less than 135°. The point
of intersection of the street lot lines is the corner.
A.
LOT, DEPTH — The mean horizontal distance between the front and the
rear lot lines.
B.
LOT LINES — The property lines bounding the lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The ultimate right-of-way line of the street or
road.
(1)
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line opposite and most distant from the
front lot line.
(2)
C.
183. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 260-7 DANVILLE CODE § 260-7
1:494
MOBILE (MANUFACTURED) HOME — When located within any delineated
floodplain area and for the purpose of floodplain management, the words
"mobile home" shall be replaced with the words "manufactured home."
The term "manufactured home" is defined as a transportable, single-family
dwelling intended for permanent occupancy, office or place of assembly,
contained in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis, which
arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and
incidental unpacking and assembly operations and constructed so that it
may be used with or without a permanent foundation. The term does include
park trailers, travel trailers or other similar vehicles which are placed on a
site for more than 180 consecutive days.
MOBILE (MANUFACTURED) HOME PARK — When located within any
delineated floodplain area and for the purpose of floodplain management,
the words "mobile home park" shall be replaced with the words
"manufactured home park." The term "manufactured home park" is defined
as a parcel of land under single ownership which has been planned and
improved for the placement of two or more manufactured homes for
nontransient use.
MOTELS, MOTOR COURTS and MOTOR HOTELS — A series of attached or
semiattached dwelling structures, where each unit has convenient access
to parking space for the use of the units' occupants. The units, with the
exception of the manager's office or caretaker's unit, are designed to
provide sleeping accommodations for automobile transients or overnight
guests.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Danville.
NET DEVELOPED AREA — Total acreage excluding any area within a public
right-of-way.
NET LAND AREA — The net land area of any development parcel shall
include only the area contained within the property line and the ultimate
right-of-way line. The area within the right-of-way (public right-of-way or
other thoroughfare) shall not be computed as part of the net land area.184
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. A
side lot line separating a lot from a street is called a side street lot
line.
(3)
LOT LINE, STREET OR ALLEY — A lot line separating the lot from
a street or alley.
(4)
LOT WIDTH — The mean width of the lot measured at right angles to
its depth; such a line along which the minimum lot frontage shall be
measured at a point which shall coincide with the building set back or
front yard line.
D.
LOT AREA — The computed area contained within the lot lines and the
ultimate right-of-way line. The area within the right-of-way shall not be
computed as part of the lot area.
E.
§ 260-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-7
1:495
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot the area or dimension of which was lawful
prior to the adoption or amendment of this Zoning Ordinance but which fails
to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located
by reasons of such adoption or amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or part of a structure
manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable use or extent of
use provisions set forth herein or any amendment heretofore or hereafter
enacted, where such structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment of
such ordinance or amendment or prior to the application of such ordinance
or amendment to its location by reasons of annexation. Such nonconforming
structures include, but are not limited to, nonconforming signs.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or of structure, which
does not comply with the applicable use provisions set forth herein or any
amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully in
existence prior to the enactment of such ordinance or amendment or prior
to the application of such chapter or amendment to its location by reason of
annexation.
NURSING HOME — Any premises where persons are lodged and furnished
with meals and nursing care.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood having an average frequency of
occurrence on the order of once in 100 years and as indicated in the Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) dated May 16, 2008 and the accompanying maps
or the most recent revision thereof as issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.185
OWNER — Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal
or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records
of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or
otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the
estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate
of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court.186
PARKING AREA, PRIVATE — An open area for the same uses as a private
garage and regulated as a private garage.
PARKING AREA, PUBLIC — An open area, other than a street or other
public way, used for the parking of automobiles and available to the public
whether for a fee, free or as an accommodation for clients or customers.
PERSONAL CARE HOME — A premises in which food, shelter and personal
assistance or supervision are provided for a period exceeding 24 hours
for four or more adults who are not relatives of the operator, who do
not require the services in or of a licensed long-term care facility, but
who do require assistance for supervision in matters such as dressing,
184. Editor's Note: The definition of "no-impact home-based business," as added 12-9-2002 by
Ord. No. 448, which immediately followed this definition, was deleted at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
185. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
186. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 260-7 DANVILLE CODE § 260-7
1:496
bathing, diet, financial management, evacuation of a residence in the event
of an emergency, medication prescribed for self-administration.[Added
12-9-2002 by Ord. No. 448]
PERSONAL CARE RESIDENT — A person, unrelated to the licensee who
resides in a personal care home and who may require and receive personal
care services but does not require the level of care provided by a hospital
or long-term care facility.[Added 12-9-2002 by Ord. No. 448]
PERSONAL CARE SERVICES — Assistance or supervision in matters, such
as dressing, bathing, diet, financial management, evacuation of a resident
in the event of an emergency, or medication prescribed for selfadministration.[
Added 12-9-2002 by Ord. No. 448]
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the Borough of
Danville.
PREMISES — The area occupied by a business or other enterprise. When
more than one business or enterprise occupies a single building on the
ground floor, each business area shall be considered a separate premises.
Businesses or other enterprises which occupy other floors shall be
considered separate premises.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The office of a member of a recognized
profession. When conducted in a residential district, a professional office
shall be incidental to the residential occupancy, shall be conducted by a
member of the residential family entirely within a residential building and
shall include only the offices of doctors or physicians, dentists, optometrists,
ministers, architects, landscape architects, professional engineers, lawyers,
artists, authors and such other similar professional occupations which may
be so designated by the Zoning Hearing Board upon finding by the Board
that such occupation is truly professional in character by virtue of the need
for similar training and experience as a condition for the practice thereof
and that the practice of such occupation shall in no way adversely affect the
safe and comfortable enjoyment of property rights in any zone to a greater
extent than for the professional activities listed herein. The issuance of a
state or local license for regulation of any gainful occupation need not be
deemed indicative of professional standing.
PUBLIC AND SEMIPUBLIC USES — Uses which provide government
services as well as private organizations which provide service to the public
on a not-for-profit basis.
RECREATION —
RECREATION, COMMERCIAL — Recreation facilities operated as a
business and open to the general public for a fee.
A.
RECREATION, PRIVATE NONCOMMERCIAL — Clubs or recreation
facilities operated by a nonprofit organization and open only to bona
fide members of such organization.
B.
§ 260-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-7
1:497
REGULATORY FLOOD — A flood having an average frequency of
occurrence on the order of once in 100 years and as indicated in the Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) dated May 16, 2008 and the accompanying maps
or the most recent revision thereof as issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.187
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year flood elevation
as indicated in the most recent revision of the Flood Insurance Study (FIS)
dated May 16, 2008 and the accompanying maps or the most recent revision
thereof as issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.188
RESIDENTIAL MULTIUSE BUILDING — A building containing
nonresidential uses, with dwellings above the first story.
ROOMING HOUSE — A building containing a single dwelling unit and
rooms for the rooming and/or boarding of not more than 10 persons, by
prearrangement for a definite period of not less than one month. A rooming
house does not include a congregate housing facility for persons housed as
an alternative to incarceration or persons afflicted with and/or being treated
for addiction to a controlled substance.
SANITARY LANDFILL — A sanitary landfill is considered to be any facility
devoted to the storage and/or disposal of solid wastes pursuant to the
regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
governing sanitary landfills.
SEASONAL DWELLING — A detached dwelling not designed for year-round
use by virtue of the absence of central heating and similar facilities.
SETBACK LINE — A line established by the subdivision regulations189 and/
or Zoning Ordinance generally parallel with and measured from the lot line,
defining the limits of a yard in which no building or structure may be located
above ground, except as may be provided in said codes.
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of retail stores planned and designed to
function as a unit and having off-street parking as an integral component of
the unit.
SHOPPING PLAZA — A cohesive unit of stores or other commercial
businesses arranged and constructed according to a plan and contained
within the same parcel of land.
SIGN — A structure, device, light or natural object (including the ground
itself or any device attached thereto or painted or represented thereon)
which shall be used to identify, advertise or attract attention to any object,
product, place, activity, person, institution, organization, firm, group,
commodity, profession, enterprise, industry or business or which shall
RECREATION, PUBLIC — Recreation facilities operated as a nonprofit
enterprise by the municipality, any other governmental entity or any
nonprofit organization and open to the general public.
C.
187. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
188. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
189. Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 260-7 DANVILLE CODE § 260-7
1:498
display or include any letter, word, model, number, banner, flag, pennant,
insignia, device or representation used as an announcement, direction or
advertisement. For the purposes of this chapter, the word "sign" shall
include all signs which can be seen or are intended to be seen from any
public right-of-way either on or off the premises. No interior sign shall be
required to conform to these regulations.
SIGN, ABANDONED — A sign erected on and/or related to the use of a
property which becomes vacant and unoccupied for a period of six months
or more or any sign which no longer advertises a bona fide business
conducted or product sold on the premises or which relates to a time, event
or purpose which has passed.
SIGN, ADDRESS — A sign displaying the street number and/or name of the
occupant(s) for each premises.
SIGNAGE PROJECT — Equivalent to a period of six months beginning on the
day that a sign application is submitted to the Zoning Officer and includes
all business and outdoor advertising signs applied for within such six-month
period.
SIGN AREA — The sign area shall be considered to include all lettering,
wording and accompanying designs and symbols, together with the
background, whether open or enclosed, on which they are displayed, but
not including any supporting framework and bracing which are incidental
to the display itself.
SIGN, AWNING — A sign painted on or attached to a fixed or movable
framework, which is attached directly to a building wall.
SIGN, BANNER — A temporary or permanent sign made of a fabric or
fabric-like material which may be freely hanging or attached at all corners.
SIGN, COMMUNITY DIRECTORY — An accessory bulletin or announcement
board describing the public events of a community organization, institution
or public facility or describing the names and locations of community
businesses.
SIGN, CONSTRUCTION PROJECT — A sign located on a construction site
which identifies the project name and which provides other information
pertinent to the project developer(s), contractor(s), consultant(s) and
lender(s).
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL — A sign that indicates the distance and direction to
any business, institution, public building or parking area.
SIGN, EXTERIOR — Any sign affixed to the exterior of any building or
structure or to the windows or doors of a building or placed in or mounted
on the ground, which can and is intended to be seen from any public rightof-
way or parking lot.
SIGN, FREESTANDING — A sign supported by one or more uprights, poles,
posts or braces placed in or upon the ground in a fixed location and not
attached to any building or structure.
§ 260-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-7
1:499
SIGN, ILLUMINATED — A sign that is artificially illuminated, either
internally or externally, by means of electricity, gas, reflective or fluorescent
paint.
SIGN, INDIVIDUAL LETTERS OR SYMBOLS — Identifying letters, symbols,
designs or characters attached to an awning, marquee, roof, building
surface, wall or signboard.
SIGN, INTERIOR — Any sign mounted within a building which can and is
primarily intended to be seen from within the building.
SIGN, MARQUEE — A sign painted on or attached to a permanent
overhanging shelter which projects from the wall or surface of a building.
SIGN, OFF-PREMISES ADVERTISING — A billboard sign which contains a
message unrelated to a business or profession conducted upon the premises
where such sign is located or which is unrelated to a commodity, service or
entertainment sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located.
SIGN, PERMANENT — A sign intended to be used for a period greater than
30 days.
SIGN, POLITICAL — A sign intended to influence the vote of the electorate
on a law, statute, ordinance, amendment, rule, regulation or other measure
or on the nomination or election of a candidate for any public office.
SIGN, PORTABLE SIDEWALK — Any sign intended to advertise
merchandise, events, specials or sales and which is not fastened to a
building, structure or to the ground and is readily movable.
SIGN, PROFESSIONAL OCCUPATION — A sign identifying a home
occupation or a professional office as defined in § 260-39.
SIGN, PROJECTING — A sign which projects at an angle from and is
supported by a wall of a building.
SIGN, PUBLIC SERVICE — A sign located for the purpose of providing a
public service message or directions toward a use not readily visible from a
public street, e.g., public rest rooms, telephone, parking, business district.
SIGN, REAL ESTATE — A sign advertising a property for sale, for rent or
having been sold or rented.
SIGN, ROOF — Any sign erected and maintained wholly upon or over the
roof of any building or painted directly upon an existing roof surface.
SIGN, SHOPPING PLAZA — A sign which displays the name of the shopping
plaza only.
SIGN, TEMPORARY — A sign intended to be used for a period of 30 days
or less, announcing an event or advertising a special limited time offer not
normally available on the premises.
SIGN, WALL — A sign which is mounted to an exterior wall or other vertical
surface of a building or structure or which is painted directly upon a
building or structure.
§ 260-7 DANVILLE CODE § 260-7
1:500
SIGN, WINDOW — A permanent sign painted on or attached to the inside or
outside glass of a window or suspended within a window so as to be visible
from the public right-of-way.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A use which because of its unique characteristics
requires individual consideration in each case by the Zoning Hearing Board
as specified in Articles IX and X, before it may be permitted in the district
enumerated in Article III. In accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
the Zoning Hearing Board may require certain conditions and safeguards
before such a use is permitted.
SPECIAL PERMIT — Special approval which is required for hospitals,
nursing homes, jails and new manufactured home parks or subdivisions
and substantial improvements to such existing manufactured home park or
subdivision when such development is located partly or entirely within a
designated floodplain.
STORY — That portion of a building, included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or, if there is no floor above
it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling above it.
STREET — A public or private thoroughfare not less than 30 feet in width
if in existence prior to the passage of this chapter nor less than 50 feet in
width if established subsequent to the passage of this chapter which affords
the principal means of access to abutting property, including avenue, place,
way, drive, lane, boulevard, highway, road and any other thoroughfares
except an alley.
STORY, HALF — A partial story under gable, hip or gambrel roof, the
wall plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more
than four feet above the floor of such story; provided, however, that any
partial story shall not be used for residential purposes, other than for a
janitor or caretaker or his family.
A.
STORY, FIRST — The lowest story or the ground story of any building
the floor of which is not more than 12 inches below the average contact
ground level at the exterior walls of the building.
B.
SIDE STREET — Any street, the length of which shall be not more than
50% of the length of the largest street line of the municipality's blocks
of which it is part.
A.
RESIDENTIAL STREET — A street between two intersecting streets
upon which an R District abuts or where 50% or more of the abutting
street frontage is in predominantly residential use.
B.
Other street classifications:
ARTERIALS — Those serving large volumes of comparatively highspeed
and long-distance traffic, and which include facilities
classified as main and secondary highways by the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation, and include streets classified as
(1)
C.
§ 260-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-7
1:501
STRUCTURAL CHANGE — Any change in the structural members of a
building, such as walls, beams, columns or girders.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached
to the ground, including but not limited to buildings, sheds, mobile homes
and other similar items.190
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure either before the repair or improvement is
started or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before
the damage occurred.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA, COMMERCIAL — A device attached
to a building, structure, or telecommunications tower principally intended
for receipt or transmission of signals for such uses as commercial or public
VHF or UHF television, FM radio, two-way radio, commercial carriers,
cellular telephone, fixed-point microwave, lower-power television or AM
radio, including accessory equipment related to telecommunications. Not
included are antennas for private, noncommercial and amateur purposes,
including but not limited to ham radios and citizens band radios.[Added
12-9-2002 by Ord. No. 448]
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES, COMMERCIAL — Facilities used for
transmitting or retransmitting electronic signals, including, but not limited
to, the transmission of commercial radio or television signals or cellular
arterial thoroughfares or primary streets in the Traffic Plan set
forth in the municipality's Comprehensive Plan.
COLLECTOR STREETS — Those which, in addition to giving access
to abutting properties, intercept facilities and provide routes to
community facilities and to major traffic streets, and include
streets classified as secondary streets in the Traffic Plan set forth
in the municipality's Comprehensive Plan.
(2)
HALF OR PARTIAL STREET — A street, generally parallel and
adjacent to a property line, having a lesser right-of-way width than
normally required for satisfactory improvement and use of the
street.
(3)
LOCAL ACCESS STREETS INCLUDING MINOR STREETS — Those
used primarily to provide access to abutting property.
(4)
MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS — Minor streets parallel and
adjacent to major traffic streets, providing access to abutting
properties and control of intersections with the major traffic
streets.
(5)
MAJOR STREETS — All streets other than local access streets or
marginal access streets.
(6)
190. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 260-7 DANVILLE CODE § 260-7
1:502
telephone communications. TV satellite disc antenna is not included under
this category of use.[Added 12-9-2002 by Ord. No. 448]
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES, RESIDENTIAL — Antennas for
private, noncommercial and amateur purposes, including TV satellite dish
antennae as regulated in § 260-38.[Added 12-9-2002 by Ord. No. 448]
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY BUILDING, COMMERCIAL — The
building in which electromagnetic receiving and relay equipment for a
telecommunications tower is housed.[Added 12-9-2002 by Ord. No. 448]
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER, COMMERCIAL — A freestanding
structure, including any guy wires, principally intended to support facilities
for receipt or transmission of signals for uses such as commercial or public
VHF or UHF television, FM radio, two-way radio, commercial carriers,
cellular telephone, fixed-point microwave, low-power television, or AM
radio, including accessory equipment related to telecommunications. Not
included are towers and supportive structures for private, noncommercial
and amateur purposes including but not limited to ham radios and citizens
band radios.[Added 12-9-2002 by Ord. No. 448]
TRANSIENT HOUSING FACILITIES — Transient housing facilities shall
include halfway houses, emergency shelters or missions and other types of
housing facilities which are to be occupied on a temporary basis, such as
a fixed period of time. Such housing shall be distinguished from housing
occupied by a family in that family occupancy equates to an indefinite
occupancy period.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT — Any person conducting a transient retail
business.191
TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESS — A business conducted in a store, hotel,
motel, house, building or structure for the sale at retail of goods, wares
or merchandise, and which is intended to be conducted for a temporary
period of time and not permanently. If the place in which the business is
to be conducted is rented, leased or occupied for a period of six months or
less, such a fact shall be presumptive evidence that the business carried on
therein is a "transient retail business."192
TRAVEL TRAILER — A vehicle less than 30 feet in length and used for
temporary living or sleeping purposes and standing on wheels.
TRUCK — The regulation of truck parking in R Districts as set forth in
§ 260-32F hereof shall apply to any cargo-type over-the-road vehicle over
four tons with more than four wheels and to any vehicle which is utilized for
the collection or storage of solid waste.
ULTIMATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The full width of the road designated by the
governing body to be the minimum required width of any public right-ofway.
191. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
192. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 260-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-7
1:503
VARIANCE — The Zoning Hearing Board may authorize departure to a
minor degree from the terms of this chapter in direct regard to hardship
peculiar to an individual lot in accordance with the procedures set forth in
the chapter.
YARD — An open space, as may be required by this chapter, of uniform
width or depth on the same lot with a building or a group of buildings, which
open space lies between the principal building or group of buildings and
the nearest lot line and is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground
upward except as herein permitted.
ZONING HEARING BOARD — The Zoning Hearing Board of the Borough of
Danville.
ZONING MAP — The Zoning Map or Maps of the Borough of Danville,
Pennsylvania, dated May 1996, together with all amendments subsequently
adopted.
ZONING OFFICER — The administrative officer, appointed by the governing
body, who shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
YARD, FRONT — An open space extending the full width of the lot
between the front of the building and the ultimate right-of-way line
unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as
specified elsewhere in this chapter.
A.
YARD, REAR — An open space extending the full width of the lot,
between a building and the rear lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed
from the ground upward except as specified elsewhere in this chapter.
B.
YARD, SIDE — An open space extending from the front yard to the rear
yard between a building and the nearest side lot line, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward except as specified elsewhere in
this chapter.
C.
§ 260-7 DANVILLE CODE § 260-7
1:504
ARTICLE III
Zone Districts and Zoning Map
§ 260-8. Designation of zone districts.193
In accordance with the municipality's Master Plan and with consideration
of the character of the municipality and its various parts and the suitability
of the various parts for particular uses and structures, the Borough of
Danville is hereby divided into 11 zoning districts, differentiated according
to permitted uses and building regulations, as follows:
R-1A One-Family Residential District
R-1B One-Family Residential District
R-2A Two-Family Residential District
R-2B Two-Family Residential District
R-3 Multifamily Residential District
C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District
C-2 Central Business District
C-2A General Commercial District
C-3 Highway Commercial District
M-1 Manufacturing District
P-1 Public District
§ 260-9. Zoning Map.194
§ 260-10. Interpretation of boundaries.
A. The location and boundaries of said zones are hereby established as
shown on the current or most recent Official Zoning Map of the
Borough of Danville, on file in the office of the Secretary of the
Borough. Said Official Zoning Map, together with any map inserts, is
hereby made a part of this chapter as if the same were all fully
described and set forth herein.
B. For the purposes of this chapter, the boundaries of all identified
floodplain areas within the Borough are as shown in the Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) dated May 16, 2008 and the accompanying maps
or the most recent revision thereof as issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, which are declared to be part of this chapter and
which are available for inspection at the Borough offices.
A. Designation of zone boundaries. The zone boundary lines are intended
to follow the right-of-way lines of streets and roads, existing lot and
property lines, the mean and/or flood level of water bodies and borough
193. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
194. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 260-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-10
1:505
§ 260-11. Degree of restrictiveness.
The phrase "more restrictive uses," as employed in this chapter, shall mean
the following:
boundary lines, all as shown on the Zoning Map; but where a zone
boundary line does not follow such a line, its location is shown on the
Zoning Map by a specific dimension expressing its distance from a
street or road line or other boundary line as indicated or by a reference
to a contour line delineated on the United States Geological Survey
Maps. [Amended 5-6-2008 by Ord. No. 491195]
B. Determination of locations of boundaries.
(1) The Floodway and Flood-Fringe Districts, as well as the
Approximated Floodplain Districts, shall serve as overlays to the
existing underlying zoning as shown on the Borough's Official
Zoning Map, and as such, the provisions for these districts shall
serve as a supplement to the underlying district provisions. Where
there happens to be any conflict between the provisions or
requirements of the Approximated Floodplain, Floodway or the
Flood-Fringe District and those of any underlying district, the more
restrictive provisions and/or those pertaining to the Floodway or
Flood-Fringe District shall apply.
(2) In the event of uncertainty as to the true location of a zone
boundary line in a particular instance, any decision of the Zoning
Officer may be appealed before the Zoning Hearing Board by an
affected property owner. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Hearing
Board to render its determination with respect thereto.
(3) Where interpretation is needed concerning the exact location of
any boundary of the Floodway or Flood-Fringe or Approximated
Floodplain District(s), the Zoning Hearing Board shall make the
necessary determination. The person questioning or contesting the
location of the district boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to present his case to the Board and to submit his own
technical evidence if he so desires.
C. Division of lot or parcel in single ownership. Where a zone boundary
line divides a lot or parcel in single ownership at the time of the passage
of this chapter, any use authorized or permitted in either zone may be
extended a distance not to exceed 50 feet beyond the boundary of the
zone in which such use is authorized or permitted.
A. Those uses permitted in a P-1 Zone are the most restrictive.
B. All other uses are less restrictive in the order they are permitted in the
zones in the sequence shown: R-1A, R-1B, R-2A, R-2B, R-3, C-1, C-2,
C-2A, C-3 and M-1.
195. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 260-10 DANVILLE CODE § 260-11
1:506
§ 260-12. Limitation of land use.
Except as provided in this chapter, no building or part thereof or other
structure shall be erected, altered, added to or enlarged, nor shall any land,
building, structures or premises be used, designed or intended to be used
for any purpose other than the uses hereinafter listed as permitted in the
zone in which such building or premises are located.
C. Where a use is specifically enumerated in a less restrictive zone, such
use shall not be permitted in a more restrictive zone unless it is
specifically enumerated as a permitted use therein.
§ 260-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-12
1:507

ARTICLE IV
District Regulations
§ 260-13. Schedules generally.
The included schedules set forth the restrictions and controls intended
to regulate development in each zone district. These regulations are
supplemented by Articles V and VI and other sections of this chapter.
§ 260-14. Schedule I, Residential District Use Regulations.
Schedule I governs the development and the use of land in all residential
zone districts.196
§ 260-15. Schedule II, Commercial District Use Regulations.
Schedule II governs the development and the use of land in all commercial
districts.197
§ 260-16. Schedule III, Manufacturing District Use Regulations.
Schedule III governs the development and the use of land in the
Manufacturing District.198
§ 260-17. Schedule IV, Public District Use Regulations.
Schedule IV governs the development and the use of land in the Public
District.199
§ 260-18. Floodplains. [Amended 5-6-2008 by Ord. No. 491200]
No structure of land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall be
located, relocated, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged or structurally
altered except in full compliance with the terms and provisions of this
section, Chapter 120, Floodplain Management, Part 2, Flood Damage
Control, of the Danville Borough Code and any other applicable ordinance
and regulations which apply to uses with the jurisdiction of this section,
including all applicable federal and state permits required.
196. Editor's Note: Said schedule is included at the end of this chapter.
197. Editor's Note: Said schedule is included at the end of this chapter.
198. Editor's Note: Said schedule is included at the end of this chapter.
199. Editor's Note: Said schedule is included at the end of this chapter.
200. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 260-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-18
1:509

ARTICLE V
Supplementary Lot, Height and Yard Regulations
§ 260-19. Zone lot regulations.
A. Existing zone lots of record. In any R District, only a single-family
detached dwelling or an appurtenant use accessory to an adjacent
principal permitted use may be erected on a nonconforming zone lot of
official record at the effective date of this chapter, irrespective of its
area or width, the owner of which does not own any adjoining property
which would create a conforming lot if all or part of said property were
combined with the subject zone lot; provided, however, that such lots
shall be considered as separate lots in those cases where the
development of such lots shall conform with the setback requirements
of this chapter; and provided, further, that no lot or lots in single
ownership shall hereafter be reduced so as to create one or more
nonconforming lots; and provided, further, that on any nonconforming
lot no side yard shall be less than five feet nor shall any side yard
adjoining a side street be less than 10 feet; provided, further, that the
rear yard of any such lot shall in no case be less than 10 feet, and the
front yard shall be as required in § 260-21B.
B. Minimum lot sizes where there is no central water or sewer. Unless the
regulations of the district in which they are located or other state or
local regulations require greater lot areas or lot widths, the following
regulations shall apply:
(1) When not served by public water or sewer, the minimum lot area
per dwelling unit shall be not less than 20,000 square feet nor less
than 100 feet in width at the front lot line when such lot is not
served by a public water or sanitary sewer system; and provided,
further, that any dwelling erected on such lot shall be in
accordance with the yard and coverage requirements as specified
in any R-1 District.
(2) Not served by public sewer. Lots served by a public water system
and an individual on-lot sewage disposal system such as a cesspool
or septic tank shall not be less than 10,000 square feet in area per
dwelling unit nor less than 80 feet in width at the front lot line and
shall be in accordance with the following yard and coverage
requirements:
(a) Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
(b) Minimum front yard: 25 feet.
(c) Minimum side yard (one): 10 feet.
(d) Minimum side yard (both): 25 feet.
(e) Maximum lot coverage: 25%.
§ 260-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-19
1:511
§ 260-20. Height regulations.
C. Lot frontage. The minimum lot frontage of any lot shall be measured
between the minimum building setback line as required for the district
where located and a parallel line not more than 10 feet beyond the
setback line. The width of any lot in any district, except C and M
Districts, shall not be less than 30% of the depth of said lot at the front
lot line; provided, however, that no lot need exceed a width of 300 feet
unless otherwise required in the district where located, nor shall any
such lot having a depth of 300 feet or more be less than 50 feet along
the front line.
D. Corner lots. At all intersecting public right-of-way lines, no obstructions
to vision (other than an existing building, post, column or tree)
exceeding 30 inches in height above the established grade of the street
at the property line shall be erected or maintained on any lot within the
triangle formed by the intersecting public right-of-way and a line drawn
between points along such street lot lines 30 feet distant from their
points of intersection. All trees or tree branches extending into this
area shall be trimmed so that branches are at least 10 feet above the
street grade.201
E. Through lots. Where a single lot under individual ownership extends
from a street to an alley, the widest street shall be deemed the street
upon which the property fronts and no principal structures and no
dwelling shall be erected which shall face on the rear of such a lot;
provided, however, that dwelling groups shall not be subject to this
limitation on the location of principal structures.
F. Required area or space cannot be reduced. The area or dimension of
any zone lot, yard, parking area or other space shall not be reduced to
less than the minimum required by this chapter; and if already less than
the minimum required by this chapter, said area or dimension may be
continued and shall not be further reduced.
A. General application. No building or structure shall have a greater
number of stories than are permitted in Article IV hereof; provided,
further, that the aggregate height of such buildings or structures shall
not exceed the number of feet permitted in Article IV, except as
otherwise provided herein in Subsection B.
B. Permitted exceptions.
(1) Height limitations stipulated elsewhere in this chapter shall not
apply to open amusement areas, barns, silos, schools, church
spires, belfries, cupolas and domes, monuments, water towers,
utility poles, chimneys, smokestacks, flagpoles, radio and television
towers, masts and aerials or to parapet walls extending not more
than four feet above the limiting height of the building.
201. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 260-19 DANVILLE CODE § 260-20
1:512
§ 260-21. Yard regulations.
(2) In any district other than the R-1 or R-2 Districts, a building may be
permitted to exceed the height limit of the district where it is to be
located and may be erected up to a height of not more than six
stories or 75 feet, whichever is less, provided that it can be shown
that adequate fire protection will be available and that such
modification shall be approved by the Zoning Hearing Board, upon
the review and approval of the Planning Commission, only in
accordance with the procedures established for the approval of a
special exception.
(3) Elderly housing, as defined in Article II, may be erected up to a
height of three stories, but shall not exceed a height of 40 feet.
[Added 6-14-2005 by Ord. No. 467]
C. Conical surface zone. The Zoning Map includes the delineation of a
conical surface zone pertaining to the Danville airport. Within this zone,
no obstruction, including a structure, growth or other object, including
a mobile object shall be permitted to a height which would result in its
elevation to or greater than 909 feet above mean sea level.
A. Side yards.
(1) Side yard width may be varied. When the side wall of a building is
not parallel with the side lot line or is broken or irregular, the side
yard may be varied. In such cases the average width of the side
yard shall not be less than the otherwise required minimum width;
provided, however, that such side yard shall not be narrower at any
point than 1/2 the otherwise required minimum width; and
provided, further, that no building wall shall be nearer to any point
on a side property line than five feet.
(2) Side yard of corner lot. Any corner lot delineated by subdivision
after the adoption of this chapter shall provide a side street setback
line which shall not be less than the minimum front yard required
on any adjoining lot fronting on a side street.
B. Front yard exception. When an unimproved lot is situated between two
improved lots, each having a principal building within 25 feet of any
side lot line of such unimproved lot, the front yard may be reduced to
the greatest depth of the front yard of the two adjoining improved lots,
but shall be not less than 15 feet. Where any unimproved lot shall front
on a right-of-way which is proposed on the municipality's Official Map
to be widened, the front yard of such lot shall be as required by Article
IV hereof and shall be measured from such proposed future right-ofway.
C. Front yard of corner lot. The front yard of any corner lot shall be
established on the wider of the two streets abutting said lot, except
§ 260-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-21
1:513
§ 260-22. Maximum coverage.
§ 260-23. Number of buildings restricted.
There shall be not more than one principal dwelling structure nor more than
two accessory structures, including a private garage, on each residential
zone lot except as otherwise provided herein for dwelling groups, largewhere
the widths of the two abutting streets are equal, then the front
yard may be established on either street.
D. Projections into required yards. Certain architectural features may
project into required yards as follows:
(1) Cornices, canopies, eaves or other architectural features may
project into a side yard a distance not exceeding two inches per one
foot of side yard width, but may not exceed a total of three feet.
(2) Fire escapes may project into side and rear yards a distance not
exceeding four feet six inches.
(3) Bay windows, balconies, fireplaces, uncovered stairways and
necessary landings and chimneys may project a distance not
exceeding four feet, provided that such features do not occupy, in
the aggregate, more than 1/3 of the length of the building wall on
which they are located.
(4) Open patios and decks may be located in side yards and rear yards.
If the patio/deck is located less than eight feet from a side or rear
property line, it shall be screened in accordance with § 260-25A
hereof. If the patio/deck is located eight feet or more from a side or
rear property line, no screening shall be required. In no case,
however, shall any patio or deck be nearer to any side or rear
property line than three feet. In case of a corner lot, no enclosed
patios shall extend into the side yard adjoining such side street.
E. Additional yards required where nonresidential uses abut R Districts.
All nonresidential uses first permitted in C-1 or less restrictive districts
which abut, at the lot line or on the same street, an R District, shall
provide yards, where they abut, of not less than 50 feet in depth;
provided, however, that if the yard requirement for the nonresidential
use is greater, then such greater distance shall be required. Such yards
shall be maintained as landscaped open spaces and shall not be
occupied by parking, loading or outdoor storage uses.
A. Building coverage. Land coverage by principal and accessory buildings
or structures on each zone lot shall not be greater than is permitted in
Article IV or other pertinent sections of this chapter.
B. Impervious coverage. The maximum impervious coverage as set forth in
Article IV hereof shall apply to the combined coverage by buildings and
other surfaces such as paving for driveways and parking areas.
§ 260-21 DANVILLE CODE § 260-23
1:514
scale developments and transient dwelling facilities; and provided, further,
that a swimming pool and all necessary facilities and structures related to a
swimming pool shall be considered to be one accessory structure.
§ 260-24. Accessory structures.
§ 260-25. General landscaping regulations.
A. Maximum permitted height. One and one-half stories or 15 feet.
B. Minimum yard regulations.
(1) Unattached accessory structures in R Districts. Accessory
structures which are not attached to a principal structure may be
erected within one of the side yards or within the rear yard, but not
in the front yard; provided, further, that accessory structures may
be erected in yards of residential properties if such structures
comply with the following:
(a) Rear yard: three feet; if fronting on an alley: 10 feet.
(b) Side yard, corner lot: same as for the principal structure and if
fronting on an alley: 10 feet.202
(c) Side yard, interior lot: three feet.
(2) Attached accessory structures in R Districts. When an accessory
structure is attached to the principal building, it shall comply in all
respects with the requirements of this chapter applicable to the
principal building.
(3) Nondwelling accessory structures in other districts. Nondwelling
accessory structures shall comply with front and side yard
requirements for the principal structure to which they are
accessory and shall be not closer to any rear property line than 10
feet.
A. Enclosed uses. Any enclosed use as may be required by this chapter to
be landscaped in accordance with this subsection shall provide a visual
screen not less than six feet high, consisting of a fence or evergreentype
hedges or shrubs spaced at intervals of not more than six feet,
located and maintained in good condition within 15 feet of the property
line adjoining or abutting an R District.
B. Unenclosed uses. Except for nurseries and the display for sales
purposes of new or used cars, motorcycles, trucks, trailers or farm
equipment in operative condition or other similar uses, any use which is
not conducted within a completely enclosed building shall be entirely
enclosed by a six-foot-high solid fence maintained in good condition or
evergreen-type hedges or shrubs, which shall be not less than six feet in
202. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 260-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-25
1:515
height, at intervals of not more than six feet and maintained in good
condition.
C. Landscaping requirements for parking lots. The objective of this
provision is to protect and promote the public health, safety and
general welfare by requiring the landscaping of parking lots which will
serve to reduce heat and noise and the glare of vehicle lights; to
preserve underground water reserves and return precipitation to the
groundwater; to act as a natural drainage system and ameliorate
stormwater drainage problems; to reduce soil erosion; to provide
shade; to relieve the blighted appearance of parking lots; and to
facilitate the creation of a convenient and attractive community.
(1) Landscape plan.
(a) No parking lot of 10 or more spaces shall be constructed,
enlarged or reconstructed until a landscape plan for that
parking lot has been approved by the Zoning Officer. The
Zoning Officer shall not approve the landscape plan submitted
to him unless it conforms to the requirements of this section.
(b) Landscape plans shall be prepared by a registered architect,
professional engineer, landscape architect or other qualified
landscaper and may be submitted as an element of the site
plan.
(c) Landscape plans shall be drawn to scale, including dimensions
and distances, and shall clearly delineate the existing and
proposed parking spaces or other vehicular use areas, access
aisles, driveways and the location, size and description of all
landscape materials.
(2) Parking lot landscaping design criteria.
(a) All parking lot landscaping shall be of such quality as to
improve and enhance the site and its surrounding areas.
(b) The primary landscaping materials used in parking lots shall
be trees which provide shade or are capable of providing shade
at maturity. Shrubbery, hedges and other planting material
may be used to complement the tree landscaping but shall not
be the sole contribution to the landscaping. Effective use of
earth berms and existing topography is also encouraged as a
component of the landscape plan.
(c) The interior dimensions of any planting area or planting
median shall be sufficient to protect the landscaping material
planted therein and to ensure proper growth.
(d) In those instances where plant material exists on a parking lot
site prior to its development, such landscape material may be
used if approved as meeting the requirements of this chapter.
§ 260-25 DANVILLE CODE § 260-25
1:516
§ 260-26. Miscellaneous building regulations.
(3) Planting materials. All planting materials shall be suitable for
planting in the municipality and shall require minimal
maintenance. All shade trees to be used shall be eight to 10 feet in
overall height upon planting and of a variety which shall attain an
average mature spread greater than 20 feet.
(4) Interior coverage requirements. Where a parking lot has more than
two rows, not less than 6% of the interior of a parking lot shall be
landscaped and one tree shall be planted for every 200 square feet
of required interior landscaped area. The landscaping and planting
areas shall generally be dispersed evenly throughout the parking
lots. Where a parking lot abuts buildings on the subject property on
more than one side, border plantings adjacent to those buildings
may be considered as part of the interior landscape requirement.203
(5) Perimeter coverage requirements. Perimeter landscaping shall be
required along any side of a parking lot of 10 or more spaces that
abuts adjoining property that is not a right-of-way. A landscaping
strip having a minimum width of four feet shall be located between
the parking area and the abutting property lines.
(6) Street coverage requirements.
(a) Street landscaping shall be required along any side of a
parking lot of 10 or more spaces that abuts the right-of-way of
any street, road or highway.
(b) A landscaping strip having a minimum width of five feet shall
be located between the abutting right-of-way and the parking
lot.
(c) One tree shall be planted for each 40 linear feet of the
landscaping strip.
(7) Maintenance. The owners and their agents shall be responsible for
providing, protecting and maintaining all landscaping in healthy
and growing condition, replacing it when necessary and keeping it
free of refuse and debris.
A. Uses to be enclosed. All nonresidential uses, except for off-street
parking and loading facilities, service stations, transportation
terminals, storage yards, junkyards, vehicle sales lots and similar uses,
shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building.
B. Unenclosed nonresidential uses. Unenclosed M District uses. All M
District uses which are not conducted wholly within a completely
enclosed building shall be not less than 100 feet distant from any R
District.
203. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 260-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-26
1:517
C. Special regulations for housing for the elderly.
(1) Maximum density. Increased density for housing for the elderly. In
any R District where housing shall be designed for occupancy by
elderly persons 60 years of age or older, the minimum lot area
required per dwelling unit shall be reduced to permit a maximum
density of 40 dwelling units for elderly persons per net acre.
(2) Off-street parking. Accessory off-street parking required to serve
housing for the elderly shall be provided in an amount of not less
than one space per three elderly dwelling units.
D. Enclosure of porches.
(1) In any new construction, no porch shall extend into any required
yard except open patios and decks as provided under § 260-21D.
(2) Any open patio, deck or porch which has been constructed within
any required yard prior to the date of this chapter shall not be
enclosed, except as follows:
(a) On an interior lot where such porch shall be located in a front
yard and the enclosure of such porch would be on a property
where such enclosure would not extend beyond the front wall
of the building or porch of any adjoining property.
(b) On a corner lot, the same provisions described in this
subsection shall apply. In adding the enclosure of a front porch,
it must also be in accordance with § 260-19D concerning the
clear sight triangle.
(c) The enclosure of a front porch in a required front yard of either
a corner lot or an interior lot shall not be allowed if such
property adjoins an undeveloped zone lot in separate
ownership.
E. Fences.
(1) Fences and walls may be erected, altered and maintained within
the yards, excluding required buffer yards, with the following
provisions: [Amended 10-12-1999 by Ord. No. 405]
(a) Any such fence or wall in the front yard shall not exceed five
feet in height.
(b) Any fence or wall in the side or rear yard may be a maximum of
eight feet in height.
(c) Any fence or wall located in the side or rear yard exceeding six
feet in height shall contain openings therein equal to 50% of
the area of that portion of the wall or fence exceeding six feet.
Any fence or wall located in the front yard exceeding four feet
in height shall contain openings therein equal to 50% of the
§ 260-26 DANVILLE CODE § 260-26
1:518
area of that portion of the wall or fence that exceeds four feet.
[Amended 8-12-2014 by Ord. No. 520]
(2) No fence shall be constructed in any street or alley right-of-way.
(3) Fences shall be constructed of durable materials, maintained in
good condition and not allowed to become dilapidated.
(4) All walls, fences and similar structures must meet the intersection
visibility requirements set forth in § 260-19D; they shall not be
erected or altered and hedges, trees or other growth shall not be
planted or maintained which may cause danger to traffic on a
sidewalk, street or road by obstructing the view or passage. In the
event that trees are planted or maintained in this area, they shall
be trimmed so that branches are at least 10 feet above the street
grade. [Amended 11-8-2011 by Ord. No. 507]
§ 260-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-26
1:519

ARTICLE VI
Supplementary Regulations Governing Special Exceptions and
Certain Other Uses
§ 260-27. Amusement uses.
A. Amusement center, bowling alley, dance halls and similar places of
amusement.
(1) Such uses, except amusement parks, shall be conducted entirely
within an enclosed structure.
(2) Parking areas shall be screened from adjoining residential
properties in accordance with § 260-25A hereof.
(3) A principal structure shall be not less than 20 feet from any
property line or such greater distance as may be otherwise
required in the district where located or as set forth in § 260-21E
hereof.
(4) There shall be no offensive noise or vibration; such elements may
be emitted only in accordance with the performance standards set
forth in Article VII.
(5) Applications for indoor theaters, bowling alleys, indoor ice- and
roller-skating rinks, gymnasiums and indoor handball and tennis
courts shall be accompanied by a site development plan.
(6) The site development plan shall show building placement and
dimensions, parking, landscaping, internal circulation and the size
and location of signage.
(7) The lot size shall be not less than two acres.
B. Outdoor recreation facilities.
(1) Such uses shall include golf courses, ice-skating rinks, swimming
pools, tennis courts, amusement parks and other similar uses.
(2) Unenclosed recreational facilities shall be located not less than 25
feet from any property line except where greater distances are
otherwise required herein and shall be effectively screened from
adjoining dwelling uses in accordance with the provisions of
§ 260-25B.
(3) Illuminated signs and other lights shall be directed away or
shielded from adjoining residential properties in such a way as not
to disturb the occupants thereof.
(4) No public address system is permitted except where such system
will not be audible at any residential property line.
(5) Private swimming pools more than 24 inches deep, permanent and
portable, which shall be accessory to a principal noncommercial
§ 260-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-27
1:521
§ 260-28. Community facilities and services.
dwelling use shall be regulated as follows: [Amended 7-10-2007
by Ord. No. 483]
(a) May be erected only on the same zone lot as the principal
structure.
(b) May be erected only in the rear yard and shall be a distance of
not less than 10 feet from the rear lot line nor less than three
feet from any side yard.
(c) The pool shall be solely used for the enjoyment of the
occupants of the principal use of the property on which it is
located, and their guests, and no fee shall be charged.
(d) The swimming pool shall be so walled or fenced, as to prevent
uncontrolled access by children from the street or from
adjacent properties, in accordance with Pennsylvania's
Uniform Construction Code.
(e) The swimming pool's power supply shall be in compliance with
Pennsylvania's Uniform Construction Code.
A. Essential services, enclosed or permanent structures. Such uses are
intended to include facilities for sewage treatment, electric substations,
transformers, switches and auxiliary apparatus, as well as local
governmental services such as police stations, firehouses and similar
uses. Where such uses are proposed to be located in a Residential
District, they shall be subject to the following regulations:
(1) Such facility shall not be located on a residential street, unless no
other site is available, and shall be so located as to draw a minimum
of vehicular traffic to and through such streets.
(2) The location, design and operation of such facility shall not
adversely affect the character of the surrounding residential area.
(3) Adequate fences, barriers and other safety devices shall be
provided and shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions
of § 260-25A.
(4) Noise emitted from electric substations shall not be greater than
permitted in accordance with the performance standards set forth
herein.
B. Essential services, open. Such uses shall be limited to the erection,
construction, alteration or maintenance, by public utilities or municipal
or other governmental agencies, of underground or overhead gas,
electrical, steam or water transmission or distribution systems,
collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including poles,
wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes,
police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and other similar equipment
§ 260-27 DANVILLE CODE § 260-28
1:522
§ 260-29. Residential and residential-related commercial uses.
and accessories in connection therewith reasonably necessary for the
furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or municipal
or other governmental agencies or for the public health or safety or
general welfare. Such uses shall not include sanitary landfills and
related uses such as staging areas or other means of solid waste
disposal. Where applicable, the landscaping regulations of § 260-25B
shall apply.
C. Hospitals, churches or other religious or philanthropic institutions. All
such uses shall be located on a public street which shall have a
pavement width of not less than 38 feet, and they shall maintain a
minimum ten-foot-wide landscaped strip in accordance with the
provisions of § 260-25 on all property lines abutting R Districts and all
residential streets. Such uses shall not be located or designed in such a
manner as would be detrimental to the privacy, convenience and
property values of nearby residential development.
D. Child day-care center (including family day-care home and group daycare
home). Such uses shall be situated on a zone lot of not less than
10,000 square feet, except where a greater area is otherwise required
herein, and shall be screened in accordance with the provisions of
§ 260-25. Such uses shall provide evidence of all required state
approvals.
E. Public and parochial schools and colleges and private schools and
colleges for academic instruction. In any R District, such uses,
including play areas, shall be located not less than 100 feet from any lot
line, except where greater distances are otherwise required herein.
Schools will be located on or within close proximity to roads having a
pavement width of not less than 38 feet.
F. Community buildings, social halls, lodges, fraternal organizations,
clubs and similar uses in R Districts.
(1) All buildings must be a minimum of 20 feet from all lot lines, except
where greater distances are otherwise required herein.
(2) There shall be no external evidence of any gainful activity. Access
to any space used for gainful activity shall be from within the
building. Retail sales shall be limited to members and guests only.
(3) Any such use shall be located on a street having a pavement width
of at least 30 feet or shall be able to provide access without causing
heavy traffic on local residential streets.
(4) All applications for such uses in R Districts shall demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board that the proposed use will
serve primarily the residents of the surrounding neighborhood and
that the use cannot satisfactorily be located elsewhere to serve said
neighborhood.
§ 260-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-29
1:523
A. Two-family and multifamily dwellings, including dwelling groups.
(1) All two-family, townhouse and other multifamily development sites,
including dwelling groups, shall be provided with an existing or
approved public and/or community-type water supply and sanitary
sewer system, approved by appropriate local and state health
authorities having jurisdiction. Excepted from this regulation is the
development of a two-family dwelling on an individual zone lot.
(2) Minimum lot area, coverage and yard requirements.
(a) Two-family dwellings. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit
shall be as specified in Article IV hereof for the zone district
where situated, except that in zones designated R-1, the
minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be not less than 5,625
square feet. Minimum frontage, depth, yards and maximum
coverage shall be as specified for the zone district where
situated.204
(b) Multifamily dwellings.
[1] Minimum lot size. Garden apartment, townhouse or other
multifamily developments shall not be erected on a zone
lot of less than two acres. The minimum width of such a lot
shall not be less than 150 feet at the front property line.
[2] Maximum lot coverage. The land area covered by
buildings, garages and other accessory structures shall
not exceed an aggregate of 25% of the lot area; and
maximum impervious coverage shall not exceed 40% of
the lot area.
[3] Yards. The following yard requirements shall not apply to
townhouses or to two-family dwellings on individual lots.
[a] Front yard: no structure shall be located nearer to a
front street property line than 50 feet.205
[b] Rear yard: no structure shall be located nearer to a
rear property line than 50 feet.
[c] Side yard: no structure shall be located nearer to a
side property line than 30 feet.
[d] A building wall exposing both windows and an
entranceway shall be located not closer to another
building than a distance equal to the height of the
taller building of the two, but in no case less than 50
feet.
204. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
205. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 260-29 DANVILLE CODE § 260-29
1:524
[4] Distance between buildings. Where there is no property
line separating the buildings, a building wall exposing only
windows or only an entranceway shall be located no closer
to another building than a distance equal to the height of
the taller building of the two, but in no case less than 25
feet.
(c) Dwelling groups.
[1] Minimum lot size. Where a group of two or more singlefamily
or two-family dwelling structures are located on a
single zone lot, the minimum lot area per dwelling unit
shall be as required for single-family and two-family
dwelling structures in the district where they are located;
provided, however, that the lot sizes may be reduced if
replaced by equivalent adjacent areas of common open
space.
[2] Maximum lot coverage. The maximum coverage of land by
buildings shall be as required for the district where
located; provided, however, that where the lot size is
reduced as provided herein the maximum lot coverage
may be increased by the same percentage as the
percentage of lot size reduction.
[3] Yards.
[a] Minimum yard requirements shall be as required for
the district where located.
[b] Where there is no property line separating two or
more structures on a zone lot, the distance between
such buildings shall be equal to the distance that
would otherwise be required if the structures would
be separated by a property line equidistant from the
structures.
(3) Maximum number of dwelling units. Garden apartments and
townhouses shall not exceed eight dwelling units per structure.
(4) Permanent open space. In addition to the yard, setback and offstreet
parking requirements of this chapter, there shall be provided
a minimum of 10% of the gross area of the site to be permanently
set aside for open recreation area, which shall be for the common
use of the residents thereof.
(5) Off-street parking. Provision for off-street parking shall be as
required in § 260-32.
(6) Approval of site plan. The plans for any proposed two-family or
multifamily development other than a two-family dwelling
structure on a single lot shall require the approval of the Zoning
§ 260-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-29
1:525
Hearing Board as provided in § 260-56E(3) and the requirements of
this section.206
B. Transient dwellings, including motels, motor courts, motor hotels and
similar uses.
(1) Such uses shall have a minimum area for each unit of occupancy of
150 square feet and shall include a minimum of one bedroom and
an enclosed bathroom containing a bathtub or shower, commode
and lavatory and be supplied with hot and cold running water.
(2) Illuminated signs and other lights shall be directed away from or
shielded from adjoining residential properties in such a way as not
to disturb the occupants thereof.
(3) Such uses shall not be closer than 200 feet to an R District, shall be
located on a public street having a pavement width of not less than
38 feet and shall provide ingress and egress so as to minimize
traffic congestion.
(4) Site development standards.
(a) A site development plan shall accompany each application and
shall show building placement, parking, vehicular safety
control features, specific landscaping components and the size
and location of signage.
(b) Lot size shall be not less than two acres.
(c) Lot width shall be not less than 250 feet.
(d) Surface drainage shall be such that will not subject adjoining
properties or streets to damage. A stormwater management
plan and a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be
designed to control runoff for a ten-year storm and shall be in
accordance with Act 167 of 1978.207 Such plans shall be
accompanied by evidence of approval by appropriate agencies
and authorities.
(e) An architectural rendering showing the appearance of the
facade(s) of the structure(s) visible from the highway which it
faces must be submitted along with the site development plan.
C. Trailers. Trailers, other than recreation vehicles, which are not placed
on a permanent foundation shall be permitted only in mobile
(manufactured) home parks.
D. Conversions, year-round dwellings. Conversion of a single-family
residence to a two-family residence shall be permitted only in an R-2 or
less restrictive district, provided that:
206. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
207. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 260-29 DANVILLE CODE § 260-29
1:526
(1) The minimum lot area per dwelling shall be as required for the zone
district where the zone lot to be converted shall be located.
(2) Where such conversion is undertaken there shall be provided on
the same zone lot not fewer than two additional off-street parking
spaces for each additional dwelling unit, in accordance with the
provisions of § 260-32 hereof.
(3) Such structure shall contain not less than 2,000 square feet of
living space, and no dwelling unit therein shall contain less than
1,000 square feet of living space.208
(4) There shall be no structural alteration to the exterior so it would
appear as other than a single-family structure.
E. Conversion of nondwelling structures. Conforming nondwelling
structures may be converted to other nondwelling structures which
shall be of equal or greater restrictiveness than the use being
converted. No nondwelling structure having plate glass windows shall,
however, be converted to a residential use unless such windows are
removed from the structure; and no such building which has already
been converted shall be further converted to provide for additional
dwelling units unless the plate glass windows are removed and the
facade is renovated to reflect the residential use. Any such conversion
shall conform with the off-street parking and loading requirements of
§ 260-32 hereof. The conversion of nonconforming nondwelling
structures shall be in accordance with §§ 260-54 and 260-55 hereof.209
F. Home occupations. The home occupation shall be operated in a
dwelling unit and shall meet the following requirements: [Amended
7-13-1999 by Ord. No. 403]
(1) Where permitted. Within the dwelling unit and only by the person
or persons maintaining said dwelling unit and not more than two
additional nonresident persons shall be employed in the home
occupation; provided, however, that the total number of persons
employed in the home occupation shall not exceed four. Such
restrictions on the number of employees shall apply to all home
occupations, except as otherwise provided herein.
(2) Evidence of use. The home occupation shall in no way cause the
residential appearance or character of the premises to differ from
the surrounding residential area. Home occupations shall not be
conducted in such a manner as create any dangerous, injurious,
noxious or otherwise objectionable fire, explosive or other hazard;
noise or vibration, smoke, dust, dirt or other form of air pollution;
electrical or other disturbance; glare; or other nuisance, condition
or element in such amount as to adversely affect the surrounding
area or premises (as referenced also in § 260-45, Nuisance
208. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
209. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 260-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-29
1:527
elements). Notwithstanding any other signage regulation in this
chapter, no more than one unanimated, nonilluminated sign having
an area of not more than two square feet shall be permitted on each
street front of the zone lot on which the building is situated.
(3) Extent of use. Home occupations shall be conducted entirely within
the residence. The home occupation cannot utilize more than 20%
of the gross floor area of the dwelling unit, except that professional
offices, licensed family day care, bed-and-breakfast facilities and
room and boarding may utilize not more than 50% of the gross floor
area of the dwelling unit.
(4) Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with
§ 139-32 hereof.
(5) No outside storage of material, goods, supplies or equipment
related to the operation of the home occupation shall be allowed.
(6) Merchandise shall be limited only to products and crafts crafted or
assembled on the premises or to incidental supplies necessary for
the conduct of a home occupation. Items shall not be purchased offsite
for resale at the premises.
(7) To the extent that there is any sale of any item related to a home
occupation, delivery of that item to the buyer should occur off the
premises.
(8) No more than one home occupation per residence shall be allowed,
and it must be conducted by the occupant.
(9) Home occupations that attract customers, clients or students to the
premises shall not be allowed in multifamily dwelling units.
(10)No commercial vehicle shall be used in connection with the home
occupation for delivery of goods to or from the premises, nor
parked on the property. This provision does not preclude the
delivery of mail or packages by the postal service or by private or
public shipping and courier services; provided, however, that such
deliveries shall not exceed an average of one delivery per day.
(11) Permitted uses. The following is a list of uses which may be
conducted as a home occupation within the limits established in
this section:
(a) The offices of doctors or physicians, dentists, optometrists,
ministers, architects, landscape architects, professional
engineers, lawyers, artists, authors and such other similar
professional occupations which may be so designated by the
Zoning Hearing Board upon finding by the Board that such
occupation is truly professional in character by virtue of the
need for similar training and experience as a condition for the
practice thereof and that the practice of such occupation shall
§ 260-29 DANVILLE CODE § 260-29
1:528
in no way adversely affect the safe and comfortable enjoyment
of property rights in any zone to a greater extent than for the
professional activities listed herein. The issuance of a state or
local license for regulation of any gainful occupation need not
be deemed indicative of professional standing.
(b) Rooming and/or boarding of not more than two persons.
(c) Dressmaker, seamstress, tailor.
(d) Art, handicraft, music, writing, photography or similar studios.
(e) Direct sale product distribution (Amway, Avon, Tupperware,
etc.).
(f) Home typing or computing services.
(g) Hair cutting and styling with not more than one nonresident
employee.
(h) Mail-order sales.
(i) Telephone sales and order taking.
(j) Tutoring for not more than four students simultaneously,
provided that the sound produced is not audible at any
property line.
(k) Licensed family day-care homes for not more than six
nonresident children, subject to Pennsylvania Department of
Public Welfare guidelines. No nonresident employees shall be
permitted.
(l) Bed-and-breakfast facilities. There shall be provided not less
than one additional off-street parking space for each bed-andbreakfast
family unit. Such use shall be subject to the
provisions for special exceptions as set forth in § 260-48D and
E(3).210
(m) Antique repair and refinishing and television repair.
G. Temporary tract office, tract sign, model home. Such temporary use is
permitted in any district, shall be located on the property to which it is
appurtenant and shall be limited to a six-month-period at the expiration
of which time the applicant may request a further extension of time;
otherwise, such temporary use shall be removed at the expense of the
owner.
H. Mobile (manufactured) home parks. Mobile (manufactured) homes shall
be permitted only in mobile home parks which meet the requirements
of this section.
210. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 260-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-29
1:529
§ 260-30. Commercial and manufacturing uses.
(1) No mobile home park shall have an area of less than five acres.
(2) Each mobile (manufactured) home site or space within the park
shall have a minimum area of 5,000 square feet; provided, further,
that the minimum width of each site shall be not less than 50 feet.
(3) No mobile (manufactured) home shall be located within 10 feet of
its respective front, side and rear site lines; provided, further, that
there shall be no less than a twenty-five-foot clearance between a
mobile home and an accessory building, such as the park's office
building, storage sheds, etc., within the park.
(4) No mobile (manufactured) home shall be located closer to any
property line of the park or any abutting public street than 30 feet
or such greater distance as may be established by this chapter with
respect to conventional buildings in the district where the mobile
home park is located.
(5) Not less than 10% of the gross area of the park shall be improved
for the recreational use of the residents of the park.
(6) All service and accessory buildings shall meet the requirements of
this chapter and all other applicable codes and ordinances.
(7) The park shall meet all applicable requirements of Chapter 220,
Subdivision and Land Development, except as otherwise provided
herein.
I. Animals in residential districts. Animals in R Districts shall be subject to
the provisions of Chapter 81, Animals, Article II, Keeping of Animals.
J. Group housing for handicapped persons and personal care homes.
Group housing for handicapped persons and personal care homes are
permitted as a special exception use in all residential zones and shall
comply with the following standards: [Amended 12-9-2002 by Ord.
No. 448]
(1) It must include supervision by not less than one person.
(2) It must be operated by a nonprofit charitable institution or by a
governmental agency. It shall not be operated for profit.
(3) It shall not be hazardous to the health, safety and welfare of the
residential neighborhood where it is to be located.
(4) Such uses shall not be a residence for transients. There shall be no
fixed length of time for occupancy by the residents.
(5) It must show evidence of such licensing as may be required by the
Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare.
§ 260-29 DANVILLE CODE § 260-30
1:530
A. Animal hospitals, kennels, pounds, veterinary clinics and similar uses.
In any zone district where permitted, no such use shall be located
closer than 100 feet to any R District, restaurant or hotel and shall show
that adequate measures and controls shall be taken to prevent offensive
noise and odor. No incineration shall be permitted on the premises.
[Amended 5-5-2009 by Ord. No. 496]
B. Bakeries. Bakeries first permitted in any C-1 District shall be located no
closer to an R District than 50 feet, and goods produced on the
premises shall be sold only at retail on the premises.
C. Retail uses in M Districts. Such uses, designated in Schedule III
hereof,211 shall be permitted only where the applicant proves that such
use is or will be necessary to serve manufacturing uses and will not
adversely affect the industrial development of adjoining land. Where
such uses are permitted, the minimum lot size requirement shall be
10,000 square feet.
D. Manufacturing uses. Manufacturing uses in any M District, when
abutting an R District, shall be screened from such district in
accordance with the provisions of § 260-25 hereof.
E. Retail sales for guests only. Where such uses are permitted, the
following shall apply:
(1) There shall be no external evidence of any gainful activity, however
incidental, nor any access to any space used for gainful activity,
other than from within the building.
(2) There shall be no harm to adjoining existing or potential residential
development due to excessive traffic generation or noise or other
circumstances.
F. Junkyards and similar storage areas, including automobile wrecking.
(1) Such uses existing at said date of adoption may continue their
operations as nonconforming uses, but shall terminate within one
year unless they shall be completely enclosed by a solid fence,
screen or wall of sufficient height so as to obscure all view of such
use.
(2) No operations shall be conducted which shall cause a general
nuisance or endanger the public health of the surrounding
neighborhood.
(3) No highly inflammable or explosive material shall be stored in bulk
above ground, with the exception of fuel tanks or drums which are
directly connected with heating appliances. Inflammable and
explosive material storage shall be in compliance with all
applicable federal and state laws and regulations.
211. Editor's Note: Said schedule is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 260-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-30
1:531
§ 260-31. Large-scale developments.
The purpose of this section shall be to permit large-scale development in
such a manner as to provide for the flexibility of design and arrangement
of structures which would achieve the objectives of this chapter but would
not be bound by the standards established for individual lot-by-lot
developments. Such developments shall, however, be subject to the broader
standards set forth below. Large-scale developments, as defined herein,
shall be permitted only as special exceptions in the districts where they are
designated in Article IV hereof and shall be developed in accordance with
the following requirements.
(4) All materials or wastes causing fumes or dust, constituting a fire
hazard or attractive to rodents or insects may be stored outdoors
only in enclosed containers.
A. Conformity with Comprehensive Plan. The proposed large-scale
development shall conform to the municipality's Comprehensive Plan in
terms of general location.
B. Large-scale residential developments.212
(1) Spacing and orientation of residential developments. Spacing
between buildings and orientation in residential building groups
shall be as follows:
(a) In buildings containing multiple dwelling units, walls
containing main window exposures or main entrances shall be
so oriented as to ensure adequate light and air exposures.
(b) Such buildings shall be so arranged as to avoid undue exposure
to concentrated loading or parking facilities and shall be so
oriented as to preserve visual and audible privacy between
adjacent buildings.
(2) Vehicle and pedestrian circulation. Adequate provision for vehicle
and pedestrian circulation shall be designed as follows:
(a) Safe and convenient arrangement of walks, roadways,
driveways and off-street parking and loading space.
(b) Separation of general vehicle traffic from pedestrian walks and
public transportation loading places.
(c) A building group may not be so arranged that any temporary or
permanently inhabited building is inaccessible by emergency
vehicles.
(3) Paving and drainage. The developer shall install throughout any
proposed large-scale residential development hard-surfaced
212. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 260-30 DANVILLE CODE § 260-31
1:532
streets, which shall include curbs or gutters, catch basins and
storm sewers.
(4) Development standards.
(a) Minimum lot area per dwelling unit.
[1] Single-family detached. Although the average minimum lot
area per dwelling unit shall not be less than the minimum
area requirement for the district where the development is
located, the size of each lot may be reduced, as needed, to
not less than 2/3 of the minimum required in the R-1A
District; provided, however, that for cluster developments,
each lot may be reduced to 1/3 of the minimum lot area,
but the average area per dwelling unit within each
development section, including open space, shall not be
less than the minimum otherwise required for the R-1A
District.
[2] Two-family dwellings and multifamily dwellings. The
average minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall not be
less than the minimum area required for each respective
type of dwelling structure in the district where such
principal permitted uses are first permitted. The
dimensions of each individual lot may, however, be
reduced by not more than 1/3 of the minimum
requirement, provided that the average lot area per
dwelling unit within each development district shall not be
less than the area otherwise required.
(b) Minimum lot size. There shall be no minimum lot size
requirements for any housing types other than the average
minimum lot area required for such dwellings as described in
Subsection B(4)(a) hereof.
(c) Minimum lot frontage. The minimum lot frontage requirement
shall be as follows:
[1] One-family and two-family dwellings, detached: 80 feet.
[2] One-family and two-family dwellings, semidetached: 50
feet for each side.
[3] One-family dwellings, attached (townhouses): 25 feet per
dwelling unit plus an additional 25 feet at each end of all
rows.
[4] One-family cluster development: none.
[5] Multifamily dwelling structures: none.
§ 260-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-31
1:533
(d) Minimum lot depth. No lot for any residential structure or
group of residential structures shall have a lot depth of less
than 100 feet.
(e) Minimum front yards. The minimum front yard for all
residential structures shall be 25 feet, except that garden
apartments and other multifamily structures not including
townhouses shall have a minimum front yard of not less than
50 feet; provided, however, that these minimum front yard
requirements may be reduced by not more than 20% if the
developer shall provide adequate justification acceptable to
both the Planning Commission and the Zoning Hearing Board.
(f) Minimum side yards and other distances between buildings.
Minimum side yards for all single-family dwellings, including
cluster developments, shall be as specified in Schedule I hereof
for one-family dwellings in an R-1B District.213 There shall be
no side yard requirements for all other residential structures,
except as follows:
[1] Side yards adjoining public rights-of-way or other
thoroughfares shall be not less than 50 feet, except where
the front yard of such structure shall be reduced by up to
20% as specified in Subsection B(4)(e) hereof, then such
side yard adjoining a thoroughfare may be reduced to the
same depth as such front yard.
[2] All other distances between buildings shall be as set forth
under Subsection B(1) hereof.
(g) Maximum lot coverage. There shall be no maximum lot
coverage limitation on a lot-by-lot basis; provided, however,
that the overall coverage of land by buildings within any
development section shall not exceed 25% of the net land area,
excluding land used for rights-of-way and the maximum
impervious coverage shall not exceed 50% of the net land area.
(5) Supporting commercial facilities. Local retail and service
commercial facilities, including those uses designated as principal
permitted uses in a C-1 Commercial District, may be permitted in a
large-scale residential development, provided that such
commercial development, including required off-street parking, offstreet
loading and landscaping, shall not exceed 10% of the net
land area of the large-scale residential development, provided that
such uses shall not include automobile service stations, bars,
cocktail lounges and similar uses; and provided, further, that the
location of such commercial facilities shall be approved by the
Planning Commission. Such permitted retail and service uses shall
213. Editor's Note: Schedule I is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 260-31 DANVILLE CODE § 260-31
1:534
be designed to primarily serve the residents of the large-scale
development of which they are a part.
(6) Aesthetic considerations. Due to the potential impact of a largescale
development on the municipality as a whole and since the
developer is provided the opportunity to modify otherwise
minimum development standards, the Zoning Hearing Board may
withhold the overall approval of such projects as well as the
approval of reduced standards pending its review and approval of
the proposed overall design, arrangement and layout of the
buildings to be erected, including the exterior design of such
buildings, to ensure that the architectural character of the largescale
development area will be compatible with that of the
adjoining areas.
C. Large-scale commercial and manufacturing development.
(1) Spacing and orientation of commercial and manufacturing
developments. Spacing between buildings and orientation in
commercial and industrial building groups shall be as follows:
(a) Exterior walls of opposite buildings shall be located no closer
than a distance equal to the height of the taller building.
(b) A building group may not be so arranged that any permanently
or temporarily inhabited building is inaccessible by emergency
vehicles.
(2) Planting and screening. In business building groups abutting or
within 100 feet of residential districts, fences, walls or year-round
screen planting shall be provided when necessary to shield
adjacent residential districts from parking lot illumination,
headlights, heat, blowing papers and dust and to reduce the visual
encroachments of commercial architecture, signs and activity.
(3) Justification for exception. Where such exceptions are requested,
they shall be granted solely for the purpose of promoting an
integrated site plan no less beneficial to the residents or occupants
of such developments as well as of neighboring properties than
would be obtained under the standard requirements of this chapter.
(4) Planned, integrated shopping centers and industrial parks shall be
subject to the following requirements regardless of the applicant's
request for consideration as a large-scale development:
(a) A tract of not less than three acres is required. [Amended
11-8-2011 by Ord. No. 507]
(b) The minimum lot width shall be 300 feet, measured at the
building setback line.
(c) Only one ingress and one egress point is permitted onto a
major highway.
§ 260-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-31
1:535
§ 260-32. Automotive services; off-street parking and loading.
[Amended 9-9-1997 by Ord. No. 393; 12-9-2002 by Ord. No. 448;
7-11-2006 by Ord. No. 477; 11-8-2011 by Ord. No. 507; 6-10-2014 by
Ord. No. 518]
(d) A stormwater management plan and a soil erosion and
sedimentation control plan consistent with Act 167 of 1978214
and designed to control stormwater for a ten-year storm shall
be submitted for review and comment to appropriate agencies
and authorities.
(e) Written confirmation shall be obtained from appropriate
authorities and/or agencies that adequate sewage treatment
and water facilities are available.
(f) A site design plan showing building placement and vehicular
safety control features, specific landscaping components and
the size and location of signage shall be submitted with all
applications.
(g) An architectural rendering showing the appearance of the
facade(s) of the structure(s) visible from the major highway
shall be submitted along with the site plan.
A. Off-street parking. Any off-street parking developed in the Borough of
Danville shall be developed only in accordance with the provisions of
this section. In all districts, except the C-2 District, in connection with
every manufacturing, business, institutional, recreational, residential
or any other use, there shall be provided at the time any building or
structure is erected, enlarged, increased in capacity or changed in use
off-street parking space for automobiles available to the occupants of
such buildings or visitors thereto at no charge; provided, however, that
for dwellings in the C-2 District, there shall be provided off-street
parking for each dwelling unit in accordance with this section.
(1) Size and access.
(a) Each off-street parking space in a parking lot shall have an
area of not less than 153 square feet, exclusive of access drives
or aisles, and shall be of usable shape and condition; provided,
however, that when a new parking lot is constructed for a
supermarket, the size of each parking space in the
supermarket shall be not less than 180 square feet. Except in
the case of dwellings, no parking area shall contain fewer than
three spaces.
(b) There shall be adequate provisions for ingress and egress to all
parking spaces. Access to off-street parking areas shall be
limited to several well-defined locations, and in no case shall
214. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 260-31 DANVILLE CODE § 260-32
1:536
there be permitted unrestricted access along the length of the
street or alley upon which the parking area abuts.
(c) No off-street parking shall be located in the front yard of any
residential lot, except in a driveway providing access to a
garage or within a required side yard.
(d) No point of ingress or egress shall be nearer, one to the other,
than 300 feet, except where inadequate highway frontage
precludes the feasibility of complying with this requirement.
(2) Number of parking spaces required. The number of off-street
parking spaces required shall be as set forth in Table I following, in
accordance with the definition of "floor area" as set forth in Article
II hereof; provided, further, that in any R District, on any lot having
an area of one acre or less, private garage space may be provided
for not more than four motor vehicles. Space for one additional
motor vehicle may be provided for each 1/5 acre by which the area
of the lot exceeds one acre; and in any R District, not more than one
garage space provided on any lot shall be used for the housing of a
commercial motor vehicle greater than 1/2 ton capacity. In any case
of a building, structure or premises the use of which is not
specifically mentioned herein, the provisions for a use which is so
mentioned and to which said use is similar, in the opinion of the
Zoning Hearing Board, shall apply.
(3) Off-site facilities. All permitted and required accessory off-street
parking spaces, open or enclosed, shall be located on the same
zone lot as the use to which such spaces are accessory, except that
such spaces may be provided elsewhere but shall be provided
within a radius of no greater distance than 250 feet from that zone
lot; provided, however, that for spaces to serve residential
dwellings in the C-2 District, such spaces shall be permitted to be
located up to 500 feet from the property to be served; and
provided, further, that required spaces are provided off the site in
accordance with the provisions set forth herein, and that such
spaces shall be in the same ownership as the use to which they are
accessory and shall be subject to deed restrictions filed in an office
of record, binding the owner and his heirs and/or assigns to
maintain the required number of spaces available throughout the
life of such use, and such spaces shall conform to all regulations of
the district in which they are located; provided, however, that in
lieu of evidence of ownership of the required off-site parking space
in a C-2 District, there shall be provided annual proof of access
thereto.
§ 260-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-32
1:537
Table 1
Off-Street Parking
Uses
Minimum Required
Parking Spaces
1. Churches and schools 1 for each 3.5 seats in an
auditorium or for each 17
classroom seats, whichever is
greater
2. Business and professional
offices and banks, except
medical and dental offices
1 for each 200 square feet of
floor area
3. Community buildings and
social halls
1 for each 200 square feet of
floor area
4. Country clubs, golf courses 1 for each 200 square feet of
floor area occupied by all
principal and accessory
structures, except those used
for parking purposes**
5. Dwellings 2 for each family or dwelling
unit***
6. Motels, hotels, rooming
houses and dormitories
1 for each 2 bedrooms
7. Apartments, townhouses and
garden apartments*
2 for each dwelling unit
8. Funeral homes and
mortuaries
10 for each parlor
9. Hospitals, nursing and
convalescing homes, personal
care homes
1 for each bed, plus 1 for
each employee
10. Manufacturing plants,
research or testing
laboratories and bottling
plants
1 for each 1,000 square feet
of floor area, plus 1 for each
4 employees in the maximum
working shift; the total
parking area shall not be less
than 25% of the building floor
area
11. Medical or dental clinics or
offices
5 spaces for each doctor or
dentist and 1 for each
employee in the maximum
working shift
12. Restaurants, beer parlors and
nightclubs
1 for each 2.5 seats
§ 260-32 DANVILLE CODE § 260-32
1:538
Table 1
Off-Street Parking
Uses
Minimum Required
Parking Spaces
13. Retail stores, store groups,
shops and personal services
In a C-1 Zone, 1 for each 300
square feet of floor area,
when the floor area exceeds
1,000 square feet; in all other
C Zones, where required, 3
for each 300 square feet of
floor area
14. Wholesale establishments or
warehouses
1 for each 2 employees in the
maximum working shift; the
total parking area shall be
not less than 25% of the
building floor area
15. Outdoor recreational
facilities
An adequate number of
spaces so that all vehicles
located at the facility can be
accommodated in existing
parking lots and not on the
Borough's roads
16. Auctions, galleries 5 for each 500 square feet of
floor area
17. Bowling alleys 5 for each lane
18. Movie theaters, auditoriums
and sport stadiums
1 for each 2.5 seats
19. Home occupations In addition to spaces
required for the dwelling, 1
for each nonresident
employee; if there are no
nonresident employees, 1 for
each home occupation
20. Group housing Not less than 1 space per
bedroom unit, plus 1 per
employee in the maximum
working shift, but not less
than a total of 3 spaces per
unit
NOTES:
* Except elderly housing, where one parking space for each
three dwelling units shall be provided.
** There shall be not less than 20 off-street parking spaces for
each use.
§ 260-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-32
1:539
*** Except in the C-2 District there shall be not less than 1 offstreet
parking space for any dwelling unit with not more
than 1 bedroom.
B. Off-street loading. In any district, in connection with every building or
building group or part thereof hereafter erected and having a gross
floor area of 5,000 square feet or more which is to be occupied by
manufacturing or commercial uses or distribution of material or
merchandise by vehicles, there shall be provided and maintained, on
the same zone lot with such building, off-street loading berths in
accordance with the requirements of Table II following.
(1) Size and location. Each loading space shall be of sufficient size to
accommodate vehicles that are likely to utilize the berth, but not
less than 10 feet in width, 30 feet in length and 14 feet in height,
and may occupy all or any part of any required yard, except where
located adjacent to any R District, where they shall be set back a
minimum of six feet from any such property line.
Table II
Off-Street Loading
Uses
Square Feet of
Floor Area
Required Off-
Street Loading
Berths
1. Schools 15,000 or more 1
2. Hospitals (in
addition to space for
ambulance)
From 10,000 to
30,000
1
For each additional
30,000 or major
fraction thereof
1 additional
3. Undertakers and
funeral homes
5,000 1
For each additional
5,000 or major
fraction thereof
1 additional
4. Hotels and offices 10,000 or more 1
5. Retail, commercial,
wholesale,
manufacturing,
storage and
miscellaneous
From 10,000 to
25,000
1
From 25,000 to
40,000
2
From 40,000 to
60,000
3
§ 260-32 DANVILLE CODE § 260-32
1:540
Table II
Off-Street Loading
Uses
Square Feet of
Floor Area
Required Off-
Street Loading
Berths
From 60,000 to
100,000
4
For each additional
50,000 or major
fraction thereof
1 additional
C. Joint facilities for parking or loading. Off-street parking and loading
facilities for separate uses may be provided jointly if the total number of
spaces so provided is not less than the sum of the separate
requirements for each use, and provided that all regulations governing
the location of accessory spaces in relation to the use served are
adhered to. Further, no accessory space or portion thereof shall serve
as a required space for more than one use unless otherwise approved
by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the purposes and
procedures set forth herein.
D. Development and maintenance of parking and loading areas. Every
parcel of land hereafter used as a public or private parking area or
loading area, including a commercial parking lot, shall be developed
and maintained in accordance with the applicable sections of Chapter
216 Streets, Sidewalks and Driveways, Article V, Off-Street Parking and
Driveways, and the following requirements:
(1) Screening and landscaping. Off-street parking areas for more than
five vehicles and off-street loading areas shall be effectively
screened on each side which adjoins or faces premises situated in
any R District or institutional premises by a solid fence or hedge.
Such fence or hedge shall be not less than four feet nor more than
six feet in height and shall be maintained in good condition without
any advertising thereon. Any space between such fence or hedge
and the side lot line adjoining premises or the front lot line facing
premises in any R District shall be landscaped with grass, hardy
shrubs or evergreen ground cover and maintained in good
condition. The landscaping of parking lots shall conform with the
requirements of § 260-25C.
(2) Minimum distances and setbacks. No off-street parking or loading
area or part thereof for more than five vehicles shall be closer than
10 feet to any dwelling, school, hospital or other institution for
human care located on an adjoining lot. If not in an R District but
adjoining such district, the parking area shall be set back not less
than five feet from the established street right-of-way line within 50
feet of any R District.
§ 260-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-32
1:541
(3) Surfacing. Any off-street parking or loading area shall be surfaced
with asphalt, concrete, brick, cement pavers or similar durable and
dustless material. Dustless material shall not include loose stone of
any size. All off-street parking areas shall be so graded and drained
as to dispose of all surface water accumulated within the area and
shall be so arranged and marked as to provide for the orderly and
safe loading, parking and storage of self-propelled vehicles.
(a) Exception: Residential driveway/parking of 450 square feet or
less, constructed in a rear or side yard and accessed from a
Borough alley.
(4) Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking or
loading areas shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from
the adjoining premises in any R District.
E. Automobile service stations and parking lots.
(1) Location of establishments and access thereto. Vehicular service
stations, commercial parking lots for five or more motor vehicles,
automobile repair shops or any vehicular access thereto are
regulated as follows:
(a) A site development plan shall accompany all applications and
shall show building and fuel pump placement and dimensions,
parking, landscaping, internal circulation and the size and
location of signage.
(b) All vehicular servicing activities except for those normally
performed at fuel pumps shall be performed within completely
enclosed buildings.
(c) Minimum setbacks of fuel pumps shall be 20 feet from the front
yard setback line.
(d) Fuel pumps shall not interfere with parking spaces or internal
circulation and shall be located at least 30 feet from all parking
areas.
(e) A minimum width of 250 feet at the building setback line is
required.
(f) Automobile service stations and parking lots shall not be
located within 100 feet of any boundary line of any R District;
provided, however, that where the rear lot line of the property
shall be less than 100 feet distant from an R District, there
shall be established along such rear lot line a buffer zone which
shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions of
§ 260-25 hereof, and no part of any parking space shall be less
than 20 feet from any residential property line.
(g) Automobile service stations and parking lots shall not be
located within 100 feet of property dedicated to or intended for
§ 260-32 DANVILLE CODE § 260-32
1:542
§ 260-33. Transient retail businesses. [Added 11-8-2011 by Ord. No.
507]
schools, playgrounds, churches, hospitals, public libraries and
institutions for dependents or for children, when located along
the same street or road and in the same block as said
properties.
(h) Vehicular access to the above automotive uses shall be welldefined
driveways and shall not be closer to the intersection of
any two street right-of-way lines than 50 feet.
F. Truck and truck trailer parking in residential districts. No truck
trailers, trucks over four tons or vehicles used for the collection of solid
waste may be parked overnight on residential zone lots.
G. Drive-in eating and drinking places. Such businesses where persons are
served in automobiles shall be not closer than 100 feet to an R District
and shall be located on a major public street and shall provide ingress
and egress so as to minimize traffic congestion and shall comply with
the following:
(1) A minimum of eight on-site vehicular waiting spaces are required
for occupied vehicles waiting for window service.
(2) The above spaces shall not interfere with parking spaces intended
for non-drive-through customers, internal circulation or pedestrian
safety.
(3) A site development plan shall be submitted showing building
placement and dimensions, vehicular and pedestrian access,
internal circulation, landscaping and size and location of signage.
H. Other drive-in business. For banks, financial institutions and any other
business uses with drive-through service, applications shall be
accompanied by a site development plan showing building placement
and dimensions, the location of all drive-through facilities, parking,
internal circulation and the location and size of signage.
A. Permit required. Every person, firm or corporation, whether principal
or agent, entering into, beginning or desiring to begin a transient retail
business in the Borough of Danville for the sale of any goods, wares or
merchandise whatsoever, and who hires, leases, occupies or uses any
room, apartment, store, shop, building, railway car or other place or
structure for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares or
merchandise, for a period six months or less, shall, before starting such
sale, obtain a zoning permit for a transient retail business. Permits for
transient retail businesses shall be valid for a period of 14 days.
Applications shall be accompanied by a certificate from the Sealer of
Weights and Measures certifying that all weighing and measuring
devices to be used by the applicant have been examined and approved.
No permit shall be refused except for a specific reason and for the
§ 260-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-33
1:543
§ 260-34. General services.
protection of the public safety, health, morals or general welfare. Each
permit shall include the right to use only one vehicle to conduct the
business for which the permit is issued. All business shall be conducted
within a zone where transient retail businesses are permitted.
(1) Exception: Any transient business operating under the authority of
the Downtown Business Alliance or the Iron Heritage Festival and
their respective events.
B. Standards of conduct for licensees. A licensed transient merchant shall:
(1) Not falsely or fraudulently misrepresent the quantity, character or
quality of any article offered for sale, or offer for sale any
unwholesome, tainted or diseased provisions or merchandise.
(2) Not blow a horn, ring a bell or use any other noisy device to attract
public attention to his wares.
(3) Not stand or permit the vehicle used by him to stand in one place in
any public place or street for more than 10 minutes, or in front of
any premises for any time if the owner of or lessee of the ground
floor thereof objects.
(4) Not create or maintain any booth or stand or place any barrels,
boxes, crates or other obstructions upon any street or public place
for the purpose of selling or exposing for sale any goods, wares or
merchandise.
(5) Provide a written receipt for any advanced payment or deposit of
money prior to final delivery.
A. Cemetery, mausoleum. Any of these uses shall provide an entrance on a
street or road which shall have a pavement width of not less than 20
feet, with ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic
congestion, and shall provide a fence a minimum of six feet high or
evergreen or evergreen-type hedges or shrubs at intervals of not more
than six feet or shall provide a minimum of 20 feet of permanently
maintained planting strip on all property lines abutting any R District or
residential street.
B. Undertakers and funeral parlors.
(1) Undertaking and funeral parlor establishments may be permitted
as a special exception in those zone districts where they are
enumerated in Article IV hereof, provided that the outward
appearance of the building does not detract from the residential
area where it may be proposed; and it is to be located on a street
where the collection and movement of vehicles participating in a
funeral procession will not adversely affect the major or secondary
vehicular circulation pattern of the community.
§ 260-33 DANVILLE CODE § 260-34
1:544
§ 260-35. Heliports.
Heliports may be permitted, including the construction of runways and
landing pads, provided that plans for such construction shall be approved
by the Federal Aviation Administration and that such construction will not
interfere with the comprehensive plan for the area which may be affected
by it, nor create any hazards or inconvenience in presently developed areas.
Except in the event of an emergency, helicopter landings shall be permitted
only at approved heliports.
§ 260-36. Outdoor storage areas.
Such uses shall not abut existing residential development, a residential
street or any R District, and the operation thereof shall be governed by
the following provisions and any other conditions as may be required by
the Zoning Hearing Board to protect the public health, safety, comfort,
convenience and general welfare and especially with regard to abutting
properties and the occupants thereof.
§ 260-37. Telecommunications facilities. [Added 12-9-2002 by Ord.
No. 448]
(2) Applications for such uses shall be accompanied by maps showing
the proposed routing of funeral processions.
A. Inflammables and explosives. No highly inflammable or explosive
liquids, solids or gases shall be stored in bulk above ground, except as
permitted by state and federal regulations. Tanks or drums of fuel
directly connecting with heating devices or appliances located on the
same premises as the tanks or drums of fuel are excluded from this
provision.
B. Fencing and setbacks. All outdoor storage facilities shall be enclosed by
a fence or wall adequate to conceal such facilities and the contents
thereof from adjacent property. Such walls and fences shall be distant
not less than 20 feet from all property lines which abut an R District or
existing residential development, but in any other case shall be distant
not less than 10 feet from any property line and shall be distant not less
than 25 feet from any public street.
C. Deposit of wastes. No materials or wastes shall be deposited on any
premises in such form or manner that they may be transferred off such
premises by natural causes or forces.
D. Other hazardous materials. All materials or wastes which might cause
fumes or dust or which constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible
by or otherwise be attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored
outdoors only in closed containers.
A. Conditions that apply to the location of all telecommunications towers
and telecommunications facility buildings.
§ 260-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-37
1:545
(1) All applications for the location of the telecommunications towers
and telecommunications facility buildings are subject to the
requirements of Chapter 220, Subdivision and Land Development,
and are subject to the site plan review by the Planning Commission
and approval by the Borough Council.
(2) The telecommunications tower shall be designed and constructed
to all applicable standards of the American National Standards
Institute, ANSI/EIA-222-E manual, as amended.
(3) A soil report complying with the standards of Appendix I,
Geotechnical Investigations, ANSI/EIA-222-E manual, as amended,
shall be submitted to the Borough to document and verify design
specifications of the foundation for the telecommunications tower,
and anchors for the guy wires if used.
(4) Telecommunications towers shall be designed to withstand wind
gusts of at least 100 miles per hour.
(5) A telecommunications tower may not be located on a lot that is
listed on a historic register or in an officially designated state or
federal historic district.
(6) The applicant for the placement of a telecommunications tower
shall be required to submit to the Borough evidence of the need for
the telecommunications tower and that the applicant has
exhausted all alternatives to constructing a telecommunications
tower. Applicants are required to prove need by:
(a) Demonstrating via written evidence that, in terms of location
and construction, there are no existing towers,
telecommunications towers, buildings, structures, elevated
tanks or similar uses able to provide the platform for the
telecommunications antenna; and
(b) Providing evidence, including coverage diagrams and technical
reports, demonstrating that co-location on existing
telecommunications towers is not technically possible in order
to serve the desired need. Co-location is not possible if:
[1] Planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity
of existing telecommunications towers within the Borough,
considering existing and planned use of those
telecommunications towers, and existing
telecommunications towers cannot be reinforced to
accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at a
reasonable cost;
[2] Planned equipment will cause radio frequency (RF)
interference with other existing or planned equipment for
the telecommunications tower, and the interference
cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost;
§ 260-37 DANVILLE CODE § 260-37
1:546
[3] Existing or approved telecommunications towers do not
have the space on which planned equipment can be placed
so it can function effectively and at least in parity with
other similar equipment in place or planned; or
[4] Other reasons make it impractical to place the equipment
planned by the applicant on existing and approved
telecommunications towers.
(7) Telecommunications towers shall not be closer than 500 feet to
another telecommunications tower, such distance being measured
as a horizontal from tower to tower.
(8) Telecommunications towers shall be subject to a minimum setback
from all overhead electric transmissions lines of a distance equal in
the height of the tower.
(9) The applicant shall present documentation that the
telecommunications tower is designed in accordance with all
applicable state and federal regulations. Except as required by the
Federal Aviation Administration, or other federal or state agencies,
no telecommunications tower may use artificial lighting or strobe
lighting at night.
(10) An applicant for a zoning permit for a telecommunications tower
shall:
(a) Execute an agreement with the Borough, in a form legally
acceptable to the Borough, requiring the removal of the tower
within one year after the tower ceases to function as such,
including the posting of appropriate security adequate to
remove the subject tower;
(b) Agree to erect a tower with sufficient capacity to accommodate
not less than two antennas in addition to their own;
(c) Agree to rent or sell such additional capacity to accommodate
not less than two antennas in addition to their own;
(d) Agree to submit to binding arbitration, in accordance with
procedures to be established by the Danville Borough Council,
and agree to share the cost of such arbitration equally with the
other parties desiring space on the subject tower in the event
that the developer and the other parties do not reach an
acceptable settlement within 30 days of notification to the
Borough; and the tower developer shall be responsible for
prompt reporting of an offer within five days thereof.
(11) Except when located on the roof of a building, a security fence, of
approved design, of not less than eight feet, and no greater than 10
feet, shall completely enclose the telecommunications tower. A
fence of not less than eight feet and no greater than 10 feet shall
§ 260-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-37
1:547
also completely enclose the anchored locations of guy wires, if
used. This fencing shall be designed to be compatible with
surrounding land uses.
(12) Except when located on the roof of a building, the applicant shall
submit a landscaping plan. Sites in which telecommunications
towers are located shall be required to comply with the following
landscaping requirements:
(a) Landscaping and planting of an approved design shall be
provided for a depth of 10 feet along all public rights-of-way
abutting the lot where the telecommunications tower is
located. This requirement may be waived by the Zoning
Hearing Board, provided rights-of-way abutting the lot.
(b) Landscaping, consisting of trees and shrubs, shall be required
at the perimeter of the security fences and the
telecommunications facility building. Evergreen trees of 10
feet height at planting, and growth of a minimum of 50 feet at
maturity, shall be planted a maximum of 15 feet from each
other around the perimeter of the security fence. Areas
between the trees shall be interspersed with approved
shrubbery planting of a height of not less than five feet.
(c) Landscaping, consisting of approved evergreen trees of 10 feet
height of planting, at a maximum of 15 feet from each other
shall be required along all property lines abutting an existing
residence, school, park, or church. This requirement may be
waived by the Zoning Hearing Board, provided the abutting
property owner(s) submit in writing to the Borough that they
are waiving their right to this landscaping, or the Zoning
Hearing Board may waive this requirement if there is existing
acceptable vegetation along the property lines.
(13) A minimum of two parking spaces shall be required. Spaces shall
meet the applicable requirements of § 260-32 hereof.215
(14) Telecommunications towers shall be fully automated and
unattended on a daily basis. The site shall be visited only for
periodic maintenance.
(15) Telecommunications facility buildings shall be identified as
accessory buildings, and the applicable regulations for the host
zoning district shall apply.
(16) Guy wires, if utilized, must be anchored no closer than 25 feet from
any property line. Guy wires shall not cross or encroach any
overhead telephone or electric power lines.
215. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 260-37 DANVILLE CODE § 260-37
1:548
(17) Tower height shall be measured from the top of the foundation to
the top point of the tower or the top point of the
telecommunications antenna, whichever is higher.
(18) Internal access to the telecommunications tower shall be provided
by a minimum twelve-foot width cartway with a durable and
dustless surface, such as concrete or a bituminous concrete surface
for a minimum of 50 feet from any public or private street. The
length of the cartway beyond this 50 feet shall, at a minimum, be
surfaced with a durable and dustless gravel surface. The vehicular
access to the telecommunications tower and telecommunications
facility building shall, whenever feasible, be provided along
existing circulation driveways.
(19) Setbacks. Telecommunications towers shall be required to be set
back from adjacent property lines a minimum of 1.5 times the
height of the telecommunications tower. Such distance shall be
measured in a straight line from the telecommunications tower to
the property line. This setback requirement abuts the property in
which the telecommunications tower is located. In that situation,
the largest setback requirement shall apply.
(20) A telecommunications tower shall be no higher than 175 feet.
(21) There shall be no more than one telecommunications tower on one
lot.
B. Conditions on the location and placement of telecommunications
antennas. Telecommunications antennas may be attached to any
nonresidential building or structure that is a permitted use in the
district, including but not limited to a church, a municipal or
governmental building or facility, a building owned by a utility, or a
telecommunications tower. Subdivision and land development review is
not required by the Planning Commission or the governing body for the
location of telecommunications antennas on a building. The following
conditions shall be met:
(1) No more than one telecommunications antenna may be attached to
any nonresidential building as permitted use. A permit for one
telecommunications antenna on one building may be issued by the
Zoning Officer after a review of the requirements stated in this
section.
(2) The location of two or more telecommunications antennas on any
nonresidential building shall be considered as a special exception.
There shall be a minimum distance equal to the height of the
telecommunications antennas.
(3) The location of one or more telecommunications antennas on any
nonoccupied structure, such as a telecommunications tower, a
water tank, or an observation tower shall be considered as a
principal permitted use. Permit(s) for telecommunications antenna
§ 260-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-37
1:549
§ 260-38. Television satellite dish antennas and other antennas.
on nonoccupied structures may be issued by the Zoning Officer
after a review of the requirements stated in this section.
Subdivision and land development review is not required by the
Planning Commission or the Borough Council for the location of
telecommunications antenna on a nonoccupied structure.
(4) Height limits for telecommunications antennas: not to exceed 20
feet above the structure or building on which it is located.
(5) The top point height of any telecommunications antennas located
on a telecommunications tower shall not exceed the height
requirements for telecommunications towers stated in this chapter.
(6) Setback. Telecommunications antennas located on buildings and
structures shall be required to be set back from all property lines a
minimum of the front yard setback requirement of the host district
plus the height of the telecommunications antenna.
C. Telecommunications tower and telecommunications antennas that are
related to the operations of a principal use on the same lot. The
following regulations shall apply to telecommunications towers and
telecommunications antennas that are related to the operations of a
principal use in any zoning district:
(1) No subdivision of land shall be required for the placement of a
telecommunications tower on any lot where the use of that
telecommunications tower relates to the operations of a principal
use on that lot.
(2) Telecommunications antennas located on any building or structure
where the use of that telecommunications antenna relates to the
operations of a principal use on that building or structure shall be
considered as principal permitted uses in all zoning districts where
they are authorized, and shall not require site plan and land
development approval from the governing body.
D. Exclusion of residential television and radio antennas from height
regulations. The height regulations prescribed herein shall not apply to
residential TV and radio antennas.
A. Purpose. The following regulations governing antennas are designed to
protect the aesthetic environment of the vicinity where they are to be
located as well as to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to a television satellite dish
antennas and other antennas having a diameter of 36 inches or less.
B. Permit requirements. A special satellite reception permit shall be
required only for specific situations described below in Subsections C
and D.
§ 260-37 DANVILLE CODE § 260-38
1:550
§ 260-39. Signs.
C. Allowed locations. In C Districts and M Districts, they shall be allowed
anywhere on the site or on the building. In R Districts, they shall be
limited to the rear yard. If the applicant adequately documents that
reception is unfeasible in the rear yard, they may be located in any side
yard. If, however, reception is infeasible in either of these areas, they
may be located in the front yard or on the roof of the building to which
they are appurtenant. If they are to be located in the front yard or on
the roof of the building, a special satellite reception permit shall be
required as specified in Subsection B hereof.
D. Size and height. In C Districts and M Districts, there shall be no
restrictions regarding their size or height. In all R Districts, however,
except as otherwise provided herein, they shall not exceed a diameter
of 12 feet or a height of 20 feet. However, where such height and/or size
restrictions preclude the feasibility of reception, these dimensions may
be exceeded, but a special satellite reception permit shall be required.
E. Additional requirements.
(1) Except in a C District or M District, satellite television antennas
shall be located and designed (to the extent reasonably feasible) to
reduce visual impact on surrounding properties.
(2) Antennas shall meet all manufacturers' specifications, be of
noncombustible and corrosive-resistant material and be erected in
a secure, wind-resistant manner.
(3) Every antenna must be adequately grounded for protection against
a direct strike of lightning.
(4) Every antenna shall be effectively screened from the adjoining
premises and/or public right-of-way. [Added 12-9-2002 by Ord.
No. 448]
F. Radio and television towers, masts and aerials. Such uses shall be
subject to all applicable criteria for the approval of special exceptions
and all applicable regulations of the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) and other applicable federal and state regulating
bodies as evidenced by their approval of all plans thereof. [Amended
12-9-2002 by Ord. No. 448]
A. Purpose. The sign regulations, controls and provisions set forth herein
are made in accordance with an overall plan and program for public
safety, economic and community development and the general welfare
of the Borough. It shall be the purpose of these sign regulations to
control and promote the erection of signs which preserve the
wholesome and attractive character of the Borough; to preserve and
protect property values; to preserve the architectural character and
environmental context of the historic district; to avoid the uncontrolled
proliferation of signs; to encourage and support business activity
§ 260-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-39
1:551
through reasonable standards for advertising signs; and to avoid undue
concentrations of signs which distract and endanger traffic safety.
B. Signs permitted in all districts. Signs listed in this section are permitted
in all districts and shall not require permits; except as otherwise
provided herein, they shall not be counted when calculating the number
of signs on a premises. Such signs shall conform with the general
regulations and design standards for the types of signs provided for and
required by the provisions hereof.
(1) Banners, pennants and flags. Decorative banners or pennants or
flags bearing the insignia of any government, religious, charitable
or fraternal organization maintained in a serviceable condition and
limited to a maximum area of 24 square feet.
(2) Construction project signs. Signs not to exceed 16 square feet in
residential districts and 24 square feet in commercial and
industrial districts. Such signs shall be maintained on the building
or site only for the actual period of construction and shall be
removed within 15 days following the completion of construction.
(3) Decal signs. Decals affixed to the windows or door glass panes
which indicate membership in a business group or which denote
credit cards accepted by the establishment.
(4) Display signs. Interior window signs which are attached or related
to displays which inform, entertain, promote, endorse or sponsor.
Such signs shall be limited to a maximum area of 10 square feet per
display.
(5) Historical markers. Plaques or signs which document historical
events or the historical significance of persons or buildings.
(6) Identification signs for places of worship. Signs identifying places
of worship, when located on the premises thereof, and not more
than 24 square feet in sign area.
(7) Memorial signs or tablets. Signs or tablets which honor the
memory of persons and events.
(8) Municipal signs. Signs erected by the Borough Council or under the
direction of the Council and bearing no commercial advertising,
e.g., traffic signs, railroad crossing signs, safety signs, signs
identifying public schools and playgrounds, etc.
(9) Name and address of resident. Name and address of resident,
business or building, but not to include any commercial
advertising, and not more than two square feet in sign area.
(10)No trespassing signs. "No trespassing" signs or other such signs
regulating the use of a property, of no more than two square feet in
sign area in residential districts and five square feet in all
commercial and manufacturing districts.
§ 260-39 DANVILLE CODE § 260-39
1:552
(11) On-premises signs for professional occupations. On-premises signs
identifying professional and home occupation uses as defined in
§ 260-29 hereof, including names and credentials. Such signs shall
be limited to two square feet and shall contain no commercial
advertising.
(12) On-premises information signs. Signs regulating on-premises
traffic, parking or other functional information, e.g., "lubrication,"
"sales department," etc., when less than four square feet in area
and bearing no commercial advertising. Internal illumination of
such signs shall not be permitted.
(13) Political signs. Signs which are designed to influence the vote of
the electorate. Such signs shall be stationary, temporary and
unlighted except where otherwise permitted.
(14) Real estate management signs. Such signs may include the name,
address and telephone number of a real estate management
company but shall not include an emblem, logo or any commercial
advertising; they shall be not more than 24 square inches in sign
area, and there shall be not more than one such sign per building
entrance.
(15) Real estate signs. Signs not to exceed five square feet in residential
districts and 25 square feet in commercial and manufacturing
districts, which advertise the sale, rental or lease of the premises
upon which they are located. Such signs shall be maintained in a
serviceable condition and shall be removed within 10 days after the
premises advertised has been sold, rented or leased.
(16) Signs (and banners), temporary advertising community activities,
special events of charitable or public service groups. Such signs
shall be limited to a maximum area of 75 square feet. Such signs
shall not be erected earlier than 15 days prior to the advertised
event or activity and shall be removed within 48 hours following
the event or activity. [Amended 5-10-2011 by Ord. No. 506]
C. Signs prohibited in all districts. Signs listed in this section are
prohibited in all districts:
(1) Any sign which flashes, rotates or moves that is visible from a
public street.
(2) Any sign which, by reason of its size, location, content, coloring or
manner of illumination, constitutes a traffic hazard or a detriment
to traffic safety by obstructing the vision of drivers or detracting
from the visibility of any traffic sign or control device on public
streets and roads.
(3) Any sign which obstructs free ingress to or egress from a public
right-of-way or required door, window, fire escape or other required
exitway or which obstructs a window, door or other opening for
§ 260-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-39
1:553
providing light or air or which interferes with the proper function
of the building.
(4) Any sign or sign structure which is structurally unsafe; constitutes
a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance,
dilapidation or abandonment; is not kept in good repair; or is
capable of causing electrical shocks to persons likely to come in
contact with it.
(5) Signs which make use of words such as STOP, LOOK, DANGER,
etc., or any phrases, symbols or characters which interfere with,
obstruct, mislead or confuse traffic.
(6) Flashing, blinking or pulsating string lights used in connection with
commercial premises for commercial purposes, except temporary
holiday decorations.
(7) Searchlights, advertising pennants, spinners and streamers, except
for use as a temporary .
(8) Signs which are affixed to a roof, highway right-of-way fence, utility
pole or utility structure or tree, shrub, rock or other natural
objects.
(9) Off-premises advertising signs other than community directory
signs, except off-premises advertising signs which are permitted in
the C-3 District.
D. Sign restrictions in all districts.
(1) General requirements. All signs shall conform to the general
regulations and design standards for the types of signs provided for
and required by this chapter. No signs except portable sidewalk
signs shall be located in or upon a public right-of-way.
(2) Limit on number of signs. Except as otherwise provided herein,
there shall be no limit on the total number of signs permitted on a
premises, provided that the maximum sign area for the building
does not exceed the limits established in Subsection E(4)(d).
(3) Limit on height of signs. No sign or any part thereof, including
braces, supports or lights, shall exceed a height of 20 feet. Height
shall be measured from grade level directly below the face of the
sign to the highest part of the sign.
(4) Limit on sign area. The maximum sign area permitted for buildings
within all commercial districts, regardless of the number of
premises contained therein, shall not exceed 1 1/2 square feet per
linear foot of building face parallel to or substantially parallel to a
public right-of-way. If a building fronts on two or more streets, the
maximum sign area for each street frontage shall be computed
separately. A lot without a building situated thereon shall be
entitled to a maximum sign area of 24 square feet.
§ 260-39 DANVILLE CODE § 260-39
1:554
(5) Limit on content of signs. Trademarks that are registered for a
specific commodity may occupy no more than 10% of the maximum
sign area for a building, unless the commodity is the principal
product sold or manufactured on the premises, except for offpremises
signs, which shall be regulated by the standards for offpremises
advertising signs.
(6) Safety and maintenance. Every sign and all parts thereof shall be
maintained in a secure and safe condition. If, in the opinion of the
Zoning Officer, a sign is not secure, safe and in good state of repair
or otherwise not in compliance with this section, the Zoning Officer
shall give written notice of this fact to the owner or lessor in
accordance with the procedures set forth in § 260-63 hereof.
E. Sign design standards. In addition to the general provisions of this
section, the following regulations shall apply to each sign specified
herein.
(1) Address sign.
(a) One address sign shall be provided for each premises in
accordance with Section 304.3 of the International Property
Maintenance Code.216
(b) The address sign may be attached to the building or affixed to a
post. Post-mounted signs shall not exceed five feet in height
above grade level.
(c) The address sign shall not exceed two square feet.
(2) Awning sign.
(a) The awning sign shall be painted or printed on flat against the
surface of the awning.
(b) Letters shall not exceed 10 inches in height.
(c) The awning sign shall not project beyond the awning surface or
be attached to the underside of the awning.
(3) Banner sign.
(a) A banner sign may overhang a public right-of-way, provided
that the sign is firmly attached to a supporting structure.
(b) Any organization or individual erecting a banner sign over a
public right-of-way shall first secure the written approval of the
affected property owners and the Borough Police Department.
(c) Any organization or individual erecting a banner sign over a
public right-of-way shall agree, in writing, to assume all
liability for any damages resulting from the placement and use
216. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 260-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-39
1:555
of the sign. Additionally, a hold harmless agreement, as
provided by the Borough, shall be executed and filed with the
Borough prior to erecting any banner sign over a public rightof-
way.
(4) Community directory sign.
(a) The community directory sign, excluding any frame or
enclosing structure, shall not exceed 15 square feet in area.
(b) The community directory sign shall not exhibit commercial
advertising. Church and civic organization sponsored directory
signs shall not be considered commercial advertising.
(c) Only one community directory sign shall be allowed for each
street frontage of a premises.
(5) Construction project sign.
(a) Only one construction project sign shall be allowed for each
construction site.
(b) The construction project sign shall not exceed 12 square feet in
area.
(c) The construction project sign shall be maintained on the
building or site only for the actual period of construction and
shall be removed within 15 days following the completion of
construction.
(d) Failure to remove a construction project sign within such time
period shall authorize the Zoning Officer to remove the sign in
accordance with the administrative and enforcement
provisions defined in § 260-63 hereof.
(6) Directional sign.
(a) A single directional sign may be erected along roadways to
direct vehicles or pedestrians to premises not located on such
roadways, but the access to which is from such roadways.
(b) Directional signs shall be freestanding signs with a maximum
area of three square feet on a single face or six square feet on a
double-faced sign.
(c) The content of directional signs shall be limited to the name of
the establishment and direction and distance information.
(d) The longest dimension of a directional sign shall not exceed
1 1/2 times its shortest dimension and shall exhibit a light
background with contrasting dark border and letters.
(e) The maximum height of any directional sign shall not exceed a
height of nine feet above grade level.
§ 260-39 DANVILLE CODE § 260-39
1:556
(7) Freestanding sign (C-3 District).
(a) The freestanding sign shall have no more than two faces.
(b) Each sign face shall not exceed 24 square feet.
(c) The top of the freestanding sign shall not exceed a height of 18
feet above grade level.
(d) A premises may erect and maintain one freestanding sign per
lot except as otherwise permitted in this section. However, no
individual business or other individual enterprise within a
shopping plaza may erect or maintain a freestanding sign.
(e) One freestanding sign may be permitted for and toward each
public right-of-way for a corner lot or lot having public
entrance to two or more public rights-of-way.
(f) A lot with a frontage of 300 feet or more on a public right-ofway
may have a total of two freestanding signs; provided,
however, that such signs shall not be closer, one to the other,
than 150 feet.
(8) Freestanding sign (C-1, C-2, R-3, P-1 Districts).
(a) The freestanding sign shall have no more than two faces.
(b) Each sign face shall not exceed nine square feet.
(c) The longest dimension of the freestanding sign shall not
exceed 1 1/2 times its shortest dimension.
(d) The top of the freestanding sign shall not exceed a height of
nine feet above grade level.
(9) Illuminated sign.
(a) Internally and externally illuminated wall and window signs
shall be permitted in the C-1, C-2 and C-3 Districts.
(b) Internally illuminated wall and window signs in the C-1 and C-2
Districts shall be limited to a maximum top to bottom height of
24 inches.
(c) No form of illumination that is flashing, moving, animated or
intermittent shall be permitted in C-1 or C-2 Districts.217
(d) All exterior illuminated signs shall have concealed connecting
wires.
(e) All electrically illuminated signs shall conform to
Pennsylvania’s Uniform Construction Code.218
217. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
218. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 260-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-39
1:557
(10) Individual letters or symbol sign.
(a) Sign area shall be computed by measuring the area of the
smallest rectangle or other geometric shape which
encompasses all of the individual letters or symbols.
(b) Individual letters or symbols shall not project more than nine
inches from the building surface at the point of attachment.
(c) Individual letters and symbols shall not extend above the
building facade or roof cornice or project beyond the ends of
the wall to which they are attached.
(11) Marquee sign.
(a) The marquee sign may be painted on or attached flat against
the surface of the marquee, but shall not project beyond the
marquee or be attached to its underside.
(b) Letters or symbols on the marquee sign shall not exceed 12
inches in height.
(c) The bottom of the marquee sign shall have a minimum
clearance of 10 feet above the sidewalk.
(12)Off-premises advertising sign.
(a) Off-premises advertising signs shall be permitted only in the
C-3 District.
(b) Off-premises advertising signs shall be freestanding signs and
shall be subject to the same requirements for such signs.
(13) Political sign.
(a) Political signs are permitted in all districts if stationary and in
compliance with the regulations for the illumination of signs.
(b) Political signs shall be removed within 15 days following a
primary or general election.
(c) Political signs shall not be attached to utility poles, highway
right-of-way fences or trees within the public right-of-way.
(14) Portable sidewalk sign.
(a) Portable sidewalk signs shall be erected or displayed only
during the course of normal daylight business hours. No such
sign shall be illuminated, erected or displayed after sunset or
during hours when the business or businesses are closed.
(b) Portable sidewalk signs shall not impede pedestrian traffic or
obstruct the vision of motorists.
§ 260-39 DANVILLE CODE § 260-39
1:558
(c) The dimensions of such signs shall not exceed 24 inches wide
by 42 inches high when measured perpendicular to the
sidewalk.
(d) Only one such sign shall be permitted per storefront. Where
more than one business occupies a building, the portable sign
may be shared.
(e) Merchants using portable sidewalk signs within the public
right-of-way shall provide the Borough Zoning Officer with a
certificate of liability insurance for a minimum of $500,000.
Additionally, a hold harmless agreement, as provided by the
Borough, shall be executed and filed with the Borough prior to
issuance of a sign permit.
(15) Professional occupation sign.
(a) The professional occupation sign shall denote only the name,
office hours, symbol, credentials and/or profession of the
occupant.
(b) The professional occupation sign shall not exceed three square
feet.
(c) The longest dimension of the professional occupation sign shall
not exceed 1 1/2 times its shortest dimension.
(d) The professional occupation sign may be attached to the
building or affixed to a freestanding post. Post-mounted signs
shall not exceed nine feet in height above grade level.
(16) Projecting sign.
(a) Each face of a two-sided projecting sign shall not exceed nine
square feet.
(b) The area of a three-dimensional object or symbol sign shall not
exceed nine square feet. The area shall be computed by
enclosing the largest cross section of the sign in a geometric
shape, e.g., rectangle, square, circle, triangle or
parallelogram, and calculating the area of the enclosed shape.
(c) Projecting signs may be internally or externally illuminated.
(d) No form of illumination that is flashing, moving, animated or
intermittent shall be permitted.
(e) All exterior illuminated signs shall have concealed connecting
wires.
(f) All electrically illuminated signs shall conform to
Pennsylvania’s Uniform Construction Code.219
219. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 260-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-39
1:559
(g) The largest dimension of the projecting sign shall not exceed
1 1/2 times its shortest dimension.
(h) The largest vertical dimension of the projecting sign shall not
exceed three feet.
(i) The horizontal projection of the projecting sign shall not
exceed 42 inches from the building face.
(j) The projecting sign shall be mounted at a right angle to the
building face or may be mounted diagonally to the right angle
corner of the building.
(k) The projecting sign shall be hung so as to maintain a minimum
clearance of eight feet between any sidewalk and the bottom of
the sign.
(l) There shall be no more than one projecting sign for any
premises unless the premises is located on a corner lot or has
public entrances on two or more public ways, in which case
one projecting sign may be erected for and toward each public
way.
(17) Public service sign.
(a) The public service sign necessary for public safety and
convenience shall not exceed four square feet in area.
(b) The public service sign shall not exhibit commercial
advertising.
(c) The public service sign shall not be included in the
computation of allowable sign area for a premises.
(18) Real estate sign.
(a) The real estate sign shall not exceed five square feet in
residential districts or 24 square feet in commercial and
manufacturing districts.
(b) Only one real estate sign shall be allowed for each 150 feet of
street frontage. The sign shall be limited to the property being
sold or rented.
(c) All real estate signs shall be removed within 30 days after the
closing of the sale of the real estate or the rental of the real
estate.
(d) The Zoning Officer is empowered to remove real estate signs in
accordance with Subsection G(1) hereof, when the period
required for removal has expired.
(19) Shopping plaza sign.
§ 260-39 DANVILLE CODE § 260-39
1:560
(a) The shopping plaza sign shall display the name of the shopping
plaza only.
(b) Only freestanding signs which exhibit the name of the
shopping plaza may be erected on the land occupied by the
plaza, subject to the provisions of Subsection E(7) and (8)
relating to freestanding signs.
(c) All other signs identifying individual premises located within
the shopping plaza shall be erected in accordance with the
applicable provisions hereof.
(20) Temporary sign.
(a) Temporary signs pertaining to special sales or events may be
displayed for a period of 30 days or less.
(b) The cumulative area of temporary window sign(s) shall not
exceed 20% of the area of each display window or public
entrance on the building site. For purposes of this subsection,
any display window that faces a separate public right-of-way or
which is separated from any other display window by a public
entrance shall be considered a single display window.
(21)Wall sign.
(a) The wall sign shall not project more than nine inches from the
building surface.
(b) The wall sign shall not extend above the building facade or roof
cornice or project beyond the ends of the wall or surface to
which it is attached.
(22)Window sign.
(a) The total area of any permanent window sign shall not exceed
30% of the total glass area of the display window. For purposes
of this subsection, any display window that faces a separate
public right-of-way or which is separated from any other
display window by a public entrance shall be considered a
single display window.
(b) The contents of the window sign shall only advertise an onpremises
use.
(c) The total area of permanent window signs shall be included in
computing the total area of signs on the building frontage.
(d) The area of window signs shall be computed by measuring the
area of the smallest rectangle or other geometric shape which
encompasses all of the individual letters or symbols.
F. Table of Permitted Sign Uses.
§ 260-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-39
1:561
Zoning District
Sign Type C-1 C-2 C-3 M-1 R-1 R-2 R-3 P-1
Address P P P P P P P P
Awning P P P P N N N N
Banner P P P P P P P P
Community
directory
P P P P P P P P
Construction
project
P P P P P P P P
Directional P P P P N N N P
Externally
illuminated
P P P P N N N P
Freestanding P P* P N N N P P
Individual
letters or
symbols
P P P P N N N N
Internally
illuminated
P P P N N N N N
Marquee N P P N N N N N
Off-premises
advertising
N N P N N N N N
Political P P P P P P P P
Portable
sidewalk
P P P N N N N P
Professional
occupation
P P P P P P P P
Projecting N P N N N N N N
Public service P P P P P P P P
Real estate P P P P P P P P
Roof N N N N N N N N
Shopping
plaza
P P P N N N N N
Temporary P P P P P P P P
Wall P P P P P P P P
Window P P P P P P P P
Notes:
* Traffic control signs only.
P = Permitted
N = Not permitted
§ 260-39 DANVILLE CODE § 260-39
1:562
Zoning District Key:
C-1 Neighborhood Commercial
C-2 Central Business
C-3 Highway Commercial
M-1 Manufacturing
R-1 One-Family Residential
R-2 Two-Family Residential
R-3 Multifamily Residential
P-1 Public
G. Administration and enforcement of the sign regulations.
(1) Sign inspection and enforcement.
(a) The Zoning Officer shall inspect signs and enforce the
provisions hereof.
(b) The Zoning Officer shall receive and examine all applications
for permits to erect signs and shall issue permits for all signs
which conform to the requirements hereof.
(c) The Zoning Officer shall record and file all applications,
conduct an annual inspection of all signs and make such
reports as the Borough may require.
(d) Enforcement of these provisions regulating signs in the
Borough of Danville shall be in accordance with § 260-63
hereof.
(2) General provisions for all sign permits.
(a) All signs except those specifically permitted in Subsection B
hereof shall require a permit.
(b) All sign approval permits shall be filed on application forms
provided by the Borough and administered by the Zoning
Officer.
(c) One application form may be used to describe and permit
multiple sign installations on the same property, provided that
complete information is provided for each sign as stipulated in
Subsection G(3) hereof.
(d) Sign approval permits are valid until the sign is replaced,
remodeled or structurally altered, in which case a new permit
shall be required.
(3) Permits to erect new signs or to alter or move existing signs.
§ 260-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-39
1:563
(a) No sign shall be erected, structurally altered or moved until a
permit has been obtained from the Zoning Officer. A permit
shall only be issued when the Zoning Officer determines that
the sign plans comply with all applicable provisions hereof.
(b) Any person desiring a sign permit shall file an application on a
form provided by the Borough and administered by the Zoning
Officer.
(c) The sign permit application form shall contain the following
information:
[1] Applicant's name, address and telephone number.
[2] A plan, drawn to scale, showing the location of the
building, structure or lot to which the sign is to be
attached or erected and showing the position of the sign in
relation to the property lines, adjoining or nearby
buildings, streets or highways.
[3] A description of the dimensions, shape, color, material,
supports, anchoring and height of the sign and the
intensity of illumination.
[4] A sketch of the sign, drawn to scale, illustrating the style of
letters, words, symbols or other graphics.
[5] The name of the person or firm constructing, altering or
moving the sign.
[6] Written consent of the property owner, if different from the
applicant.
[7] Any other conditions which the Zoning Officer may require
to demonstrate full compliance with this chapter and other
applicable laws of the Borough.
(d) The Zoning Officer shall process applications for sign approval
permits within 30 days from the date of the filing of a complete
application with the required fee.
(e) Approval to erect, alter or move a sign shall be granted subject
to the provisions hereof or other applicable ordinances and any
other specific conditions which may be stipulated on the permit
application form, as may be required by the Zoning Hearing
Board.
(f) The Zoning Officer shall inspect the sign installation for
conformance to all applicable requirements and conditions.
Signs deemed to be in compliance with the terms and
conditions of the permit application shall be granted a permit.
The permit shall be validated by the signature of the Zoning
§ 260-39 DANVILLE CODE § 260-39
1:564
Officer. A copy of the validated sign permit shall be provided to
the sign owner.
(g) The sign owner shall notify the Zoning Officer upon the
removal of any permitted sign.
(4) Nonconforming signs. All signs existing at the time this chapter is
enacted which do not conform to one or more applicable provisions
hereof shall be deemed to be nonconforming signs and shall be
subject to the following requirements:
(a) Any sign heretofore legally erected may continue to be
maintained. However, no such sign shall be enlarged, added to
or replaced by another nonconforming sign.
(b) A nonconforming sign may be temporarily removed for repair
and maintenance and reerected if restored within six months.
Signs not restored within a six-month period shall be deemed
abandoned and the use of the nonconforming sign shall
terminate.
(c) Nonconforming signs or sign locations which are discontinued
or not used for a period of at least six months shall be deemed
abandoned and the use of the nonconforming sign shall
terminate.
(d) Any nonconforming sign that becomes unsafe or which is
destroyed or damaged beyond repair shall be removed.
Nonconforming signs which are unsafe, destroyed or damaged
beyond repair for a period of six months or more shall be
deemed abandoned and the use of the nonconforming sign
shall terminate.
(e) No person shall maintain an abandoned nonconforming sign or
permit an abandoned sign to be maintained on a premises
under their ownership or control. Any such abandoned sign
shall be removed by the landowner or person controlling the
property within 30 days of the abandonment.
(f) Failure to comply with the approved permit provisions for
removal of nonconforming signs shall result in penalties for
noncompliance as set forth in § 260-63 hereof.
(5) Fees for sign permit.
(a) Applications for erecting, altering or moving a sign or signs, as
well as the filing of a request for variance with the Zoning
Hearing Board, shall be accompanied by the fees established in
the Schedule of Fees adopted by the Borough of Danville.220
220. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Fees is on file in the office of the Borough Secretary. See
also § 260-64, Fees, of this chapter.
§ 260-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-39
1:565
§ 260-40. Automatic teller machines (ATMs).
ATMs shall be permitted only in accordance with the following restrictions
and requirements:
§ 260-41. Telephone booths.
Coin-operated public phone booths shall be permitted only in accordance
with the following restrictions and requirements:
§ 260-42. Adult businesses. [Added 12-9-2002 by Ord. No. 448]
Adult businesses are permitted only as a special exception use only in the
C-3 zone district.
(b) No fee shall be charged for resubmitting an application which
adopts the suggested modifications of the Zoning Hearing
Board.
(c) No fee shall be charged for the painting or repair of a sign that
is an exact duplicate of the existing approved sign.
(d) No permit shall be issued nor variance granted without the
payment of required fees.
A. Such machines shall only be located on sites immediately adjacent to a
public street.
B. Such facility shall be so lighted as to readily permit visibility of the
facility and the users thereof from the public street it abuts.
C. Where such a facility is designed as a drive-through facility, it shall also
comply with the requirements of § 260-32H hereof.
A. Such facilities shall only be located on sites immediately adjacent to a
public street.
B. Such facility shall be so lighted as to readily permit visibility of the
facility and the users thereof from the public street it abuts.
A. Legislative findings. In adopting these standards which apply to adult
businesses, the Borough Council has made the following findings in
regard to the secondary effects on the health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of Danville Borough. The findings are based on evidence
concerning the adverse secondary effects of adult uses on the
community presented in hearings and in reports made available to the
Borough Council, and on findings incorporated in the cases of City of
Renton v. Playtime Theaters, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v.
American Mini Theaters, 426 U.S. 50 (1976), and Northern Cinema,
Inc., v. Seattle, 585 P. 2d 1153 (Wash. 1978), and in re: appeal of Bucks,
Bass and Balls Inc., d/b/a LaDolce Vita from the Deemed Denial by the
Zoning Hearing Board of Springbrook Township in the Court of
Common Pleas of Lackawanna County, Civil Action – Law No.
§ 260-39 DANVILLE CODE § 260-42
1:566
97-CV-5379 and 100 Lackawanna Jurist 223 (1999), and City of Erie, et
al v. Pap's A.M. TDBA "Kandyland" (Slip Opinion – Supreme Court of
the United States) No. 98-1161 decided March 29, 2000, and on studies
in other communities including, but not limited to, Phoenix, Arizona;
Minneapolis, Minnesota; Saint Paul, Minnesota; Manatee County,
Florida; Houston, Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Los
Angeles, California; Austin, Texas; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City,
Oklahoma; Beaumont, Texas; and New York City, New York; and also
on the findings found in Report of the Attorney General's Working
Group on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses, June 6, 1989,
State of Minnesota. The June 6, 1989, Report of the Attorney General's
Working Group on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses from
the State of Minnesota, and the November 1994, City of New York Adult
Entertainment Study, each summarize a number of studies from around
the country as follows:
Minneapolis
The effects of sexually oriented businesses on the crime rate index is
positive.
There is a close association between adult businesses, crime rates,
and low housing values.
St. Paul
A significant correlation exists between the location of adult
businesses and neighborhood deterioration.
Indianapolis
Real estate appraisers overwhelmingly (80%) felt that an adult
bookstore would have a negative effect on residential property
values within one block of the site.
71% believed there would be a detrimental effect on commercial
property values in the one-block radius.
Major crimes such as criminal homicide, rape, robbery, assault,
burglary, and larceny, occurred at a rate 23% higher in areas with
adult businesses.
The sex-related crime rate, including rape, indecent exposure, and
child molestation, was 77% higher in such areas.
Phoenix
Property crimes were 43% higher in areas with adult businesses.
The sex crime rate was 500% higher in those areas.
Whittier, California
Higher occupancy turnover rates were documented in commercial
and residential areas adjacent to adult businesses.
Numerous reports of excessive noise, drunkenness and
pornographic litter associated with adult businesses were identified.
§ 260-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-42
1:567
The Minnesota Working Group concluded that a comprehensive
approach is required to reduce or eliminate the impacts of sexually
oriented businesses. Zoning and licensing regulations are needed to
protect residents from the intrusion of "combat zone" sexual crime and
harassment into their neighborhoods.1
The New York City study concluded that numerous studies in other
locations found that adult entertainment uses have negative secondary
impacts such as increased crime rates, depreciation of property
values, deterioration of community character and the quality of urban
life.2
Municipalities typically allow adult uses in heavy commercial and
industrial districts. The New York City study reported that:
A study in the Town of Islip, NY formed the basis of zoning
regulations that allow adult uses only in Industrial I Districts by
special exception.
The Indianapolis, Indiana study recommended that adult uses should
be allowed only by special exception in commercial districts oriented
beyond a neighborhood and not within 500 feet of a residential, school,
church, or park property line, or historic area.3
A study conducted by the Manatee County, Florida, Planning and
Development Department recommended that adult uses be limited
to commercial locations at least 500 feet from a residential district
and 2,000 feet from churches, schools, child-care facilities and public
recreation areas.4
This ordinance adopted in 1992 by Jackson, Mississippi, limits topless
bars and other adult businesses to areas zoned for light industrial
uses and requires distances ranging from 250 feet to 1,000 feet from
residential uses and commercial facilities.
Regulations in many Long Island, New York, communities attempt to
protect residential and commercial areas by allowing adult uses only
in low-visibility industrial districts.5
Recent events and alleged criminal activity at an adult business in
a nearby community document that secondary effects of adult
businesses can affect rural areas as well as urban areas (Hip Hop Club,
Hamlin, PA).
The concern over sexually transmitted diseases is a legitimate health
concern of Danville Borough which demands reasonable regulation of
adult businesses and adult uses in order to protect the health and wellbeing
of the citizens.
Certain employees of sexually oriented business regulated by this
ordinance as adult theaters and cabarets engage in higher incidents
of certain types of sexually oriented behavior at these businesses than
employees of other establishments.
§ 260-42 DANVILLE CODE § 260-42
1:568
Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur at
sexually oriented businesses, including adult bookstores, adult novelty
shops, adult video stores, adult motion-picture theaters, or adult
arcades, and especially those which provide private or semiprivate
booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos, or live sex shows. Offering
and providing such space encourages such activities, which create
unhealthy conditions. Numerous studies and reports have determined
that semen is found in the areas of sexually oriented businesses where
persons view "adult" oriented films.
Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades, and other
sexually oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex within
the premises of such sexually oriented businesses. At least 50
communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring in
sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, syphilis,
gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus infection (AIDS), genital
herpes, hepatitis B, non B amebiasis, salmonella infections and
shigella infections; and, the incidence of many of these diseases is on
the increase.
Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are
unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are
unhealthy, and, in part, because of the unregulated nature of the
activities and the failure of the owners and the operators of the
facilities to self-regulate those activities and maintain those facilities.
Classifying adult businesses as special exception uses is a reasonable
means of accountability to ensure that operators of adult businesses
comply with reasonable regulations and conditions, and to ensure that
operators do not knowingly allow their establishments to be used as
places of illegal sexual activity or solicitation.
There is convincing documented evidence that adult businesses,
because of their very nature, have a deleterious effect on both the
existing businesses around them and the surrounding residential areas
adjacent to them, causing increased crime, the downgrading of
property values, and the decline of the overall character of the
community. A number of municipal studies, including the 1986 Austin,
Texas study, have demonstrated this.
It is generally recognized that adult businesses, due to their nature,
have serious objectionable operational characteristics, particularly
when they are located in close proximity to each other, thereby
contributing to neighborhood blight and downgrading the quality of
life in the adjacent area. A number of municipal studies, including the
1986 Austin, Texas study, have demonstrated this.
The Borough Council desires to minimize and control these adverse
secondary effects and thereby protect the health, safety and welfare
of the citizenry, protect the citizens from increased crime, preserve
the quality of life, preserve property values and the character of the
surrounding community.
§ 260-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-42
1:569
Based on the zoning principal established by the courts that all
legitimate uses must be permitted somewhere in the community, adult
uses should be permitted. Nevertheless, such uses must be regulated
in terms of time, place and manner. In other words, the location
and outward operation should be regulated, while remaining "content
neutral" in terms of free speech protected by the First Amendment.
Specific standards for setbacks, visibility and signs must be included
to protect adjoining residential, educational and other uses from the
negative secondary impacts of any adult use.
NOTES:
1 Report of the Attorney General's Working Group on the Regulation of
Sexually Oriented Businesses, State of Minnesota, June 6, 1989, p. 2.
2 Adult Entertainment Study. Department of City Planning. City of New
York, November 1994. p. 67.
3 Ibid., p. 5.
4 Ibid., p. 8.
5 Ibid., p. 9.
B. Intent. It is the intent of this section to:
(1) Regulate adult business in order to promote the public health,
safety and welfare by minimizing the secondary effects on the
community which are associated with such businesses, and which
include difficulties for law enforcement, trash disposal, deleterious
effects on business and residential property values, increased
crime (particularly the corruption of morals of minors and
prostitution).
(2) Prevent the concentration of regulated uses in order to minimize
the secondary effects of such uses.
(3) Designate a zoning district where adult businesses are permitted,
and establish reasonable, content-neutral standards applicable to
such uses.
(4) Have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or
restriction on the content of any communicative materials
including sexually oriented or adult materials.
(5) Not totally restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented
materials or adult materials protected by the First Amendment of
the Bill of Rights of the U.S. constitution.
(6) Not deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually
oriented entertainment to their intended market.
§ 260-42 DANVILLE CODE § 260-42
1:570
(7) Not condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material, or
to encourage any violation of the Pennsylvania Crimes Code or
Pennsylvania Obscenity Code.
C. Special exception use in the C-3 District. Adult businesses are classified
as special exception uses in the C-3 Commercial District, which
provides a suitable area for the development of such uses away from
areas with concentrated residential development.
D. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted or
invited wherein coin-operated or token-operated or electronically or
mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or
other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five
or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images
so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or
describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
An "adult arcade" shall be considered a regulated use for the purpose
of this section.
ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO
STORE —
ADULT BUSINESS/REGULATED USE — All of the following shall be
considered "adult businesses/regulated uses":
An establishment having a substantial party of its business, offering
for sale or rental for any form of consideration, any one or more
of the following: books, magazines, and other periodicals or other
printed matter or photographs, films, motion pictures,
videocassettes, or video reproductions, slides or other visual
representations which are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis on matter depicting, anatomical areas, or instruments,
devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection
with specified sexual activities, or an establishment with a segment
or section devoted to the sale or display of such material, where
that segment or section exceeds an area of 10% of the sales space
in such an establishment or 50 square feet, whichever is greater.
(1)
The term "adult bookstore" shall include but not be limited to an
adult video store, and all such uses shall be considered a regulated
use for the purpose of this section.
(2)
The use of a building or land for a business which has obscene
materials as a substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade.
(1)
The use of a building or land for a business which involves the sale,
lease, trade, gift or display of drug paraphernalia as a substantial
or significant portion of its stock-in-trade.
(2)
§ 260-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-42
1:571
ADULT LIVE ENTERTAINMENT USE OR FACILITY —
Any nightclub, bar, restaurant, arcade, theater, or any other
establishment that conducts life performances as part of its
business that are characterized by the exposure of specified
anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities, or films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic
reproductions in which a substantial portion of the total
presentation time is devoted to the showing of material that is
characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or where
any specified sexual activities are conducted for economic gain or
any other form of consideration.
(3)
Any of the following as defined herein:
(a) Adult arcade.
(b) Adult bookstore or adult video store.
(c) Adult live entertainment use or facility.
(d) Adult motel.
(e) Adult motion-picture theater.
(f) Adult theater.
(g) Cabaret.
(h) Drug paraphernalia stores.
(i) Escort agency.
(j) Massage parlor.
(k) Nude model studio.
(l) Sexual encounter center.
(4)
A commercial use (including, but not limited to a use of selling food
or beverages) including live entertainment involving:
Persons (which may include, but is not limited to, waiters,
waitresses, contractors, dancers, clerks, bartenders or others)
appearing in a state of nudity;
(a)
Live performances which are characterized by the exposure
of specified anatomical areas or simulated or actual specified
sexual activities, or
(b)
Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas
(c)
(1)
§ 260-42 DANVILLE CODE § 260-42
1:572
ADULT MOTEL —
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER —
ADULT THEATER —
CABARET — An adult club, restaurant, theater, hall or similar place
which features topless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers,
strippers, male or female impersonators or similar entertainers
exhibiting specified anatomical areas or performing specified sexual
activities.
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA — Any objects, devices, instruments,
apparatus or contrivances, whose primary and traditionally exclusive
use is involved with the illegal use of any and all controlled substances
under Pennsylvania Law.
An adult live entertainment use or facility shall be considered an
adult business for the purpose of this section.
(2)
A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:
Offers accommodations to the public for any form of
consideration and as part of the consideration provides patrons
with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas; or
(a)
Offers sleeping rooms for rent three or more times in one
calendar day.
(b)
(1)
An adult motel shall be considered an adult business for the
purpose of this section.
(2)
A commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration,
films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar
photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas
(1)
An adult motion picture theater shall be considered an adult
business for the purpose of this section.
(2)
A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a
state of nudity or in live performances which are characterized
by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual
activities.
(1)
An adult theater shall be considered an adult business for the
purpose of this section.
(2)
§ 260-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-42
1:573
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA STORES — Any retail store selling
paraphernalia commonly related to the use of any drug or narcotic of
which the sale, use or possession of is subject to the provisions of the
Controlled Substance, Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act, 1972, April 14,
P.L. 233, No. 64, § 1 et seq., 35 P.S. § 780-101 et seq., including but
not limited to water pipes, pipe "screens", hashish pipes, "roach clips,"
"coke spoons," "bongs" and cigarette rolling papers by a store that also
sells loose tobacco or the sale by prescription of implements needed for
the use of prescribed drugs or narcotics.
ESCORT — A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act
as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or
offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for
another person.
ESCORT AGENCY — A person or business association or establishment
which furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as
one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip, or other
consideration.
MASSAGE — The performance of manipulative exercises using hands
and/or a mechanical or bathing device on a person(s)'s skin other than
the face or neck by another person(s) that is related to certain monetary
compensation and which does not involve persons who are related to
each other by blood, adoption, marriage or official guardianship.
MASSAGE PARLOR — A person or business association or
establishment which furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to
furnish as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip, or other
consideration a massage which involves the exposure of any specified
anatomical areas or the conduct of any specified sexual activities,
except where such service is provided by a certified masseur/masseuse.
NUDE MODEL STUDIO — Any place where a person who appears in
a state of nudity exhibiting specified anatomical areas is provided to
be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or
similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of
consideration.
NUDITY or A STATE OF NUDITY — The showing of the human male or
female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque
covering or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully
opaque covering or any portion thereof below the top of the areolae.
OBSCENE MATERIALS — Any literature, book, magazine, pamphlet,
newspaper, paper, comic book, drawing, photograph, figure, image,
motion picture, videotape, sound recording, article, instrument or any
other written or recorded matter which depicts or describes any
specified anatomical areas and/or specified sexual activities.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER —
A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary
business purposes, offers for any form of consideration:
(1)
§ 260-42 DANVILLE CODE § 260-42
1:574
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — Any of the following:
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Any of the following:
Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
persons of the opposite sex.
(a)
Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of
the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of
nudity or seminudity.
(b)
A sexual encounter center shall be considered an adult business for
the purpose of this section.
(2)
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a point immediately
above the top of the areolae.
(1)
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
(2)
The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, public
region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts.
(1)
Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy.
(2)
(3) Masturbation, actual or simulated.
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in Subsections (1), (2) and (3) of this definition.
(4)
E. Standards. In addition to the other applicable provisions hereof, the
following standards shall apply to adult businesses:
(1) No regulated use shall be permitted within 3,000 feet of any other
existing regulated use.
(2) No regulated use shall be permitted within 500 feet of any
establishment that sells alcoholic beverages.
(3) No regulated use shall be permitted within 500 feet of any
residentially zoned district, or any of the following residentially
related uses:
(a) Group care facility.
(b) Commercial enterprises catering primarily to persons under 18
years of age;
(c) Churches, chapels, convents, rectories, religious article or
religious apparel stores;
(d) Schools, up to and including the 12th grade, and their adjunct
play areas;
§ 260-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-42
1:575
(e) Public recreational facilities, and public libraries;
(f) All other public buildings and offices.
(4) For the purposes of this section, spacing distances shall be
measured as follows:
(a) From all property lines of any regulated use in Subsection E(3)
above;
(b) From the outward line or boundary of all residential zoning
districts;
(c) From all property lines of any uses identified in Subsection
E(3)(a) through (f) above.
(5) Enlargement. Any enlargement or expansion of an existing, legally
created adult business shall be considered a special exception use
subject to the provisions of this § 260-42 and all other applicable
standards of this chapter.221
(6) Limit of one use. It shall be a violation of this section for any person
to cause or permit the operation, establishment, or maintenance of
more than one adult business in the same building, structure or
portion thereof, or an increase of floor area of any adult business in
any building, structure or portion thereof that contains another
adult business.
(7) Nonconformity. Any adult business lawfully operating on the date of
enactment of this section that is in violation of any of the provisions
of this § 260-42 shall be deemed a nonconforming use. Such
nonconforming uses shall be increased, enlarged, altered or
extended, only in accord with Article VIII, Nonconforming Uses and
Structures, and all other applicable standards of this section. The
use may be changed to a conforming use. However, under no
circumstances shall a nonconforming use as regulated by Article
VIII hereof be changed to any type of adult business without
applying for such change of use as a special exception.222
(8) Change of use. Whenever an existing regulated use is proposed to
be changed to another permitted regulated use, the applicant shall
request consideration as another regulated use in accordance with
the procedures set forth herein for such special exceptions.
(9) Location of new neighboring uses. An adult business lawfully
operating as a conforming use shall not be rendered a
nonconforming use if, subsequent to the grant of a special
exception permit, a use from which an adult business is required to
provide a setback under this § 260-42 is developed within the
221. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
222. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 260-42 DANVILLE CODE § 260-42
1:576
required setback distance. Any additions or expansions of the adult
business use shall comply with all setbacks required by this
§ 260-42.223
(10) Alcohol. No adult business shall be operated in combination with
the sale and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the
premises.
(11)No regulated use shall permit the admission of minors to their
regulated business establishment, and the sale of regulated
services or materials to minors is also prohibited.
(12)No regulated use shall operate between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
8:00 a.m. from Monday to Friday, nor between the hours of 3:00
a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Saturdays, nor between the hours of 3:00
a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sundays.
(13) Exemption for modeling class. It is a defense to prosecution under
this § 260-42 that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a
modeling class operated:224
(a) By a proprietary school, licensed by the state, or an
academically accredited college or university;
(b) By a private college or university which maintains and
operates educational programs in which credits are
transferable to a college, junior college or university supported
entirely or partly by taxation;
(c) In a structure:
[1] Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure
and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is
available for viewing;
[2] Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must
enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and
[3] Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at
any one time; or
(d) By an organization which qualifies under Section 501(c)(3) of
the U.S. Internal Revenue Code as a nonprofit organization or
foundation.
F. Signs and other visible messages. All regulated uses shall be permitted
signs and visible messages based on the allowable sign area of the
zoning district in which they are located.225
223. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
224. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
225. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 260-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-42
1:577

ARTICLE VII
Performance Standards
§ 260-43. General application. [Amended 5-5-2009 by Ord. No. 496]
All existing and proposed principal and accessory permitted uses, special
exceptions, and conditional uses are subject to the following performance
standards and procedures.
§ 260-44. Performance standards procedures.
§ 260-45. Nuisance elements.
A. Prior to construction and operation.
(1) Any application for a building permit for a use, which shall be
subject to performance standards, shall be accompanied by a
sworn statement by the owner of subject property that said use will
be operated in accordance with the performance standards set
forth herein.
(2) Any application for a principal or accessory permitted use in a C-3
or M-1 Zone shall further be accompanied by a report prepared by
a licensed professional engineer describing the methods or
procedures to be undertaken to assure compliance with the
performance standards specified herein; provided, however, that
the Zoning Hearing Board will consider requests for a waiver of
this requirement and may waive this requirement for uses which
are not considered likely to violate any of the standards set forth
herein.
B. Continued compliance. Continued compliance with performance
standards is required and enforcement of continued compliance with
these performance standards shall be the responsibility of the Zoning
Officer.
C. Determination of violation. The Zoning Officer shall investigate any
purported violation of performance standards and, if there is
reasonable ground for the same, shall initiate the procedures set forth
in § 260-63B hereof.
A. Definition of elements. No land or building shall be operated in such a
manner so as to create any dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise
objectionable fire, explosive or other hazard; noise or vibration, smoke,
dust, dirt or other form of air pollution; electrical or other disturbance;
glare; or other nuisance, condition or element in such amount as to
adversely affect the surrounding area or premises (referred to herein as
"dangerous or objectionable elements").
B. Locations where determinations are to be made for enforcement of
performance standards. The determination of the existence of any
dangerous and objectionable elements shall be made at:
§ 260-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-45
1:579
§ 260-46. Standards to be enforced.
(1) The point or points where such elements shall be most apparent for
fire and explosion hazards, for radioactivity and electrical
disturbances, for smoke and other forms of air pollution.
(2) The property lines of the use creating such elements for noise, for
vibration, for glare and for odors.
A. Fire and explosion hazards.
(1) In all activities involving and all storage of inflammable and
explosive materials, the owner or operator of such use shall provide
adequate safety devices against the hazard of fire and explosion
and adequate fire-fighting and fire-suppression equipment and
devices standard in this industry. Burning of waste materials in
open fires is prohibited. The relevant provisions of state and local
laws and regulations shall also apply.
(2) No highly flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be
stored in bulk above the ground except in structures according to
commonwealth and federal specifications.
(3) All outdoor storage facilities for fuel shall be enclosed by an
approved safety fence to prevent access thereto by unauthorized
individuals.
(4) All materials or wastes which might cause fumes, constitute a fire
hazard or attract rodents or insects may only be stored if enclosed
in buildings or containers which are adequate to eliminate such
hazards.
(5) No materials, fuels, wastes or flammable substances may be
deposited or stored on a lot in such a manner as to allow them to be
transferred off the lot by natural causes or forces. No substances,
including but not limited to gasoline, oil, waste oil and chemicals,
which can contaminate a stream or watercourse or render such
stream or water source unusable or undesirable as a source of
water supply or recreation or which will destroy or damage aquatic
life shall be stored in such a location so that it could be introduced
into said stream or watercourse by natural causes or forces or by
rupture of storage containers or accidental discharge.
B. Radioactivity or electrical disturbance. No activities shall be permitted
which emit dangerous radioactivity or electrical disturbance adversely
affecting the operation of any equipment other than that of the creator
of such disturbance.
C. Noise. No noise shall be emitted in excess of the standards set forth in
Chapter 161, Noise.
§ 260-45 DANVILLE CODE § 260-46
1:580
D. Vibration. No vibration shall be permitted which is detectable without
instruments at the points of measurement specified in § 260-45B.
E. Glare. No direct or sky-reflected glare, whether from floodlights or from
high-temperature processes such as combustion or welding or
otherwise, so as to be visible at the points of measurement specified in
§ 260-45B shall be permitted. This restriction shall not apply to signs
otherwise permitted by the provisions of this chapter.
F. Smoke, dust, fumes, vapor and gas control. The emission of dust, dirt,
fly ash, fumes, vapors or gases which cause any damage to human
health, to animals or to vegetation or other forms of property or which
can cause soiling or staining of persons or property at any point beyond
the lot line of the use creating such emission is hereby prohibited. No
emission of liquid or solid particulate from any chimney or stack or
otherwise shall exceed three hundredths (0.03) grains per cubic foot of
the covering gas at any point beyond the lot line of the use creating the
emission. Identical processes or facilities may be compared to
determine compliance with this subsection. For measurement for the
amount of particles discharged as set forth above, measurement
procedures shall follow those then employed by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection for similar or identical
measurements.
G. Odors. No emission shall be permitted of malodorous gases or other
malodorous matter in such quantities as to be readily detectable
without instruments at the property line of the zone lot from which they
are emitted.
H. Other forms of air pollution. No emission of fly ash, dust, fumes, vapors,
gases and other forms of air pollution shall be permitted which can
cause any damage to health, animals, vegetation or other forms of
property or which can cause any excessive soiling.
I. Surface and ground water contamination. All activities involving the
possible contamination of surface or groundwater shall be provided
with adequate safety devices to prevent such contamination. Details of
the potential hazards (including the groundwater characteristics of the
area in which the use is proposed) and details of planned safety devices
and contamination response actions shall be provided by the developer.
§ 260-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-46
1:581

ARTICLE VIII
Nonconforming Uses and Structures
§ 260-47. Continuation of use.
A use, building or structure lawfully in existence prior to the adoption of
this chapter, which does not comply with the applicable use provisions of
this chapter or any applicable amendment thereto, may be continued as
provided herein. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the
plans, construction or designated use of a building complying with existing
laws, a permit for which had been duly granted and the construction of
which shall have been started before the date of adoption of this chapter
or any applicable amendment thereto, and the ground story framework of
which, including the second tier of beams, shall have been completed within
six months of the date of the permit and which entire building shall have
been completed, according to such plans as have been filed, within one year
of the date of adoption of this chapter or any applicable amendment thereto.
§ 260-48. Registration of nonconforming uses.
The Zoning Officer may identify and register nonconforming uses and
nonconforming structures as provided in Section 613 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended.226
§ 260-49. Certificate of nonconformance.
The Zoning Officer shall issue a certificate of nonconformance for any
nonconformance registered in accordance with § 260-48 hereof.
§ 260-50. Destruction of nonconforming use.227
Any nonconforming use which shall be destroyed by fire or other disaster
may not be restored except as a conforming use; provided, however, that
the owner of such use may apply to the Zoning Hearing Board for the
restoration of such use in accordance with the procedure set forth under
§ 260-56E(1) herein for applications for special exceptions. The Zoning
Hearing Board may authorize the Zoning Officer to issue a permit for
such replacement if the findings are in accordance with the criteria set
forth under § 260-56E(3)(b), not including § 260-56E(3)(b)[1]; and provided,
further, that such application shall be made within 90 days of such disaster
and that such permit shall not be valid for a period of more than one year.
§ 260-51. Partial destruction of a nonconforming use.
Any nonconforming use or structure damaged less than 50% of its existing
floor area may be restored, reconstructed or used as before, provided that
the volume of such use or structure shall not exceed the floor area which
226. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10613.
227. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 260-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-51
1:583
existed up to the time of such damage; and provided, further, that such
restoration shall be in accordance with the following:
§ 260-52. Conforming use on a nonconforming lot.
Where a use is in conformity with this Zoning Chapter in all respects other
than its lot size, yards and setbacks and such use is destroyed totally or
partially, it may be restored to its condition prior to such damage; provided,
however, that it shall not be made any more nonconforming as to yards
and setbacks than it was prior to such damage and that, to the extent
feasible, such reconstruction shall be made more conforming as to yards
and setbacks.
§ 260-53. Nonconforming building.
Any nonconforming building which is not also a nonconforming use, if
damaged or destroyed, may be restored to its original condition.
§ 260-54. Termination of use.
When the use and occupancy of a nonconforming use shall be abandoned
for a period of one year or more, then the reuse of such property shall not
thereafter be resumed as a nonconforming use. The use of such property
following the abandonment of a nonconforming use for a period of at
least one year shall be in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
governing the zone district where it is located.
§ 260-55. Change of use and expansion of use.
A. It shall be completed within one year of such damage.
B. Except for the previous nonconformance, it shall be in accordance with
all other requirements of this chapter.
A. A nonconforming use shall not be changed into a use which is first
permitted in a less restrictive zone district than where the
nonconforming use is first permitted.
B. A nonconforming use may be changed into a conforming use.
C. A nonconforming use which is not permitted in any zone district or
which is permitted only as a special exception may only be changed into
a conforming use.
D. When a nonconforming use shall be changed in accordance with the
provisions hereof, the use of the building or other structure or tract of
land shall not thereafter by changed again, except in accordance with
these regulations.
E. No nonconforming use shall be expanded by more than 25% of the area
and bulk which existed at the time of the adoption of this chapter.
§ 260-51 DANVILLE CODE § 260-55
1:584
ARTICLE IX
Zoning Hearing Board
§ 260-56. Organization and procedure.
A. Establishment. Pursuant to the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Municipality Planning Code, Article X, a Zoning Hearing Board is
hereby established.
B. Appointment.
(1) Members of the Board shall be residents of the municipality,
appointed by resolution of the governing body. The Zoning Hearing
Board shall consist of three members, one of whom shall be
designated to serve until the first day of January following the
adoption of the Zoning Ordinance, one until the first day of the
second January thereafter and one until the first day of the third
January thereafter. Their successors shall be appointed on the
expiration of their respective terms to serve three years. Members
of the Board shall hold no other public office in the municipality.
(2) Appointment to fill vacancies. The Board shall promptly notify the
governing body of any vacancies which occur. Appointment to fill
vacancies shall be for the unexpired term of the member or
members whose term or terms become vacant, and such
appointments to fill vacancies shall be made in the same manner as
the original appointment.
(3) Removal. Any Board member may be removed for malfeasance,
misfeasance or nonfeasance in office or for other just cause by a
majority vote of the governing body who appointed the member,
taken after the member has received 15 days' advance notice of the
intent to take such a vote. A hearing shall be held in connection
with the vote if the member shall request it in writing.
(4) Organization of Board.
(a) The Board shall elect from its own membership its officers,
who shall serve annual terms as such and may succeed
themselves. For the conduct of any hearing and the taking of
any action, a quorum shall be not less than a majority of all the
members of the Board, but the Board may appoint a hearing
officer from its own membership to conduct any hearing on its
behalf, and the parties may waive further action by the Board
as provided in Subsection D. The Board may make, alter and
rescind rules and forms for its procedure, consistent with
ordinances of the municipality and laws of the commonwealth.
The Board shall keep full public records of its business, which
records shall be the property of the municipality and shall
submit a report of its activities to the governing body as
requested by the governing body.
§ 260-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-56
1:585
(b) If, by reason of absence or disqualification of a member, a
quorum is not reached, the Chairman of the Board shall
designate as many alternate members of the Board to sit on the
Board as may be needed to provide a quorum. Any alternate
member of the Board shall continue to serve on the Board in all
proceedings involving the matter or case for which the
alternate was initially appointed until the Board has made a
final determination of the matter or case. Designation of an
alternate pursuant to this subsection shall be made on a caseby-
case basis in rotation according to declining seniority
among all alternates.
(5) Appointment of alternate members. The governing body may
appoint by resolution at least one but no more than three residents
of the municipality to serve as alternate members of the Board. The
term of office of an alternate member shall be three years. When
seated pursuant to the provisions of Section 906 of Act 247, as
amended,228 an alternate shall be entitled to participate in all
proceedings and discussions of the Board to the same and full
extent as provided by law for Board members, including specifically
the right to cast a vote as a voting member during the proceedings,
and shall have all the powers and duties set forth herein and as
otherwise provided by law. Alternates shall hold no other office in
the municipality, including membership on the Planning
Commission and Zoning Officer. Any alternate may participate in
any proceeding or discussion of the Board but shall not be entitled
to vote as a member of the Board nor be compensated pursuant to
Section 907 of Act 247, as amended,229 unless designated as a
voting alternate member pursuant to Section 906 of Act 247, as
amended.
C. Expenditures for services. Within the limits of funds appropriated by
the governing body, the Board may employ or contract for secretaries,
clerks, legal counsel, consultants and other technical and clerical
services. Members of the Board may receive compensation for the
performance of their duties, as may be fixed by the governing body, but
in no case shall it exceed the rate of compensation authorized to be paid
to the members of the governing body.
D. Hearings. The Board shall conduct hearings and make decision in
accordance with the following requirements: [Amended 12-9-2002 by
Ord. No. 448]
(1) Public notice shall be given and written notice shall be given to the
applicant, the Zoning Officer, such other persons as the governing
body shall designate by ordinance and to any person who has made
timely request for the same. Written notices shall be given at such
time and in such manner as shall be prescribed by ordinance or, in
228. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10906.
229. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10907.
§ 260-56 DANVILLE CODE § 260-56
1:586
the absence of ordinance provision, by rules of the Board. In
addition to the written notice provided herein, written notice of
said hearing shall be conspicuously posted on the affected tract of
land at least one week prior to the hearing.
(2) The governing body may prescribe reasonable fees with respect to
hearing before the Zoning Hearing Board. Fees for said hearings
may include compensation for the secretary and members of the
Zoning Hearing Board, notice and advertising costs and necessary
administrative overhead connected with the hearing. The costs,
however, shall not include legal expenses of the Zoning Hearing
Board, expenses from engineering, architectural or other technical
consultants or expert witness costs.
(3) The first hearing before the Board or hearing officer shall be
commenced within 60 days from the date of receipt of the
applicant's application, unless the applicant has agreed in writing
to an extension of time. Each subsequent hearing before the Board
or hearing officer shall be held within 45 days of the prior hearing,
unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant in writing or on the
record. An applicant shall complete the presentation of his case-inchief
within 100 days of the first hearing. Upon the request of the
applicant, the Board or hearing officer shall assure that the
applicant receives at least seven hours of hearings within the 100
days, including the first hearing. Persons opposed to the
application shall complete the presentation of their opposition to
the application within 100 days of the first hearing held after the
completion of the applicant's case-in-chief, provided the persons
opposed to the application are granted an equal number of
additional hearings. Persons opposed to the application may, upon
the written consent or consent on the record by the applicant and
municipality, be granted additional hearings to complete their
opposition to the application provided the applicant is granted an
equal number of additional hearings for rebuttal.
(4) The hearings shall be conducted by the Board or the Board may
appoint any member or an independent attorney as a hearing
officer. The decision, or, where no decision is called for, the findings
shall be made by the Board; however, the appellant or the
applicant, as the case may be, in addition to the municipality, may,
prior to the decision of the hearing, waive decision or findings by
the Board and accept the decision or findings for the hearing officer
as final.
(5) The parties to the hearing shall be the municipality, any person
affected by the application who has made timely appearance of
record before the Board, and any other person including civic or
community organizations permitted to appear by the Board. The
Board shall have power to require that all persons who wish to be
considered parties enter appearances in writing on forms provided
by the Board for that purpose. The chairman or acting chairman of
§ 260-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-56
1:587
the Board or the hearing officer presiding shall have power to
administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of
witnesses and the production of relevant documents and papers,
including witnesses and documents requested by the parties. The
parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and
shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence
and argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant
issues.
(6) Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial,
or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
(7) The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall keep a
stenographic record of the proceedings. The appearance fee for a
stenographer shall be shared equally by the applicant and the
Board. The cost of the original transcript shall be paid by the Board
if the transcript is ordered by the Board or hearing officer or shall
be paid by the person appealing from the decision of the Board if
such appeal is made, and in either event the cost of additional
copies shall be paid by the person requesting such copy or copies.
In other cases, the party requesting the original transcript shall
bear the cost thereof.
(8) The Board of the hearing officer shall not communicate, directly or
indirectly, with any party or his representatives in connection with
any issue involved except upon notice and opportunity for all
parties to participate, shall not take notice of any communication,
reports, staff memoranda, or other materials, except advice from
their solicitor, unless the parties are afforded an opportunity to
contest the material so noticed and shall not inspect the site or its
surroundings after the commencement of hearings with any party
or his representative unless all parties are given an opportunity to
be present.
(9) The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall render a
written decision or, when no decision is called for, make written
findings on the application within 45 days after the last hearing
before the Board or hearing officer. Where the application is
contested or denied, each decision shall be accompanied by
findings of fact and conclusions based thereon together with the
reasons therefor. Conclusions based on any provisions of this act or
of any ordinance, rule or regulation shall contain a reference to the
provision relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed
appropriate in the light of the facts found. If the hearing is
conducted by a hearing officer and there has been no stipulation
that his decision or findings are final, the Board shall make his
report and recommendations available to the parties within 45 days
and the parties shall be entitled to make written representations
thereon to the Board prior to final decision or entry of findings, and
the Board's decision shall be entered no later than 30 days after the
report of the hearing officer. Except for challenges filed under
§ 260-56 DANVILLE CODE § 260-56
1:588
Section 916.1 of the PA Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended,230 where the Board fails to render the decision within the
period required by this subsection or fails to commence, conduct
or complete the required hearing as provided in Subsection D(1),
the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of
the applicant unless the applicant has agreed in writing or on the
record to an extension of time. When a decision has been rendered
in favor of the applicant because of the failure of the Board to
meet or render a decision as hereinabove provided, the Board shall
give public notice of said decision within 10 days from the last
day it could have met to render a decision in the same manner
as provided in Subsection D(1) of this section. If the Board shall
fail to provide such notice, the applicant may do so. Nothing in
this subsection shall prejudice the right of any party opposing
the application to appeal the decision to a court of competent
jurisdiction.
(10) A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the
findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to
him not later than the day following its date. To all other persons
who have filed their name and address with the Board not later
than the last day of the hearing, the Board shall provide by mail or
otherwise, brief notice of the decision or findings and a statement
of the place at which the full decision or findings may be examined.
E. Functions of the Board.
(1) Jurisdiction. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive
jurisdiction to hear and render final adjudications in the following
matters:
(a) Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use
ordinance, except those brought before the governing body
pursuant to Sections 609.1 and 916.1(a)(2) of Act 247, as
amended.231,232
(b) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer,
including but not limited to the granting or denial of any permit
or failure to act on the application therefor, the issuance of any
cease-and-desist order or the registration or refusal to register
any nonconforming use, structure or lot.
(c) Appeals from a determination by the Municipal Engineer or the
Zoning Officer with reference to the administration of any
floodplain ordinance or such provisions within a land use
ordinance.
230. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.1.
231. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10609.1 and 10916.1(a)(2).
232. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E(1)(b), regarding procedural validity challenges, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 260-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-56
1:589
(d) Applications for variances from the terms of the Zoning
Ordinance and flood hazard ordinance233 or such provisions
within a land use ordinance, pursuant to Subsection E(2)
hereof.
(e) Applications for special exceptions under the Zoning
Ordinance or floodplain or flood hazard ordinance or such
provisions within a land use ordinance, pursuant to Section
912.1 of Act 247, as amended.234
(f) Appeals from the Zoning Officer's determination under Section
916.2 of Act 247, as amended.235
(g) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or
Municipal Engineer in the administration of any land use
ordinance or provision thereof with reference to sedimentation
and erosion control and stormwater management insofar as
the same relate to development not involving applications
under Chapter 220, Subdivision and Land Development.
(2) Variances.
(a) The Board shall hear requests for variances where it is alleged
that the provisions of this chapter inflict unnecessary hardship
upon the applicant. The Board may by rule prescribe the form
of application and may require preliminary application to the
Zoning Officer. The Board may grant a variance, provided that
all of the following findings are made where relevant in a given
case:
[1] That there are unique physical circumstances or
conditions, including irregularity, narrowness or
shallowness of lot size or shape, or exceptional
topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the
particular property and that the unnecessary hardship is
due to such conditions and not the circumstances or
conditions generally created by the provisions of the
Zoning Ordinance in the neighborhood or district in which
the property is located.
[2] That because of such physical circumstances or
conditions, there is no possibility that the property can be
developed in strict conformity with the provisions of the
Zoning Ordinance and that the authorization of a variance
is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of this
property.
233. Editor's Note: See Ch. 120, Floodplain Management.
234. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10912.1.
235. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.2.
§ 260-56 DANVILLE CODE § 260-56
1:590
[3] That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by
the appellant.
[4] That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the
property is located, nor substantially or permanently
impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent
property, nor be detrimental to the public welfare.
[5] That the variance, if authorized, will represent the
minimum variance that will afford relief and will represent
the least modification possible of the regulation in issue.
(b) In granting any variance, the Board may attach such
reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem
necessary to implement the purposes of this Zoning Chapter
and Act 247, as amended.236
(c) Upon approval of a variance, the Board shall direct the Zoning
Officer to issue a permit to the applicant, which permit shall
authorize the applicant to proceed with development in
accordance with the terms of the approved variance.
(d) Variance approvals shall be valid a period of one year from the
date of approval. If the proposed development is not completed
within one year of approval, the applicant shall submit a new
application for a variance and shall require approval thereof.
Exception: If the proposed development is subject to additional
approvals such as planning, engineering or other regulatory
requirements, the variance shall remain valid, provided
progress related to the project has not ceased for more than
180 consecutive days. [Amended 8-11-2015 by Ord. No.
529]
(3) Special exceptions.
(a) Board action. Special exceptions, as enumerated in Article IV,
shall be permitted only upon authorization by the Zoning
Hearing Board. The Board may refer such applications to the
Planning Commission for its review and recommendations. The
Board shall hear and decide requests for special exceptions in
accordance with the standards and criteria set forth herein. In
granting a special exception, the Board may attach such
reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those
expressed in this chapter, as it may deem necessary to
implement the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance and Act 247,
as amended.237
236. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
237. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 260-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-56
1:591
(b) Review criteria. Approval of special exceptions shall be
authorized only if they are found to comply with the following
requirements and other applicable requirements as set forth in
this chapter.
[1] That the use is a permitted special exception as set forth in
Article IV hereof.
[2] That the use is so designed, located and proposed to be
operated that the public health, safety, welfare and
convenience will be protected.
[3] That the use will not cause substantial injury to the value
of other property in the neighborhood where it is to be
located.
[4] That the use shall be compatible with adjoining
development and the character of the zone district where
it is proposed to be located.
[5] That adequate landscaping and screening is provided as
required in § 260-25 and as otherwise provided herein.
[6] That adequate off-street parking and loading is provided
and ingress and egress is so designed as to cause
minimum interference with traffic on abutting streets.
[7] That the use conforms with all applicable regulations
governing the district where located, except as may
otherwise be determined for large-scale development.
(c) Special exceptions: affect of filing an application. When an
application for a special exception has been filed with the
Zoning Hearing Board and the subject matter of such
application would ultimately constitute either a "land
development" as defined in Section 107 or a "subdivision" as
defined in Section 107 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act 247, as amended,238 no change or
amendment of the zoning, subdivision or other governing
ordinance or plans shall affect the decision on such application
adversely to the applicant and the applicant shall be entitled to
a decision in accordance with the provisions of the governing
ordinances or plans as they stood at the time the application
was duly filed; provided, further, that should such an
application be approved by the Zoning Hearing Board, the
applicant shall be entitled to proceed with the submission of
either land development or subdivision plans within a period of
six months or longer or as may be approved by the Zoning
Hearing Board following the date of such approval in
accordance with the provisions of the governing ordinance or
238. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10107.
§ 260-56 DANVILLE CODE § 260-56
1:592
plans as they stood at the time the application was duly filed
before the Zoning Hearing Board. If either a land development
or subdivision plan is so filed within said period, such plan
shall be subject to the provisions of Section 508(1) through (4)
of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as
amended,239 and specifically to the time limitations of Section
508(4)240 which shall commence as of the date of filing such
land development or subdivision plan.
F. Parties appellant before the Board. Appeals under Section 909.1(a)(1),
(3), (4), (7), (8) and (9) of Act 247, as amended, 241 may be filed with the
Board in writing by the landowner affected, any officer or agency of the
municipality or any person aggrieved. Requests for a variance under
Section 910.2 of Act 247, as amended,242 and for special exception
under Section 912.1 of Act 247, as amended,243 may be filed with the
Board by any landowner or any tenant with the permission of such
landowner.244
G. Time limitations.
(1) Filing proceedings with the Board. No person shall be allowed to
file any proceeding with the Board later than 30 days after an
application for development, preliminary or final, has been
approved by an appropriate municipal officer, agency or body if
such proceeding is designed to secure reversal or to limit the
approval in any manner unless such person alleges and proves that
he had no notice, knowledge or reason to believe that such
approval had been given. If such person has succeeded to his
interest after such approval, he shall be bound by the knowledge of
his predecessor in interest. The failure of anyone other than the
landowner to appeal from an adverse decision on a tentative plan
pursuant to Section 709 of Act 247, as amended,245 or from an
adverse decision by a Zoning Officer on a challenge to the validity
of this chapter pursuant to Section 916.2 of Act 247, as
amended,246 shall preclude an appeal from a final approval except
in the case where the final submission substantially deviates from
the approved tentative approval.
(2) Appeals from adverse determinations. All appeals from
determinations adverse to the landowner shall be filed by the
landowner within 30 days after notice of the determination is
issued.
239. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508(1) through (4).
240. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508(4).
241. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10909.1.
242. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10910.2.
243. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10912.1.
244. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
245. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10709.
246. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.2.
§ 260-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-56
1:593
H. Stay of proceedings.
(1) Upon filing of any proceeding referred to in Section 913.3 of Act
247, as amended,247 and during its pendency before the Board, all
land development pursuant to any challenged ordinance, order or
approval of the Zoning Officer or of any agency or body, and all
official action thereunder, shall be stayed unless the Zoning Officer
or any other appropriate agency or body certifies to the Board facts
indicating that such stay would cause imminent peril to life or
property, in which case the development or official action shall not
be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be
granted by the Board or by the court having jurisdiction of zoning
appeals, on petition, after notice to the Zoning Officer or other
appropriate agency or body. When an application for development,
preliminary or final, has been duly approved and proceedings
designed to reverse or limit the approval are filed with the Board by
persons other than the applicant, the applicant may petition the
court having jurisdiction of zoning appeals to order such persons to
post bond as a condition to continuing the proceeding before the
Board.
(2) After the petition is presented, the court shall hold a hearing to
determine if the filing of the appeal is frivolous. At the hearing,
evidence may be presented on the merits of the case. It shall be the
burden of the applicant for a bond to prove the appeal is frivolous.
After consideration of all evidence presented, if the court
determines that the appeal is frivolous, it shall grant the petition
for a bond. The right to petition the court to order the appellants to
post bond may be waived by the appellee, but such waiver may be
revoked by him if an appeal is taken from a final decision of the
court.
(3) The question whether or not such petition should be granted and
the amount of the bond shall be within the sound discretion of the
court. An order denying a petition for bond shall be interlocutory.
An order directing the responding party to post a bond shall be
interlocutory.
(4) If an appeal is taken by a respondent to the petition for a bond from
an order of the court dismissing a zoning appeal for refusal to post
a bond and the appellate court sustains the order of the court below
to post a bond, the respondent to the petition for a bond, upon
motion of the petitioner and after hearing in the court having
jurisdiction of zoning appeals, shall be liable for all reasonable
costs, expenses and attorney fees incurred by the petitioner.
I. General grant of power. The Zoning Hearing Board shall perform all the
duties and have all the powers prescribed by the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code and as herein more particularly provided.
247. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10913.3.
§ 260-56 DANVILLE CODE § 260-57
1:594
§ 260-57. Zoning challenges.
§ 260-58. Zoning appeals to courts.
The procedure for appeals for any decision made under Act 247, as
amended, shall be pursuant to Article X-A of said Act.251
A. Procedures for curative amendments. The procedure for landowner
curative amendments shall be as set forth in Section 609.1 of Act 247,
as amended.248
B. Procedure for municipal curative amendments. The procedure for
municipal curative amendments shall be as set forth in Section 609.2 of
Act 247, as amended.249
C. Mediation. The municipality may offer a mediation option as an aid in
resolving conflicts which may arise under this chapter. In exercising
such an option, the municipality and mediating parties shall meet the
stipulations and follow the procedures set forth in Article IX of Act 247,
as amended.250
248. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10609.1.
249. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10609.2.
250. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10901 et seq.
251. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 11001-A et seq.
§ 260-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-58
1:595

ARTICLE X
Administration and Enforcement
§ 260-59. Zoning Officer.
A. Creation of office. The office of Zoning Officer is hereby established.
B. Appointment. The Zoning Officer shall be appointed by and
compensated by the governing body.
C. Holding other public office. The Zoning Officer shall not hold any
elective office in the municipality.
D. Powers and duties.
(1) The Zoning Officer shall administer the Zoning Ordinance in
accordance with its literal terms and shall not have the power to
permit any construction or any use or change of use which does not
conform to this chapter. He is authorized to institute civil
enforcement proceedings as a means of enforcing the regulations
of this chapter for which he has designated responsibilities. He
shall examine all applications for permits, issue permits for the
construction, alteration, enlargement and occupancy of all uses
which are in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and
all nonconforming uses, record and file all applications for permits
with accompanying plans and documents and make such reports to
the Planning Commission and the Zoning Hearing Board as may be
required.
(2) Zoning permits for a variance from the requirements of this
chapter and for such special exceptions as may be enumerated in
Article IV hereof shall be issued only upon written order of the
Zoning Hearing Board.
(3) Zoning permits for a conditional uses as may be enumerated in
Article IV hereof shall be issued only upon written order of the
governing body. [Added 5-5-2009 by Ord. No. 496]
E. Appeals. All appeals from decisions of the Zoning Officer shall be taken
in the manner set forth in this chapter and as otherwise prescribed by
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
F. Qualifications of the Zoning Officer. The Zoning Officer shall be able to
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the local governing body a working
knowledge of municipal zoning.
G. Registration of nonconforming uses and structures. The Zoning Officer
may identify and register nonconforming uses and structures and shall
identify the reasons for their identification as nonconformances.
H. Issuance of preliminary opinion. In order not to unreasonably delay the
time when a landowner may secure assurance that the ordinance or
map under which he proposes to build is free from challenge, and
§ 260-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-59
1:597
§ 260-60. Zoning permits; conditional use permits.
recognizing that the procedure for preliminary approval of his
development may be too cumbersome or may be unavailable, the
landowner may advance the date from which time for any challenge
to the ordinance or map will run under Section 914.1 of Act 247, as
amended,252 by the following procedure:
(1) The landowner may submit plans and other materials describing
his proposed use or development to the Zoning Officer for a
preliminary opinion as to their compliance with the applicable
ordinances and maps. Such plans and other materials shall not be
required to meet the standards prescribed for preliminary,
tentative or final approval or for the issuance of a building permit
so long as they provide reasonable notice of the proposed use or
development and a sufficient basis for a preliminary opinion as to
its compliance.
(2) If the Zoning Officer's preliminary opinion is that the use or
development complies with the ordinance or map, notice thereof
shall be published once each week for two successive weeks in a
newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. Such notice
shall include a general description of the proposed use or
development and its location, by some readily identifiable directive,
and the place and times where the plans and other materials may
be examined by the public. The favorable preliminary approval
under Section 914.1 of Act 247, as amended,253 and the time
therein specified for commencing a proceeding with the Board
shall run from the time when the second notice thereof has been
published.
A. Purpose: to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
No person shall erect, alter or convert any structure or building or part
thereof, nor alter the use of any land, subsequent to the adoption of this
chapter, until a zoning permit has been issued by the Zoning Officer.
B. Application for permits. All such applications shall be accompanied by
plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual shape and
dimensions of the lot or lots to be built upon, its assessment map and
parcel number as recorded, the date of official record of any lot or lots
on which construction is proposed, the exact size and location of any
building, sign, parking or loading area or other physical feature existing
or proposed on the lot, the existing and intended use of each building or
part of a building, the number of families, dwelling units, employees,
offices or other appropriate units of occupancy which the building is
designed to accommodate and such other information as may be
necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. One copy of such
plans shall be returned to the owner when such plans shall be
252. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10914.1.
253. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10914.1.
§ 260-59 DANVILLE CODE § 260-60
1:598
approved; one copy each of all applications with accompanying plans
and documents shall become a public record after a permit is issued or
denied.
C. Issuance of permits.
(1) It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to issue a zoning permit,
provided that he is satisfied that the structure, building, sign,
parking area of premises and the proposed use thereof conform
with all requirements of this chapter and that all other reviews and
actions, if any, called for in this chapter have been complied with
and all necessary approvals secured thereof.
(2) All zoning permits shall be issued in duplicate, and one copy shall
be kept conspicuously on the premises affected and protected from
the weather whenever construction work is being performed
thereon. No owner, contractor, workman or other person shall
perform any building operations regulated by this chapter of any
kind unless a zoning permit covering such operation has been
displayed as required by this chapter, nor shall they perform such
building operations after notification of the revocation of said
zoning permit.
D. Denial of permits. When the Zoning Officer is not satisfied that the
applicant's proposed development will meet the requirements of this
chapter, he shall refuse to issue a zoning permit and the applicant may
appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board for a reversal of the Zoning
Officer's decision.
E. Revocation of permits.
(1) If it shall appear at any time to the Zoning Officer that the
application or accompanying plans are in any material respect false
or misleading or that work is being done upon the premises
differing materially from that called for in the applications filed
with him under existing laws or ordinances, he may forthwith
revoke the zoning permit, whereupon it shall be the duty of the
person holding the same to surrender it and all copies thereof to
said Zoning Officer. After the zoning permit has been revoked, the
Zoning Officer may, in his discretion, before issuing a new zoning
permit, require the applicant to file an indemnity bond in favor of
the municipality with sufficient surety conditioned for compliance
with this chapter and all building laws and ordinances then in force
and in a sum sufficient to cover the cost of removing the building if
it does not so comply.
(2) Any development authorized by a zoning permit shall be completed
within a period of one year of the date of such permit. If such
development is not completed within one year, the zoning permit
shall be automatically revoked, and any future development of the
subject project shall require a new application and the issuance of
a new permit.
§ 260-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-60
1:599
F. Conditional use permits. [Added 5-5-2009 by Ord. No. 496]
(1) Procedure. Conditional uses shall be allowed only upon a
determination by the governing body that they comply with the
standards and criteria set forth herein. The governing body shall
hold hearings on and decide requests for conditional uses in
accordance with the standards and criteria set forth herein. The
hearing shall be conducted by the governing body or the governing
body may appoint any member or an independent attorney as a
hearing officer. The decision shall be made by the governing body.
However, the applicant, in addition to the municipality, may, prior
to the decision of the hearing, waive decision by the governing
body and accept the decision of the hearing officer as final. In
granting a conditional use, the governing body may attach such
reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those
expressed in this chapter, as it may deem necessary to implement
the purposes of this chapter.
(2) Timing.
(a) The governing body shall render a written decision on the
conditional use application within 45 days after the last
hearing before the governing body. Where the application is
contested or denied, each decision shall be accompanied by
findings of fact or conclusions based thereon, together with
any reasons therefor. Conclusions based on any provisions of
any ordinance, rule or regulation shall contain a reference to
the provision relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is
deemed appropriate in the light of the facts found.
(b) Where the governing body fails to render the decision within
the period required by this subsection or fails to commence,
conduct or complete the required hearing as provided in
Section 908(1.2) of the MPC,254 the decision shall be deemed to
have been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the
applicant has agreed in writing or on the record to an
extension of time. When a decision has been rendered in favor
of the applicant because of the failure of the governing body to
meet or render a decision as hereinabove provided, the
governing body shall give public notice of the decision within
10 days from the last day it could have met to render a
decision. If the governing body shall fail to provide such notice,
the applicant may do so.
(c) Nothing in this subsection shall prejudice the right of any party
opposing the application to appeal the decision to a court of
competent jurisdiction. A copy of the final decision shall be
delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him no later
than the day following its date.
254. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10908(1.2).
§ 260-60 DANVILLE CODE § 260-60
1:600
(3) Additional requirements. The governing body may, upon a review of
the application including the environmental assessment, establish
such additional requirements for the development and the
operation of the conditional use as may be required to protect the
public health, safety and general welfare of the community;
provided, however, that such additional requirements shall not be
related to off-site transportation or road improvements.
(4) Administrative procedures.
(a) Application. Application for a conditional use shall be made
directly to the governing body. Applications shall be in
accordance with Subsection B hereof and as otherwise
specified herein. All such applications shall be referred to the
Planning Commission for review; and, no such application shall
be finally authorized until the Planning Commission has
submitted its review findings, or until 30 days after referral to
the Planning Commission, whichever occurs first.
(b) Hearing. No conditional use shall be authorized without a
hearing thereon. Hearings shall be conducted pursuant to
§ 260-56D hereof; provided, however, that such hearings shall
be conducted by the governing body.
(5) Standards and criteria for conditional uses.
(a) General criteria.
[1] That the use is so designed, located and proposed to be
operated that the public health, safety, welfare and
convenience will be protected.
[2] That the use will not cause substantial injury to the value
of other property in the neighborhood where it is to be
located.
[3] That the use shall be compatible with adjoining
development.
[4] That adequate landscaping and screening is provided as
required in § 260-25 and as otherwise provided herein.
[5] That adequate off-street parking and loading is provided
and ingress and egress is so designed as to cause
minimum interference with traffic on abutting streets.
[6] That the use is compatible with the Borough's
Comprehensive Plan.
[7] An environmental assessment shall be submitted with all
applications for conditional uses in accordance with
§ 260-60F(7) hereof.255
§ 260-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-60
1:601
(6) Standards.
(a) Traffic. The proposed development shall not be located on a
site where primary access to the site is from a minor street
designed primarily to provide vehicular access to abutting
properties. The development shall be designed in a manner
which will not be injurious to the safe and convenient flow of
vehicular traffic. A traffic plan with estimates of the number of
vehicles shall be submitted to the Borough.
(b) Performance standards. The proposed development will
comply with the performance standards specified in Article VII
hereof and such additional performance standards that shall
be specified by the governing body to protect the health, safety
and welfare of the Borough.
(c) Permits. There shall be provided evidence of all required local,
state and federal permits.
(d) Distance from existing development. No conditional use shall
be nearer to existing development than 1,000 feet or such
greater distance as may be required to assure the health,
safety and welfare of the community, or any lesser distance
specified in this chapter.
(e) Transfer of products and waste. Vehicles used in the transfer of
waste shall be designed to preclude the accidental dumping of
any part of such wastes while in transit; and, transportation
routes shall be designed to minimize traversing densely
populated areas except for waste pickups.
(7) Environmental assessment.
(a) General. All applications for a conditional use must be
accompanied by an environmental assessment as specified
herein; provided, however, that upon the request of the
developer, components of the environmental assessment may
be waived by the governing body when such components are
deemed unnecessary for certain conditional uses.
(b) Purpose. The purpose of the environmental assessment is to
provide the governing body with sufficient information to
determine if the proposed use will be harmful or beneficial to
the Borough; and to determine corrective actions if needed to
mitigate potential adverse environmental impacts.
(c) Assurances. Due to the importance of securing professional,
objective data in the Environmental Assessment, the selection
of the professionals to be engaged in its preparation shall be
subject to the approval of the governing body. The developer
255. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 260-60 DANVILLE CODE § 260-60
1:602
will further provide the governing body with assurances,
adequate to protect the Borough from violations of
noncompliance with measures required to mitigate identified
adverse environmental impacts.
(8) Content of the environmental assessment.
(a) Description of the proposal. Describe the proposed or
recommended actions, its purpose, where it is to be located,
when it is proposed to take place, and its interrelationship with
other projects or proposals, including information and
technical data sufficient to permit assessment of
environmental impact by the Borough.
(b) Description of the environment. Include a comprehensive
description of the existing environment without the proposal
and the probable future environment with the proposal. This
description should focus both on the environmental details
most likely to be affected by the proposal and on the broader
regional aspects of the environment, including ecological
interrelationships. Particular attention should be given to the
potential effects of past or present use of the site as a
repository for toxic or hazardous wastes.
(c) The environmental impact of the proposed activities. Describe
the environmental impacts of the proposed action. These
impacts are defined as direct or indirect changes in the
existing environment, both beneficial or detrimental.
Whenever possible, these impacts should be quantified. This
discussion should include the impact not only upon the natural
environment but upon land use as well. Provide separate
discussion for such potential impacts as man-caused accidents
and natural catastrophes and their probabilities and risks.
Specific mention should also be made of unknown or partially
understood impacts.
(d) Mitigating measures included in the proposed action. Include a
description of measures which are proposed to be taken or
which are required to be taken to enhance, protect, or mitigate
impacts upon the environment, including any associated
research or monitoring.
(e) Any adverse effects which cannot be avoided should the
proposal be implemented. Include a discussion of the
unavoidable adverse impacts described in § 260-60F(8)(c) and
(d) above, and an analysis of who or what will be affected and
the degree of impact.
(f) The relationship between local short-term use of man's
environment and the maintenance and enhancement of longterm
productivity. Describe the local short-term use of the
environment involved in the proposed action in relation to its
§ 260-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-60
1:603
cumulative and long-term impacts and give special attention
to its relationship to trends of similar actions which would
significantly affect ecological interrelationships or pose longterm
risk to health or safety. Short-term and long-term do
not refer to any fixed time period, but should be viewed in
terms of the various significant ecological and geophysical
consequences of the proposed action.
(g) Any irreversible and irretrievable commitments of resources
which would be involved in the proposed action should it be
implemented. Describe, and quantify where possible, any
irrevocable uses of resources, including such things as
resource extraction, erosion, destruction of archaeological or
historical sites, elimination of endangered species' habitat, and
significant changes in land use.
(h) Alternatives to the proposed action. Identify alternatives to the
proposed action, and describe the environmental impacts, both
beneficial and adverse, of the various alternatives considered.
(i) Outline considerations for developing environmental
assessment.
[1] Description of the proposal.
[a] Who is proposing the action?
[b] What is the nature of the action to be taken?
[c] What is it designed to accomplish? What identified
needs will be met and to what degree?
[d] Where will it take place?
[e] When will it take place? Indicate phasing of
acquisition and development activities, if applicable,
and timetables for completion.
[f] How does it fit in with local planning efforts,
comprehensive plans, etc.?
[2] Description of the environment.
[a] Present and past land uses of the site and of the
surrounding area.
[b] Special topographic features which may be present.
[c] Describe the site's surface and subsurface geologic
characteristics.
[d] Describe the nature of the soils in the area,
particularly their fertility and susceptibility to erosion.
§ 260-60 DANVILLE CODE § 260-60
1:604
[e] Describe the area's water resources, with specific
reference to groundwater, water quality, aquifers and
aquifer recharge areas, and areas subject to flooding.
[f] Describe the area's vegetation, including species
composition, distribution, commercial utility and
aesthetics. Special reference should be made to
unusual or unique species.
[g] Describe the nature of existing transportation routes
in the immediate area and the accessibility to the
project site.
[3] Environmental impact of the proposed action.
[a] What will be the effect on land uses in the area?
[b] Will the project affect a site listed on the National
Register of Historic Places?
[c] In what way will soils and topography be affected?
Consider such things as soil compaction, erosion,
exposure of slopes, excavation which may create
unstable slope/soil configurations, cutting and filling,
removal of topsoil, paving, loss of existing natural
landscape qualities, blockage of viewlines to
landmarks, blockage of view corridors, etc.
[d] Will solid wastes be generated? How and where will
they be disposed of? Indicate what types and volumes
will be generated and how and where it will be stored
prior to disposal and method of disposal. Discuss
removal of clearance, demolition, and construction
wastes.
[e] How will water resources be affected? Consider the
water table, runoff, sewer systems, rivers and
streams, water supply, etc. Indicate content of any
effluent which will be discharged. Address loss of
floodwater absorption capacity in natural absorption
areas, effects on stream volume, velocity, and seasonal
flows, diversion or blockage of surface water,
alterations of natural watercourses, introduction or
increase of effluents or toxic, hazardous, or
radioactive substances to runoff or water bodies,
effects on aquatic life, any blockage or impairment of
access to watercourses, effects on groundwater
recharge, release of groundwater supply, withdrawal
of groundwater supplies, blockage of groundwater
flow, contamination of groundwater supply, effect on
water temperatures, sedimentation, changes in levels
of water bodies.
§ 260-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-60
1:605
[f] How will vegetation be affected? Discuss the removal
of ground cover, loss of valuable local species, loss of
wildlife habitat, introduction of vegetation which will
spread to adjacent lands, introduction of exotic
vegetation, creation of areas of highly visible, drying,
or decaying vegetation.
[g] How will fauna be affected? Consider habitat
destruction, reduction of population, impact caused by
human intrusion, mobility restrictions, food chains,
etc.
[h] How will transportation routes be affected? Consider
congestion, hazards, capacities of affected roads and
intersections and traffic to be generated, generation
of truck traffic.
[i] Effect on air quality and ambient noise level? Include
what odors will originate; types and concentrations of
gases, vapors, particulates, and smoke; noise and
vibration levels at property lines and the level of heat
and/or glare. Indicate levels of electromagnetic
radiation at property lines. Indicate effects on local
temperatures and wind circulation and whether there
are any plants, animals, or materials in the area that
are particularly susceptible to expected emissions.
Indicate the nature, concentration and quantity of
radioactive material to be discharged to the
environment, pathways for entering the environment,
dose to populations and biota, and possible
concentrations through food chains.
[j] Describe management practices proposed for the
area.
[4] Mitigating measures included in the proposed action.
Describe actions or measures which will be taken to avoid
or alleviate adverse environmental effects. Include
reference to erosion control methods and adherence to air,
noise or water pollution control techniques and standards.
[5] Unavoidable adverse effects. If adverse effects have been
identified under other sections of the Environmental
Impact Study and cannot be mitigated, they should be
again identified here. Describe who or what will be
affected, and to what degree. Quantify wherever possible.
[6] Relationship between the local short-term use of man's
environment and the maintenance and enhancement of
long-term productivity.
§ 260-60 DANVILLE CODE § 260-60
1:606
§ 260-61. Occupancy permits.
[a] What are the impacts of the proposal in the context of
other similar projects? In what way will future
generations be affected by the currently proposed
actions?
[b] How do the immediate and long-range impacts on the
area with the project compare with the immediate and
long-range impacts without the project?
[7] Any irreversible and irretrievable commitments of
resources. Describe any irrevocable commitments of
resources resulting from implementation of the proposal.
An evaluation must be made of the extent to which the
proposed action curtails or restricts the range of possible
resources uses. Such commitments may occur because of
resources extraction, erosion, destruction of
archaeological, geological or historic features, destruction
of fragile habitat or endangered species habitat,
unalterable changes in land use, and resources used in
project development.
[8] Alternatives to the proposed action.
[a] Identify alternatives which may be considered,
including modification of the present proposal and
different approaches to gaining the same result.
[b] The beneficial and adverse effects of the alternatives
should be discussed along with the reasons for
rejection. Where appropriate, consideration should be
given to alternate construction methods which may
avoid environmental degradation.
A. For new uses. After completion of the whole building or structure and
upon the sworn application by the owner or his duly authorized agent
setting forth such facts as the Zoning Officer may require and after
actual inspection of the premises by the Zoning Officer or his duly
authorized assistant, he shall, upon finding the facts to be as
represented, issue in duplicate an occupancy permit, certifying that the
premises comply with the provisions of the chapter and may be used for
the purposes set forth in the permit, which purposes shall conform with
the requirements of this chapter. No change of use shall be made in any
building, structure or premises or any premises now or hereafter
erected or altered that is not consistent with the requirements of this
chapter. Any person desiring to change the use of his premises shall
apply to the Zoning Officer for an occupancy permit, setting forth under
oath such facts as may be required. A copy of the occupancy permit
shall be kept at all times upon the premises affected and shall be
displayed upon request made by an authorized official. A record shall be
§ 260-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-61
1:607
§ 260-62. Planning Commission.
§ 260-63. Violations and penalties.
kept of all occupancy permits issued and the original applications
therefor shall be kept on file in the same manner as applications for
zoning permits. No owner, tenant or other person shall use or occupy
any building or structure thereafter erected or altered, the use of
which shall be changed after the passage of this chapter without first
procuring an occupancy permit, provided that an occupancy permit
once granted shall continue in effect so long as there is no change of
use, regardless of change in the personnel of tenants or occupants.
B. For existing uses.
(1) Upon written request from the owner, tenant or occupant, the
Zoning Officer, after inspection, shall issue an occupancy permit for
an existing use legally existing at the time this chapter is made
effective, certifying the extent and kind of use and whether any
such existing use conforms with the provisions of this chapter.
(2) No change or extensions of use and no alterations shall be made in
a nonconforming use or premises without an occupancy permit
having first been issued by the Zoning Officer stating that such
change, extension or alteration is in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter.
A. Review application and appeals. The Zoning Hearing Board may refer
to the Planning Commission all applications for special exceptions and
it may also refer any other applications or appeals which, in its opinion,
require review by the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission
shall review such applications in accordance with applicable criteria set
forth in this chapter and any special requirements for the intended use.
B. Report to the Zoning Hearing Board. The Planning Commission may
recommend approval, disapproval or approval subject to conditions or
modifications and shall report its findings to the Zoning Hearing Board
within 30 days of receipt thereof; such report shall state all
recommended conditions and modifications and the reasons for such
approval or disapproval.
C. Report to governing body. Following the enactment of this chapter, the
Planning Commission shall from time to time prepare and file with the
governing body, but in no case at less than two-year intervals, a report
on the operation of this chapter, including recommendations on the
enactment of amendments, supplements or changes thereto. The
Planning Commission shall also review and report on all proposed
conditional uses referred to it by the governing body.
A. Complaints of violations. Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs,
any person may file a complaint in regard thereto. All such complaints
§ 260-61 DANVILLE CODE § 260-63
1:608
must be in writing and shall be filed with the Zoning Officer, who shall
properly record such complaint and immediately investigate and report
thereon.
B. Enforcement procedures.
(1) Enforcement notice.
(a) If it appears to the municipality that a violation of this chapter
has occurred, the municipality shall initiate enforcement
proceedings by sending an enforcement notice as provided in
this part.
(b) The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of
the parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any person
who has filed a written request to receive enforcement notices
regarding that parcel and to any other person requested in
writing by the owner of record.
(c) An enforcement notice shall be mailed to the alleged violator
by certified mail and shall state at least the following:
[1] The name of the owner of record and any other person
against whom the municipality intends to take action.
[2] The location of the property in violation.
[3] The specific violation with a description of the
requirements which have not been met, citing in each
instance the applicable provisions of the chapter.
[4] The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
[5] That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to
the Zoning Hearing Board within the prescribed period of
time and in accordance with procedures set forth in
Subsection B(3) hereof.
[6] The failure to comply with the notice within 30 days of the
date of said notice, unless extended by appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board, constitutes a violation, with
possible sanctions clearly described.
(2) Causes of action. In case any building, structure, landscaping or
land is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, converted, maintained or used in violation of this chapter,
the Zoning Officer, or any aggrieved owner or tenant of real
property who shows that his property or person will be
substantially affected by the alleged violation, in addition to other
remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to
prevent, restrain, correct or abate such building, structure,
§ 260-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-63
1:609
§ 260-64. Fees.
landscaping or land or to prevent in or about such premises any
act, conduct, business or use constituting a violation. When any
such action is instituted by a landowner or tenant, notice of that
action shall be served upon the municipality at least 30 days prior
to the time the action is begun by serving a copy of the complaint
on the governing body of the municipality. No such action may be
maintained until such notice has been given.
(3) Appeals. Any recipient of a notice of enforcement shall have the
right to appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board to remove such notice.
Such appeals, however, must be filed with the Zoning Hearing
Board not more than five days following the receipt of such an
enforcement notice.
C. Penalties.
(1) Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated
or permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the municipality, pay a judgment of not more than
$500, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees
incurred by the municipality as a result thereof. No judgment shall
commence or be imposed, levied or be payable until the date of the
determination of a violation by the Magisterial District Judge. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
municipality may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable
rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation, unless the Magisterial District
Judge, determining that there has been a violation, further
determines that there was a good-faith basis for the person,
partnership or corporation violating this chapter to have believed
that there was no such violation, in which event there shall be
deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day
following the date of the determination of a violation by the
Magisterial District Judge, and thereafter, each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation. All judgments, costs
and reasonable attorney fees collected for the violation of zoning
ordinances shall be paid over to the municipality.
(2) The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of
stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted
to grant to any person or entity other than the municipality the
right to commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this
section.
§ 260-63 DANVILLE CODE § 260-64
1:610
A. The following fees, in such amounts as shall be set by resolution of the
Borough Council, shall be paid to the Zoning Officer upon the filing of
an application:256
(1) Fees for zoning permits not requiring Board action.
(2) Zoning permits for business and outdoor advertising signs, per
signage project.
(3) Occupancy permits.
(4) Applications requiring Board action, including appeals for
variances, requests for amendments, applications for special uses,
applications for rehearings on appeals and applications; provided,
however, that for any development, such as a parking lot which is
not subject to Chapter 220, Subdivision and Land Development, but
which requires engineering, the application shall be accompanied
by an additional fee which shall be considered to be a deposit
against the cost of such Borough engineering services. In the event
that such costs shall exceed the amount of the deposit, the
applicant shall be responsible for the payment of such additional
costs; and if said costs are less than the amount of the deposit, the
unused funds shall be returned to the applicant.
B. Fees are intended to cover the costs of advertising and other costs of
administering applications requiring Board action, including but not
limited to stenographic recordings of proceedings. In the event that
actual costs are less than the fee paid with the application, the Borough
shall refund surplus payments in excess of $25.
256. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 260-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-64
1:611

ARTICLE XI
Amendments
§ 260-65. Procedure.
The procedures set forth in Section 607 of Act 247, as amended,257 shall be
followed in the preparation of zoning ordinance amendments.
A. Enactment.
(1) Before voting on the enactment of an amendment, the governing
body shall hold a public hearing thereon, pursuant to public notice.
In addition, if the proposed amendment involves a Zoning Map
change, notice of said public hearing shall be conspicuously posted
by the municipality at points deemed sufficient by the municipality
along the perimeter of the tract to notify potentially interested
citizens. The affected tract or area shall be posted at least one week
prior to the date of the hearing.
(2) In addition to the notice requirements specified in Subsection G(1),
where the proposed amendment involves a Zoning Map change,
notice of public hearing shall be mailed by the municipality at least
30 days prior to the date of the hearing by first-class mail to the
addresses to which real estate tax bills are sent for all real property
located within the area being rezoned, as evidenced by tax records
within the possession of the municipality. The notice shall include
the location, date, and time of the public hearing. [Added
12-9-2002 by Ord. No. 448]
B. Referral to Borough Planning Commission. In the case of an
amendment other than that prepared by the planning agency, the
governing body shall submit each such amendment to the planning
agency at least 30 days prior to the hearing on such proposed
amendment to provide the planning agency an opportunity to submit
recommendations.
C. Rehearings. If, after any public hearing held upon an amendment, the
proposed amendment is changed substantially or is revised to include
land previously not affected by it, the governing body shall hold another
public hearing, pursuant to public notice, before proceeding to vote on
the amendment.
D. Referral to County Planning Commission. At least 30 days prior to the
public hearing on the amendment by the local governing body, the
municipality shall submit the proposed amendment to the Montour
County Planning Commission (MCPC) for its recommendations. Within
30 days after enactment, a copy of the amendment to the Zoning
Ordinance shall be forwarded to the MCPC.
257. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10607.
§ 260-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-65
1:613
E. Procedure for curative amendments. The procedure for landowner
curative amendments shall be as set forth in Section 609.1 of Act 247,
as amended.258
F. Procedure for municipal curative amendments. The procedure for
municipal curative amendments shall be as set forth in Section 609.2 of
Act 247, as amended.259
G. Publication, advertisement and availability of ordinances.
(1) Publication. Publication shall include the time and place of the
meeting at which passage will be considered and a reference to a
place within the municipality where copies of the proposed
ordinance or amendments may be examined without charge or
obtained for a charge not greater than the cost thereof. The
governing body shall publish the proposed ordinance or
amendment once in one newspaper of general circulation in the
municipality not more than 60 days nor less than seven days prior
to passage. Publication of the proposed ordinance or amendment
shall include either the full text thereof or the title and a brief
summary, prepared by the Municipal Solicitor and setting forth all
the provisions in reasonable detail. If the full text is not included:
(a) A copy thereof shall be supplied to a newspaper of general
circulation in the municipality at the time the public notice is
published.
(b) An attested copy of the proposed ordinance shall be filed in the
county law library or other county office designated by the
County Commissioners, who may impose a fee no greater than
that necessary to cover the actual costs of storing said
ordinances.
(2) Rehearings. In the event that substantial amendments are made in
the proposed ordinance or amendment, before voting upon
enactment, the governing body shall, at least 10 days prior to
enactment, readvertise in one newspaper of general circulation in
the municipality a brief summary setting forth all the provisions in
reasonable detail, together with a summary of the amendments.
(3) Recording. Zoning ordinances and amendments may be
incorporated into official ordinance books by reference with the
same force and effect as if duly recorded therein.
(4) Applicability of ordinance amendments. When an application for
either special exception or a conditional use has been filed with
either the Zoning Hearing Board or the governing body, as
relevant, and the subject matter of such application would
ultimately constitute either a land development or a subdivision, no
258. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10609.1.
259. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10609.2.
§ 260-65 DANVILLE CODE § 260-65
1:614
change or amendment of the zoning, subdivision or other
governing ordinance or plans shall affect the decision on such
application adversely to the applicant and the applicant shall be
entitled to a decision in accordance with the provisions of the
governing ordinances or plans as the stood at the time the
application was duly filed. Provided, further, should such an
application be approved by either the Zoning Hearing Board or
governing body, as relevant, the applicant shall be entitled to
proceed with the submission of either land development or
subdivision plans within a period of six months or longer or as may
be approved by either the Zoning Hearing Board or the governing
body following the date of such approval in accordance with the
provisions of the governing ordinances or plans as the stood at
the time the application was duly filed before either the Zoning
Hearing Board or governing body, as relevant. [Added 12-9-2002
by Ord. No. 448]
§ 260-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-65
1:615

ARTICLE XII
Interpretation and Validity
§ 260-66. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and the application of the provisions of this chapter,
they shall be held to the minimum requirements for the promotion of the
health, safety morals and general welfare. It is not intended to interfere
with or abrogate or annul other rules, regulations or ordinances, provided
that where this chapter imposes greater restrictions upon the use of
buildings or premises or upon the height or bulk of a building or requires
larger open spaces, the provisions of this chapter shall control; provided,
however, that the regulations and restrictions contained in this chapter
shall not apply to that portion of the Borough of Danville encompassed
within the boundaries of the Danville Flood Urban Renewal Area, as
designated on the Zoning Map of the Borough of Danville, in those instances
where the provisions of this chapter are in conflict with the specific
provisions of the Urban Renewal Plan and Redevelopment Proposal, dated
February 1973, for the Danville Flood Urban Renewal Area, Project No.
PA 641(a); and provided, further, that the preceding exemption shall be
in effect for the duration of the controls of said Urban Renewal Plan and
Redevelopment Proposal.
§ 260-67. Exemptions.
This chapter shall not apply to any existing or proposed building or
extension thereof used or to be used by a public utility corporation if, upon
petition of the corporation, the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission
shall, after a public hearing, decide that the present or proposed situation
of the building in question is reasonably necessary for the convenience or
welfare of the public.
§ 260-68. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter or
the location of any district boundary shown on the Zoning Map that forms
a part hereof is for any reason held by a court of competent jurisdiction
to be invalid, such a decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of this chapter or Zoning Map. The governing body of the Borough
of Danville hereby declares that it would have passed this chapter and each
section or part thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections
or parts thereof be declared invalid.
§ 260-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-68
1:617
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 1975 Code to 2011 Code
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. I.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Chapter/Title From 1975 Code Location in 2011 Code
Part I
Administrative Legislation
Ch. 1, General Provisions
Art. I, Adoption of Code by Borough
Council
NLP; see Ch. 1, Art. I
Ch. 4, Annexations Ch. 6
Ch. 5, Auditor Ch. 10
Ch. 6, Authority, Municipal
Art. I, Establishment of Authority Ch. 13, Art. I
Art. II, Extension of Term of
Existence
Ch. 13, Art. II
Ch. 12, Fire Department Ch. 24
Ch. 20, Park and Recreation Board Repealed by Ord. No. 411
Ch. 23, Planning Commission Ch. 45
Ch. 25, Police Department
Art. I, Establishment of Department Ch. 49, Art. I
Art. II, Subsistence Allowance Repealed by Ord. No. 417
Ch. 27, Police Pension Fund
Art. I, General Provisions Ch. 52, Art. I
Art. II, Pennsylvania Municipal
Retirement System
Ch. 52, Art. II
Ch. 29, Purchasing Ch. 56
Ch. 33, Salaries and Compensation
Art. I, Salary of Mayor Ch. 63, Art. I
Art. II, Salary of Councilmen Ch. 63, Art. II
Ch. 34, Shade Tree Commission Repealed by Ord. No. 419
Ch. 36, Social Security REP
§ 260-68 DANVILLE CODE § DT-1
1:618
Chapter/Title From 1975 Code Location in 2011 Code
Part II
General Legislation
Ch. 42, Alarm Systems Ch. 77
Ch. 43, Animals
Art. I, Curbing of Dogs Ch. 81, Art. I
Art. II, General Provisions Ch. 81, Art. II
Ch. 45, Automobiles, Junk Repealed by Ord. No. 459; see Ch.
243
Ch. 48, Bicycles Ch. 88
Ch. 51, Building Construction
§§ 51-1 through 51-5 and 51-7 REP
§ 51-6, Flood Damage Control REP; see Ch. 120, Part 1
Ch. 56, Coal and Coke Repealed by Ord. No. 422
Ch. 61, Electrical Standards REP
Ch. 65, Fire Insurance Proceeds Ch. 138, Art. I
Ch. 66, Fire Prevention REP
Ch. 68, Fires, Outdoor Ch. 94
Ch. 70, Flood Control
Art. I, Closure Structures Ch. 120, Part 1
Ch. 71, Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse Repealed by Ord. No. 442; see Ch.
207, Art. II
Ch. 76, Historic District Ch. 129
Ch. 78, Housing, Fair Ch. 133
Ch. 80, Housing, Rental Repealed by Ord. No. 428
Ch. 82, Market, Curbstone Ch. 155
Ch. 86, Noise Ch. 161
Ch. 91, Peace and Good Order Ch. 167
Ch. 93, Peddling and Soliciting Ch. 170
Ch. 95, Plumbing REP
Ch. 97, Poles Repealed by Ord. No. 431; see Ch.
176
Ch. 99, Property Maintenance Repealed by Ord. No. 466; see Ch.
180
Ch. 102, Railroads Ch. 185
Ch. 104, Reckless Driving Ch. 188
Ch. 106, Recycling Ch. 207, Art. I
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:619
Chapter/Title From 1975 Code Location in 2011 Code
Ch. 108, Sewers
Art. I, Sewer Connections Ch. 194, Art. I
Art. II, Sewer Rents and Use Ch. 194, Art. II
Art. III, Holding Tanks Ch. 194, Art. III
Art. IV, Sewer Usage and Discharge
Regulation
Ch. 194, Art. IV
Ch. 110, Skateboards Ch. 199
Ch. 112, Snow and Ice Removal Ch. 203
Ch. 113, Stormwater Management Repealed by Ord. No. 505; see Ch.
212
Ch. 116, Streets and Sidewalks Superseded by Ord. No. 414; see
Ch. 216
Ch. 118, Subdivision and Land
Development
Ch. 220
Ch. 121, Taxation
Art. I, Amusement Devices Tax Ch. 225, Art. I
Art. II, Per Capita Tax Ch. 225, Art. II
Art. III, Earned Income Tax Ch. 225, Art. III
Art. IV, Occupational Privilege Tax Repealed by Ord. No. 460
Art. V, Real Estate Transfer Tax Ch. 225, Art. IV
Ch. 125, Transient Retail Business REP
Ch. 127, Trees Superseded by Ord. No. 410; see
Ch. 231
Ch. 131, Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 237
Ch. 133, Water Emergencies Ch. 252
Ch. 139, Zoning Ch. 260
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DT-1 DANVILLE CODE § DL-1
1:620
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment Adoption
Date
Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 507 11-8-2011 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
Ord. No.
507A
7-10-2012 Groundwater Ch. 123
Ord. No. 508 Not adopted
Ord. No. 509 11-12-2012 Civil Service Ch. 16
Ord. No. 510 Not adopted
Ord. No. 511 1-8-2013 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 523
Ord. No. 512 12-11-2012 2013 Tax Rate NCM
Ord. No.
5132013
2-12-2013 Salaries and
Compensation:
Compensation, Costs
and Expenses of Tax
Collector
Ch. 63, Art. III
Ord. No. 513 7-9-2013 Residential Rental
Registration
Ch. 141
Ord. No. 514 4-9-2013 Solid Waste: Recycling
Amendment
Ch. 207, Art. I
Ord. No.
514A
7-9-2013 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 523
Ord. No.
5142013
9-10-2013 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM
Ord. No. 515 10-8-2013 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 523
Ord. No. 516 11-12-2013 Peddling and Soliciting
Amendment
Ch. 170
Ord. No. 517 12-10-2013 2014 Tax Rate NCM
Ord. No. 518 6-10-2014 Zoning Amendment Ch. 260
Ord. No. 519 8-12-2014 Bridges: Utility Bridge
Attachments on
Locally Owned Bridges
Ch. 90, Art. I
Ord. No. 520 8-12-2014 Zoning Amendment Ch. 260
Ord. No. 521 11-4-2014 Residential Rental
Registration
Amendment
Ch. 141
Ord. No. 522 9-9-2014 Police Pension Plan
Amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:621
Enactment Adoption
Date
Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 523 11-12-2014 Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 237
Ord. No. 524 11-12-2014 Brake Retarders;
Engine Suppression;
Engine Brakes
Ch. 89
Ord. No. 525 2-10-2015 Quality of Life
Ticketing
Ch. 183
Ord. No. 526 5-12-2015 Taxation: Tax Collector
Fees Amendment
Ch. 225, Art. V
Ord. No. 527 6-9-2015 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 237
Ord. No. 528 7-14-2015 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 237
Ord. No. 529 8-11-2015 Zoning Amendment Ch. 260
Ord. No. 530 10-13-2015 Uniform Construction
Code Board of Appeals
NCM
Ord. No. 531 11-10-2015 Solid Waste: Garbage
and Rubbish Collection
Amendment
Ch. 207, Art. II
Ord. No. 532 12-8-2015 2016 Tax Rate NCM
Ord. No. 533 1-12-2015 Police Pension Plan
Amendment
NCM
Ord. No. 534 3-1-2016 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 237
Ord. No. 535 7-12-2016 Taxation: Local
Economic
Revitalization Tax
Assistance (LERTA)
Ch. 225, Art. VII
Ord. No. 536 9-6-2016 School Zone Ch. 191
Ord. No. 537 11-8-2016 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 237
Ord. No. 538 12-6-2016 Water: Violation of
Rules and Regulations
Ch. 250, Art. I
Ord. No. 539 12-6-2016 2017 Tax Rate NCM
Ord. No. 540 1-10-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 237
Ord. No. 541 3-7-2017 Fire Department
Amendment
Ch. 24
§ DL-1 DANVILLE CODE § DL-1
1:622
Enactment Adoption
Date
Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 542 5-9-2017 Solid Waste: Garbage
and Rubbish Collection
Amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 551
Ord. No. 543 5-9-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 237
Ord. No. 544 7-11-2017 Water: Violation of
Rules and Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 250, Art. I
Ord. No. 545 12-12-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 237
Ord. No. 546 12-12-2017 2018 Tax Rate NCM
Ord. No. 547 1-9-2018 Animals: Curbing of
Dogs Amendment
Ch. 81, Art. I
Ord. No. 548 4-10-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 237
Ord. No. 549 3-13-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 260
Ord. No. 550 4-10-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 237
Ord. No. 551 4-10-2018 Solid Waste: Garbage
and Rubbish Collection
Amendment
Ch. 207, Art. II
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:623