CHAPTER 1
ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT
Part I
Elected Officials
101. Compensation of Township Supervisors
Part 2
Berks -Montgomery Municipal Authority
201. Intention to Organize
202. Articles of Incorporation
203. Notice of Establishment
204. Filing of Articles with Secretary of Commonwealth
Part 3
Commissions and Agencies
A. Planning Commission
301. Creation of Commission
B. Educational Service Agency
321. Establishment of Agency
C. ChesMont Emergency Response Team
331. Authorization of Intergovernmental Cooperation Agreement
Establishing Police Emergency Response Team
332. Intergovernmental Cooperation Agreement Requirements
Part 4
Firemen' s Relief Association
401. Recognition of Firemen' s Relief Association
402. Certification to Auditor General
403. Annual Appropriation
Part 5
Retirement Plans
A D^ 1 -; -
501. Joining Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System
502. Mandatory Participation
Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996 - 1 -
503. Credit for Prior Service
504. Payment for Prior Service
505. Agreement Re: Benefits
506. Certified Copy to be Filed
507. Amendment to the Municipal Retirement System
508. Police Pension and Retirement Plan
B. Non -uniformed Emvlovees
521. Joining Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System
522. Membership and Participation Optional
523. Credit for Prior Service
524. Payment for Prior Service
525. Agreement Re: Benefits
526. Certified Copy to be Filed
Part 6
Drug and Alcohol Policy
601. Purpose
602. Drug and Alcohol Policy
Appendix A. Alcohol and Drug Screening Policy Statement for Job Applicants
Appendix B. Informed Consent and Release of Liability
Appendix C. Safety Sensitive Jobs and Department of Transportation Drug
Testing Requirements
2 - Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996
C
11 § 101) ( 1, § 101)
Part 1
Elected Officials
101. Compensation of Township Supervisors.
1. Each Supervisor of Douglass Township elected or appointed to
office on or after the effective date of this Part shall receive compensation
as a Supervisor in the annual amount of two thousand five hundred
dollars ($ 2, 500. 00)
2. Such compensation shall be paid in monthly or quarterly installments.
3. This Part shall be effective January 1, 1996.
Ord. 95- 3, 12/ 18/ 1995)
Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996 - 3 -
1, § 201) ( 1, § 201)
Part 2
Berks -Montgomery Municipal Authority
201. Intention to Organize. The Board of Township Supervisors of
this Township signifies the intention and desire to organize an Authority
jointly with the Township of Colebrookdale, Berks County, Pennsylvania,
under provisions of the Act of May 2, 1945, P. L. 382, as amended and
supplemented, known as the " Municipality Authorities Act of 1945" ( the
Authorities Act"), for the following purposes:
To acquire, hold, construct, improve, maintain, operate, own and
lease, either in the capacity of lessor or lessee, sewers, sewer systems or
parts thereof, sewage treatment works, including works for treating and
disposing of industrial wastes, waterworks, water supply works and water
distribution systems.
Ord. 11, 10/ 16/ 1961, § 0
202. Articles of Incorporation. The Chairman of the Board of
Township Supervisors and Secretary, respectively, of this Township are
authorized and directed to execute, in behalf of this Township, Articles of
Incorporation for such Authority in substantially the following form:
ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION
TO THE SECRETARY OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA:
In compliance with requirements of the Act of Assembly approved May 2,
1945, P. L. 382, as amended and supplemented, known as the " Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945", and pursuant to ordinances duly enacted by the
municipal authorities of the Township of Colebrookdale, Berks County,
Pennsylvania and the Township of Douglass, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania,
expressing the intention and desire of the municipal authorities of said
municipalities to organize a municipality authority jointly under provisions
of said Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, said municipalities
certify:
A. The name of the Authority is " Berks -Montgomery Municipal
Authority".
B. The Authority is formed under provisions of the Act of
Assembly approved May 2, 1945, P. L. 382, as amended and supplemented,
known as the " Municipality Authorities Act of 1945", for the following
purposes:
To acquire, hold, construct, improve, maintain, operate, own
and lease, either in the capacity of lessor or lessee, sewers,
sewer systems or parts thereof, sewage treatment works, including
works for treating and disposing of industrial wastes, waterworks,
water supply works and water distribution systems.
5 -
1, § 202, cont' d) 1, § 202, cont' d)
C. No other Authority has been organized under said Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945, as amended and supplemented, or under the Act
of Assembly approved June 28, 1935, P. L. 463, as amended and supple- •
mented, and is in existence in or for either incorporating municipality.
D. The names of the incorporating municipalities are:
Township of Colebrookdale, Berks County, Pennsylvania
Township of Douglass, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania
E. The names and addresses of all municipal authorities of said
incorporating municipalities are: [ Here followed the names and
addresses of municipal officials.]
F. The members of the Board of the Authority shall be six ( 6) in
number and shall be apportioned as follows:
Township of Colebrookdale, Berks County,
Pennsylvania 3
Township of Douglass, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania 3
G. The names, addresses and terms of office of first members of
the Board of the Authority, each of whom is a citizen of the incorporating
municipality by which he is appointed, are as follows: [ Here
followed names and addresses of the original Board members.]
H. The term of existence of the Authority shall be for a period
ending on December 31, 2025.
Ord. 11, 10/ 16/ 1961, § 2; as amended by Ord. 76- 2, 5/ 3/ 1976)
5203. Notice of Establishment. The Chairman of the Board of Township
Supervisors and Secretary, respectively, of this Township, acting jointly
with appropriate officers of Township of Colebrookdale, Berks County,
Pennsylvania, are authorized and directed to cause notice of the substance
of this Part, including the substance. of the foregoing Articles of Incorporation,
and of the proposed filing of such Articles of Incorporation, to
be published as required by the Authorities Act. ( Ord. 11, 10/ 16/ 1961, § 3)
204. Filing of Articles With Secretary of Commonwealth. The Chairman
of the Board of Township Supervisors and Secretary, respectively, of
this Township, acting jointly with appropriate officers of Township of
Colebrookdale, Berks County, Pennsylvania, are authorized and directed to
cause such Articles of Incorporation, together with necessary proofs of
publication, to be filed with the Secretary of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
and to do all other acts necessary or appropriate to effect the
incorporation of such Authority, including payment of required filing fees.
Ord. 11, 10/ 16/ 1961, § 4)
1, § 301)
Part 3
0 Commissions and Agencies
A. Planning Commission
i
1, § 301)
301. Creation of Commission. A Township Planning Commission, to be
composed of seven ( 7) members, appointed as provided by law ( P. S. 53
10202), is hereby created in and for the Township of Douglass. The
Planning Commission shall perform all duties and may exercise all powers
conferred by law upon Township planning agencies; provided, the Planning
Commission previously created in and for the said Township shall constitute
the tenure of any of the members thereof, but any and all vacancies in the
said Commission, hereafter occurring, shall be filled in the manner and for
the term provided in the law governing Township planning commissions in
effect at the time of the happening of the said vacancy. ( Ord. 29,
4/ 1/ 1969; as amended by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
7 -
1, § 321)
B. Education Service Agency
1, § 321)
5321. Establishment of Agency. An " educational service agency" is
established as provided for in Act 108 of 1979 and further in conformity
with Section 599—A of the Township Code. The educational service agency is
established and operated exclusively for the purpose of providing such
service to one or more educational institutions by the school crossing
guards appointed in conjunction with the school district. We recognize the
educational service agency" as the Township' s agency for management and
control of the school crossing guards. ( Res. 070780, 7/ 7/ 1980)
C
1, § 331)
C. ChesMont Emergency Response Team.
1, § 331)
331. Authorization of Intergovernmental Cooperation Agreement
Establishing Police Emergency Response Team. The Chairman and Secretary of
the Board of Supervisors are authorized to enter into an intergovernmental
cooperation agreement establishing a police emergency response team to be
known as " ChesMont Emergency Response Team ( CMERT)." ( Ord. 96- 2,
5/ 20/ 1996, § 322)
332. Intergovernmental Cooperation Agreement Requirements. The
intergovernmental cooperation agreement providing for CMERT shall contain
the following:
A. Provisions authorizing police officers to act outside the
boundaries of their respective municipalities; establishing a board of
chiefs; providing for meetings; directing finance procedures and
records; setting a procedure for activation and operation of CMERT;
providing for deputizing, immunity and claims; providing for additional
municipalities; providing for interpretation of agreement; providing
for termination and for an effective date of the agreement.
B. The intergovernmental cooperation agreement shall provide for
termination upon thirty ( 30) days written notice.
C. The purpose and objectives of the agreement shall be to have
available for use throughout the territorial limits of all municipalities
signing the agreement the services" of police employed by any and
all of the participating municipalities for CMERT activities.
D. All financing arrangements shall be approved by resolution of
the Board of Supervisors.
E. The organizational structure shall be by the Board of Chiefs,
which shall be comprised of the chief of police of each police department
of participating municipalities.
F. All property, real or personal, acquired by CMERT shall be
managed and controlled by the Board of Chiefs.
G. CMERT shall be empowered to enter into contracts for insurance
or other benefits only as authorized by the Board of Supervisors
by resolution.
H. The final form of any agreement and/ or amendments thereto
shall be approved by the Board of Supervisors.
This Part is intended to comply with the provisions of the Municipal Code
53 P. S. § 483 et seq.).
Ord. 96- 2, 5/ 20/ 1996, § 323)
Page Added 6/ 17/ 1996 10. 1 -
1, § 401) ( 1, § 401)
Part 4
Firemen' s Relief Association
401. Recognition of Firemen' s Relief Association.
1. The following association is hereby recognized as actively engaged
in providing fire protection and/ or emergency services in the Township of
Douglass.
Douglass Township Firemen' s Relief Association
The above named association has been formed for the benefit of its
members and their families in case of death, sickness, temporary or permanent
disability or accident suffered in the line of duty.
2. The above named Association of the Township is designated the
proper association to receive such funds as are due and payable to the
Township Treasurer by the Treasurer of the State of Pennsylvania from the
tax on premiums from foreign fire insurance companies.
Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
402. Certification to Auditor General. The Board of Supervisors
shall annually certify to the Auditor General of the Commonwealth, the
name( s) of the active associations and the percentage of service they
contribute to the protection of the Township. Such certification shall be
on forms prescribed by the Auditor General. ( Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
5403. Annual Appropriation. There is annually appropriated from the
Township Treasury all such sums of money that may hereafter be paid into
the Township Treasury by the Treasurer of the State of Pennsylvania on
account of taxes paid on premiums of foreign fire insurance companies in
pursuance of 1984 Act of December 18, No. 205, 55701 et seq. as hereafter
amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the General Assembly of
Pennsylvania. Such monies received by the Township Treasurer from the
State Treasurer shall be distributed to the duly recognized association( s)
within sixty ( 60) days of receipt. The funds shall be distributed on the
basis of the percentage of service established in the certification to the
Auditor General and with other provisions of the Act. ( Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/
1986)
1, § 501)
Part 5
Retirement Plans
A. Police
1, § 501)
501. Joining Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System. Douglass
Township, being a member municipality of the Pennsylvania Municipal
Retirement System, hereby elects to change its police pension benefits in
that System as authorized by the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Law, as
amended, and does hereby agree to be bound by all the requirements and
provisions of said Article and the law, as the case may be, and to assume
all obligations, financial and otherwise, placed upon member municipalities
by said Amendment, as the case may be. All references hereafter shall be
based on benefits negotiated between the Board and the Township under the
provisions of Article IV. ( Ord. 91- 1, 4/ 15/ 1991, § I)
502. Mandatory Participation. Membership in the Pennsylvania Municipal
Retirement System shall be mandatory for all full-time police officers
of the Township. Membership for elected officials and employees hired
on a temporary or seasonal basis is prohibited, as is membership for
individuals paid only on a fee basis. ( Ord. 91- 1, 4/ 15/ 1991, § II)
4
503. Credit for Prior Service. Credit for prior service for original
members is granted for each year or partial year thereof that the
member was employed by the Township from original date of hire. Benefits
provided to members in the agreement dated April 15, 1991, shall accrue
based on all credited service granted and earned in accordance with this
Section. ( Ord. 91- 1, 4/ 15/ 1991, § III)
504. Payment for Prior Service. Payment for any obligation established
by the adoption of this Part and the agreement between the System
and the Township of Douglass shall be made by the Township in accordance
with the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Law and Act 205 of 1984, the
Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act. ( Ord. 91- 1,
4/ 15/ 1991, § IV)
505. Agreement Re: Benefits. As part of this Part, the Township
agrees that the System shall provide the benefits set forth in the agreement
between the Board and the Township of Douglass, dated April 15, 1991.
The passage and adoption of this Part by Douglass Township is an official
acceptance of said agreement and the financial obligations resulting from
the administration of ' said benefit package. Douglass Township hereby
assumes all liability for any unfundedness created or which may be created
due to the acceptance of the benefit structure outlined in the above
referenced agreement. ( Ord. 91- 1, 4/ 15/ 1991, § V)
506. Certified Copy to be Filed. A duly certified copy of this Part
and . the referenced agreement shall be filed with the Pennsylvania Municipal
Retirement System of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Membership for the
police officers of the Township of Douglass in the Pennsylvania Municipal
Retirement System shall be effective the first day of October, 1980, with
Page Revised 10/ 22/ 1991 - 13 -
1, § 506, cont' d) 1, § 506, cont' d)
with the revised plan structure reflected in the agreement, dated April 15,
1991, effective the first day of January, 1991. ( Ord. 91- 1, 4/ 15/ 1991,
VII)
507. Amendment to the Municipal Retirement System.
1. Article IV, § 401 of the Act of February 1, 1974, No. 15 states:
A. " 401. This article shall provide for the enrollment of those
municipalities in the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System which
want to offer retirement benefits to their employees. .," and;
2. Article IV, § 413 of the Act also provides:
A. " 413. Procedures for Amending Contracts. Any municipality
which has joined the System under this Article IV may, with the
approval of the Board, amend, the contract to increase any of the
benefits enumerated in Part IV to its members.
Agre. 4/ 15/ 1991)
508. Police Pension and Retirement Plan.
1. Coverage
A. This Plan shall , cover all full-time members of the police. ,
department, hereafter referred to as member, of the Township. Membership
for elected officials and employees hired on a temporary or
seasonal basis is prohibited as is membership for individuals paid
only on a fee basis. Individual membership shall be effective as of
the date the Township entered into the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement
System or upon the expiration of the individual' s probationary
status, whichever is more recent.
B. Credited service shall accrue from the original member' s date
of hire as long as there is continuous, uninterrupted employment to
the Township. Credited service time earned prior to the enrollment of
the Township into the System shall be known as prior service.
C. No credited service time shall be granted for time employed
in a status other than active employee of the municipality excluding
credit for purchased military service, reinstatement of previous
service or service earned and credited under § 13, the portability
section of this agreement.
2. Superannuation Retirement. Eligibility for a superannuation
retirement shall occur upon the member' s attainment of fifty ( 50) years of
age or older and the completion of at least twelve ( 12) years of service.
3. Basic Benefits. The basic annual benefit shall be equal to two
27) percent of the member' s final salary multiplied by all years of
credited service. Provi,' ed however, in no event shall the basic benefit
exceed fifty ( 50%) percent of the member' s final salary.
4. Final Salary. The final salary shall be the average annual
compensation earned and paid during the member' s final three ( 3) consecutive
years of employment, or if not so long employed, then the average
annual compensation earned and paid during the whole period of such
employment.
14 - Page Revised 10/ 22/ 1991
1, § 508( 5)) 1, § 508( 5))
5. Early Retirement. A member who has been involuntarily terminated
after eight ( 8) years of credited service or, who has separated voluntarily
after twenty- four ( 24) years of credited service may retire early. Benefits
will be actuarially reduced for each year or partial year thereof that
early retirement take place prior to age fifty ( 50).
6. Permanent Disability Benefits.
A. A member who has ten ( 10) or more years of credited service
or on application of one acting in the member' s behalf, or upon
application of a responsible official of the Township, be retired by
the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Board on a disability allowance
if the physician designated by the Board, after medical examination of
the member shall certify to the Board that the individual is unable to
engage in any gainful employment and that said member ought to be
retired. When the disability of a member is determined to be service -
connected, as defined in Act 15 of 1974, no minimum period of service
shall be required for eligibility.
B. A disability annuity payable from the total disability
reserve account which, together with the municipal annuity and the
member' s annuity, if any, shall be sufficient to produce a retirement
allowance of thirty ( 30%) percent of the member' s final salary. Where
the disability of the member is determined to be service -connected,
the disability allowance shall equal fifty ( 507) percent of the
member' s final salary. The disability annuity shall be reduced by the
amount of any payments for which the member shall be eligible under
the Act of June 2, 1915 ( P. L. 736, No. 388), known as " The Pennsylvania
Workmen' s Compensation Act" or the Act of June 21, 1939 ( P. L.
566, No. 284), known as " The Pennsylvania Occupational Disease Act."
C. Any member with eight ( 8) or more years of credited service
entitled to retire for disability may, in lieu of such retirement,
elect to retire not voluntarily under the provisions of section 5.
D. Should a disability annuitant die before the total disability
retirement allowance received equals the amount of the member' s
accumulated deductions at the time of disability retirement, the Board
shall pay to the named beneficiary ( if living, or if the named beneficiary
predeceased the annuitant, or no beneficiary was named, then
to the annuitant' s estate) an amount equal to the difference between
such total retirement allowance received and the annuitant' s accumulated
deductions. If such difference is less than one hundred
100. 00) dollars and no letters have been taken out on the estate
within - six ( 6) months after the disability annuitant' s death, such
difference may be paid to the undertaker or to any person or municipality
who or which shall have paid the claim of the undertaker.
7. Spouse' s Pension.
A. In the absence of an election of an option found in § 14, on
the death of an active member of the plan who was eligible at the time
of death for either a superannuation retirement allowance because of
meeting the superannuation retirement requirements found in § 2 or a
voluntary early retirement allowance because of completing twenty- four
24) years of credited service, the surviving spouse ( or the surviving
minor children in the absence of a spouse or upon the remarriage of
Page Added 10/ 22/ 1991 - 14. 1 -
1, § 508( 8), cont' d) 1, § 508( 8), cont' d)
the surviving spouse) will receive a pension equal to one- half ( 2-) of
the pension which such member would have been eligible to receive if
the member had been retired at the time of death. An election by a
member of an option found in § 14 other than a single life annuity,
prior to retirement shall make void the foregoing provision.
B. A member who is entitled to either a superannuation retirement
allowance because of meeting the superannuation retirement
requirements found in § 2 or a voluntary early retirement allowance
because of completing twenty- four ( 24) years of credited service may
file a written application for retirement requesting that such retirement
become effective at the time of death. The member may elect one
1) of the options provided in § 14 and nominate a beneficiary. The
application shall be held by the Board ( 1) until the member files a
later application ( PMRB- 8) for a retirement allowance or ( 2) until the
death of the member while in municipal service.
C. If such a member dies prior to receiving a retirement allowance,
benefits become effective as if the member had retired on the
day immediately preceding death. The beneficiary will receive the
annuity option elected before the member' s death.
D. If a member is receiving a retirement allowance in accordance
with the Single Life Annuity provisions of § 14, upon the retired
member' s death the surviving spouse ( or the surviving minor children
in the absence of a spouse or upon the remarriage of the surviving
spouse) will receive a pension equal to one- half ( 3) of the pension
which such member was receiving. If there is no surviving spouse or
minor children, the full amount of the total accumulated deductions
standing to the member' s credit in the member account on the effective
date of retirement minus the total amount of annuity payments received
shall be paid to the designated beneficiary.
8. Length of Service Increment. In addition to the basic benefit
allowance, those members who have more than twenty- five ( 25) years of
credited service time upon retirement shall receive a yearly service
increment to be determined by computing the number of whole years of
service beyond twenty- five ( 25) years and multiplying this number by an
equal amount of 1/ 40th of the amount of the retirement allowance. This
increment shall not, ' however, exceed one hundred ($ 100. 00) dollars per
month.
9. Cost -of -Living Increases. Retired members of the plan shall be
entitled to a cost -of -living benefit effective the .first January following
at least one ( 1) year from the initial date of retirement. The amount of
such increases are subject to all of the following limitations:
A. The percent increase in pension shall not exceed the percent
increase in the Consumer Price Index since the final year in which the
retired policemen last worked;
B. The pension benefit after such increase shall not exceed
seventy- five ( 75%) percent of the final average salary which was used
as the basis for computing the retired member' s benefit; and,
C. The total cost -of -living increase shall not exceed thirty
30%) percent of the retired member' s benefit at the time the member
retired.
14. 2 - Page Added 10/ 22/ 1991
1, § 508( 10) ) 1, § 508( 10))
10. Contributions by Members. Members shall not be required to
contribute to the funding of the plan. If a member terminates prior to
becoming eligible for any benefit or the member elects not to receive a
benefit, that individual shall be entitled to the accumulated contributions,
interest and any excess investment monies allocated to the member' s
account.
11. Vesting. After twelve ( 12) years of credited service, a member
may vest by filing an application with the Board within ninety ( 90) days of
separation from employment. Upon attainment of the superannuation age
requirement found in § 2 of this agreement, a basic benefit will be calculated
in accordance with § 3 of this agreement.
12. Military Service.
A. Any member employed by the Township who has been a regularly
appointed employee for at least six ( 6) months and is inducted into
the military service of the United States, shall have all of the time
spent in such military service of the United States, shall have all of
the time spent in such military service credited to the member' s
employment record for pension or retirement benefits if the individual
returns or has heretofore returned to employment within six ( 6) months
after separation from the service.
B. An active member may also purchase credit for other than
intervening military service performed for the United States in times
of war, armed conflict or national emergency, so proclaimed by the
President of the United States, for a period not to exceed five ( 5)
years, provided the member has completed five ( 5) years of service to
the Township subsequent to such military service. An active member
may file an application with the Board for permission to purchase
credit for non -intervening military service upon completion of five
5) years or subsequent service to the Township.
C. The amount due from the member shall be certified by the
Board in accordance with methods approved by the actuary. It may be
paid in a lump sum within thirty ( 30) days or it may be amortized with
additional interest through salary deductions in amounts agreed upon
by the member and the Board.
D. The rate of interest to be charged to a member on purchase of
credit for intervening or non -intervening military service shall be
the. rate being credited by the System to members' accounts in effect
on the date of the member' s application, compounded annually.
E. A member may purchase credit for intervening or non -
intervening military service only if discharge or separation from the
service was granted under other than dishonorable conditions. A
member may not purchase military credit for any service that is
covered by another retirement system administered and wholly or
partially paid for by any other government agency or private employer.
13. Portability. When a member leaves the employ of the Township and
enters within one ( 1) year of separation into the employ -of another municipality
that has joined the System, the member' s service credits shall
remain unimpaired. Should a member from the employ of another municipality
that has joined the system separate from service and within one ( 1) year of
Page Added 10/ 22/ 19991 - 14. 3 -
1, § 508( 13), cont' d) 1, § 508( 13), cont' d)
separation join the pension plan, the member' s service credits will remain
unimpaired. In such cases, the municipal liability for past service shall
be prorated by the System between the municipalities on an equitable basis.
14. Options on Superannuation, Early Retirement or Vesting. At the
time a member elects to receive a retirement benefit allowance, the benefit
may be payable throughout the member' s life, in which case the benefit is
known as a single life annuity. A member may elect to waive any entitlement
to the spouse' s benefit found in §7 of this agreement by choosing at
time of retirement an alternative to the single life annuity that would be
of an equivalent actuarial value but that would be in a lesser allowance
and payable throughout life with provision that:
A. Option 1. If the member dies before receiving in payments
the present value of the retirement allowance as it was at the time of
retirement, the balance, if less than five thousand ($ 5, 000) dollars,
shall be paid in a lump sum to the designated beneficiary if living,
or if the named beneficiary predeceased the member or if no beneficiary
was named, then to the member' s estate. If the balance is five
thousand ($ 5, 000) dollars or more, the beneficiary may elect, by
application duly acknowledged and filed with the Board to receive
payment of such balance according to any one -( 1) of the following
provisions:
1) In a lump -sum payment;
2) In an annuity having a present value equal to the
balance payable; or,
3) In a lump -sum payment an an annuity. Such annuity
shall be of equivalent actuarial value to the balance payable
less the amount of the lump -sum payment specified by the
beneficiary.
B. Option 2. Upon the annuitant' s death, the retirement allowance
shall be continued throughout the life of and paid to the survivor
annuitant, if then living.
C. Option 3. Upon the annuitant' s death, one- half ( 11) of the
retirement allowance shall be continued throughout the life of and
paid to the survivor annuitant, if then living.
A member who has elected a single life annuity shall automatically be
deemed to have elected the spouse' s death benefit provisions found in V.
15. Social Security Offset. There shall be no offset for Social
Security retirement benefits received by a member.
16. Determination of Municipal Liability.
A. The Board will actuarially determine the normal cost of the
plan and any liability associated with the plan' s actuarial experience
which shall be contributed annually by the municipality for the
service credits of the members. If applicable, any additional amount
which shall be contributed annually toward a reserve account for the
disability allowances which may be payable in accordance with this
agreement shall also be determined and charged the municipality.
14. 4 Page Added 10/ 22/ 1991
r
1, § 508( 16)( B)) 1, § 508( 16)( B))
B. The amounts so determined shall, be computed in accordance
with the requirements of Act 205 of 1984, the Municipal Pension Pan
Fund Standard and Recovery Act, and Act 15 of 1974, the Pennsylvania
Municipal Retirement Law, and subsequent amendment to either act.
17. Procedure.
A. Matters or procedure no covered in this agreement shall be
set forth in Act 15 of 1974 and as found in Act 205 of 1984, as they
shall, from time to time, be amended.
B. Should any change or mistake in records result in any member,
beneficiary or survivor annuitant receiving from the System more or
less than the individual would have been entitled to receive had the
records been correct, regardless of the intentional or unintentional
nature of the error and upon the discovery of such error, the Board
will correct the error and so far as practicable adjust the payments
which may be made for and to such person in such a manner that the
actuarial equivalent of the benefit to which he was correctly entitled
shall be paid.
18. Unfunded Liability. Any unfunded liability incurred by the
creation of benefits under this agreement shall be borne by Douglass
Township.
19. Effective Date. This agreement shall be effective the first day
of January, 1991, with the acceptance of the same by Douglass Township and
the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Board. Termination of this agreement
shall be in accordance with Section 412 of Act 15 of 1974.
Agre. 4/ 15/ 1991)
Page Added 10/ 22/ 1991 14. 5 -
1, § 521)
B. Non -uniformed Employees.
1, § 521)
521. Joining Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System. The Township
of Douglass, being a member municipality of the Pennsylvania Municipal
Retirement System, hereby elects to upgrade its member benefits in that
System as authorized by the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Law, as
amended, and does hereby agree to be bound by all the requirements and
provisions of said Article and the Law, as the case may be, and to assume
all obligations, financial and otherwise, placed upon member municipalities
by said Amendment, as the case may be. All references hereafter shall be
based on benefits negotiated between the Board and the Township under the
provisions of Article IV. ( Ord. 89- 3, 12/ 4/ 1989, § I)
522. Membership and Participation Optional. Membership in the
Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System shall be mandatory for all permanent,
municipal employees of the Township. Membership for elected officials
and employees hire on a temporary or seasonal basis is optional. Membership
is prohibited for individuals paid only on a fee basis. The election
by elected officials and employees hired on a temporary or seasonal basis
to join the System must be made within one ( 1) year from the date the
employee or official first entered the service of Douglass Township,
Montgomery County, Pennsylvania. ( Ord. 89- 3, 12/ 4/ 1989, § II)
523. Credit for Prior Service. Credit for prior service for original
employees is granted for each year or partial year thereof that the
member was employed by the Township from original date of hire. Benefits
provided to members in the agreement dated November 20, 1989, shall. accrue
based on all credited service granted and earned in accordance with this
Section.
The Township of Douglass hereby assumes all liability for any unfundedness
created due to the acceptance of the benefit structure outlined in
the above -referenced agreement.
Ord. 89- 3, 12/ 4/ 1989, § III)
524. Payment for Prior Service. Payment for any obligation established
by the adoption of this Part and the agreement between the System
and the Township of Douglass shall be made by the Township in accordance
with the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Law and Act 205 of 1984, the
Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act. ( Ord. 89- 3,
12/ 4/ 1989, § IV)
525. Agreement Re: Benefits. As part of this Part, the Township
agrees that the System shall provide the benefits set forth in the agreement
between the Board and the Township of Douglass, dated November 20,
1989. The passage and adoption of this Part by the Board of Supervisors of
the Township of Douglass is an official acceptance of said agreement and
the financial obligations resulting from the administration of said benefit
package. ( Ord. 89- 3, 12/ 4/ 1989, § V)
526. Certified Copy to be Filed. A duly certified copy of this Part
and the referenced agreement shall be filed with the Pennsylvania Municipal
Retirement System of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Membership for the
Page Corrected 4/ 7/ 1993 - 15 -
1, § 527 cont' d) 1, § 527, cont' 0
municipal employees of the Township of Douglass in the Pennsylvania Municipal
Retirement System shall be effective the first day of August, 1980,
with the upgraded plan structure reflected in the revised agreement, dated
November 20, 1989, effective the first day of January, 1990. ( Ord. 89- 3,
12/ 5/ 1989, § VIII)
16 - Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990
1, § 601)
Part 6
Drug and Alcohol Policy
1, § 601)
601. Purpose. Douglass Township is committed to protect the health
and safety of all employees by insuring that they are fit for duty while on
the job. It is the intention of Douglass Township to provide and maintain
a safe, drug- free environment for all its employees. Substance abuse is a
threat to both the Township and the employee. The drug and alcohol policy
is necessary to:
A. Maintain the safety of trucking and other safety sensitive
operations by establishing a drug- free environment thereby minimizing
the possibility of a drug related operational accident.
B. Provide assistance with substance abuse problems.
C. Comply with the Department of Transportation Mandatory Drug
Testing Program, the Drug Free Workplace Act of 1986 and other applicable
Federal safety programs.
D. Ensure the effective performance of employees.
E. Guard against liability resulting from the actions of employees.
F. Protect Township property and other employees against theft
by persons who steal to support a drug habit.
G. Deter illegal activities.
H. Provide an effective deterrent against pressure to experiment
or continue use of deleterious compounds.
Res. 1218953, 12/ 18/ 1995, § A)
602. Drug and Alcohol Policy.
1. Drug -Free Work Environment.
A. Employee involvement with alcohol or drugs can adversely
affect the work environment, job performance and safety of all employees.
Therefore, the use of unlawful drugs, reporting to work while
impaired by, or under the influence of alcohol, controlled substances
or any other drug, or possession at work of alcohol, controlled
substances or any other drug are expressly prohibited. A violation of
this prohibition will result in disciplinary action up to and including
termination.
B. When there is a reasonable belief that drugs or alcohol are
being used on Township property or during working hours, and/ or when
there is a reasonable belief that an employee' s behavior is affected
by a controlled substance and/ or alcohol, the employee will be required
to undergo a medical evaluation which may include a drug test.
C. Employees who hold safety sensitive positions as defined by
the Township and/ or are covered by the Department of Transportation
0 Mandatory Drug Testing Program will be subject to random testing in
Page Added 6/ 17/ 1996 - 16. 1 -
1, § 602( 1)( C), cont' d) ( 1, § 602( 1)( C), cont' d)
accordance with those regulations. Providing a urine specimen which
is found to contain evidence of illegal drug use without a satisfactory
medical explanation may result in termination of employment.
2. Cooperation with Drug Testing Program. Failure to cooperate with
any drug testing requirement including, but not limited to, refusing to
consent to testing or to submit a urine or blood sample for testing when
requested by management, switching or adulterating a sample or refusing to
sign a statement agreeing to abide by the company' s drug and alcohol policy
will result in termination of employment. Prior to taking any action for a
positive drug test, Township will provide the opportunity to employees to
explain the test results.
3. Criminal Conviction of Drug Statutes. The conviction under any
criminal drug statutes will result in termination of employment.
4. Search. In circumstances where there is a reasonable belief that
drugs or alcohol are present on the Township premises or in a Township
vehicle, a Township supplied locker, desk or other container, a search may
be conducted to confirm that belief.
5. Applicant Testing.
A. Based on the needs of the Township, all applicants will be
screened for illegal drug use. Offers of employment are strictly
conditional and contingent upon the successful completion of a screening
for drugs of abuse.
B. Applicants who have received treatment for chemical dependency
and have successfully been treated for drug or alcohol dependency
will be considered on the applicant' s commitment to remaining drug
free and the agreement to be tested on a periodic basis for one ( 1)
year.
6. Employee Assistance. An employee assistance program ( EAP) is
available to provide information and assist employees in obtaining treatment
before their health, safety and work performance are affected. The
EAP services are available to employees provided no company rules have been
violated.
Res. 1218953, 12/ 18/ 1995, § B)
16. 2 - Page Added 6/ 17/ 1996
U
1, APF• A)
Douglass Township
Alcohol and Drug Screening Policy
Statement for Job Applicants
1, App. A)
It is the policy of this Township to maintain a safe, healthy and
productive work environment for all its employees; to provide services for
its citizens in an efficient manner; to maintain the integrity and security
of its facilities and property and to perform all these functions in a
fashion consistent with applicable State and Federal regulations and the
interest and concerns of the communities and customers.
Pursuant to these goals, the Township requires candidates for
employment to pass a drug/ alcohol screening test covering illegal substances
and legal substances subject to abuse.
Offers of employment are strictly conditional and contingent upon
successful completion of the screening for drugs of abuse.
Applicants may be given conditional employment which may involve
training programs or work assignments prior to obtaining the results from
the drug tests; if the drug test results are positive, the offer of
employment is rescinded and the training and/ or work assignment will be
terminated.
This requires the candidate to submit to a urine and/ or blood specimen
and to sign a consent and release statement provided by the Township.
Refusal will result in the candidate' s disqualification for further
employment consideration.
Page Added 6/ 17/ 1996 - 16. 3 -
1, APP• B) ( 1, App• B)
Douglass Township
Informed Consent and Release of Liability
I UNDERSTAND that according to Douglass Township policy, which I have
read and understand, I am required to submit a sample of my urine and/ or
blood for chemical analysis. I understand that this analysis will be
conducted by a qualified testing laboratory.
THE PURPOSE of this analysis is to determine the absence or presence
of drugs or alcohol.
I UNDERSTAND that offers of employment are strictly conditional and
contingent upon successful completion of a screening for drugs of abuse.
Applicants may be given conditional employment which may involve
training programs or work assignments prior to obtaining the results from
the drug tests; if the drug test results are positive, the offer of
employment is rescinded and the training and/ or work assignment will be
terminated.
I CONSENT freely and voluntarily to the Township' s request for urine
and/ or blood specimens. I hereby release and hold harmless the Township
and its employees and agents from any liability whatsoever arising from this
request to furnish specimens and the testing of my specimens.
Date
Employee Signature
Date
Witness Signature
Page Added 6/ 17/ 1996 - 16. 5 -
1, App. C) 1, App. C)
Douglass Township - Drug Testing Program
Safety Sensitive Jobs and Department of Transportation
Drug Testing Requirements
Consent Statement
In accordance with the Douglass Township Drug and Alcohol Policy, a
drug testing program is established as a safety requirement in accordance
with applicable Federal regulations. The program involves routine testing
of urine to determine the presence of drugs. These tests may be conducted
at any time by Douglass Township or its agent( s) to determine that
prospective employees meet the necessary qualifications for employment and
continued employment.
I, , SS#
understand, authorize and consent to Douglass Township or its agent( s)
conducting such drug tests. I further understand that my continued
employment status with Douglass Township may be contingent upon successful
completion of such drug testing requirements.
My signature below indicates that I have read, understood, authorize
and consent to the above statement and hereby voluntarily participate in
the drug testing program.
Employee Signature
Witness Signature
Page Added 6/ 17/ 1996 16. 7 -
Date
Date
CHAPTER 2
ANIMALS
Reserved to accommodate future ordinances)
17 -
CHAPTER 3
BICYCLES
Reserved to accommodate future ordinances)
19 -
CHAPTER 4
BUILDINGS
9
Part 1
Building Identification
5101. Identification Markings Required
102. Penalties
21 -
4, § 101) ( 4, § 101)
Part 1
Building Identification
101. Identification Markings Required. The owner and/ or manager of
any multi -family dwellings or residential developments within Douglass
Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, shall mark all buildings and
individual residential units owned and/ or managed for identification and
location purposes with numbers or letters in sequence within thirty ( 30)
days of the date of this Part or within thirty ( 30) days of completion of
construction or acquisition of such buildings or units constructed or
acquired after the date of this Part. If the number of residential units
is ten ( 10) or more, a plan for marking for identification and location
purposes shall be presented to and approved by the Board of Supervisors.
Ord. 84- 10, 9/ 17/ 1984, § 1)
102. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate
any provision of this Part, upon conviction thereof in an action brought
before a district justice in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than one thousand dollars
1, 000. 00) plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs,
to a term of imprisonment not to exceed ninety ( 90) days. Each day that a
violation of this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall
be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense. Ord.
84- 10, 9/ 17/ 1984, § 2; as amended by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986; by Ord. 96- 5,
11/ 4/ 1996; and by Ord. 97- 2, 7/ 7/ 1997)
Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997 - 23 -
11
CHAPTER 5
CODE ENFORCEMENT
Part 1
Office of Building Official
101. Establishment of Office of Building Official
102. Qualifications of Building Official
103. Liability of Building Official
104. Application for Appeal
Part 2
BOCA Building Code
201. Adoption of Building Code
202. Amendments Made in Building Code
203. Interpretation
204. Provisions to be Continuation of Existing Regulations
Part 3
Attorney' s Fees for Collection of Municipal Claims
and Delinquent Taxes and Fees
301. Assessment of Attorney' s Fees and Collection of Delinquent Taxes and
Fees and Municipal Claims
302. Schedule of Attorney' s Fees
Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996 - 25 -
5, 5101) ( 51 3101)
Part 1
Office of Building Official
101. Establishment of Office of Building Official. The office of
Building Official of Douglass Township hereby is created and the Executive
Official in charge thereof shall be known as the Building Official. He
shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors and shall serve at the
pleasure of such Board for an indefinite term of office. During temporary
absence or disability of the Building Official, the Supervisors shall
designate an acting Building Official. ( Ord. 73- 6, 8/ 15/ 1973, § 2)
102. Qualifications of Building Official. To be eligible for
appointment as Building Official, a person shall have had experience as an
architect, engineer, building inspector, contractor or superintendent of
building construction, or shall have had management or executive experience.
He shall be capable of making the necessary examinations and inspections.
The Building Official shall not be engaged in, or directly or
indirectly connected with, the furnishing of labor, materials or appliances
for the construction, alteration or maintenance of buildings or structures,
or the preparation of plans or of specifications therefor, unless he is the
owner of the building; nor shall such Officer engage in any work which
conflicts with his official duties or with the interests of the Township.
If said appointee has had only management or executive experience, the
Building Official and/ or the Township Supervisors shall call upon the
Township Engineer as deemed necessary for technical advice and inspections
or examinations. ( Ord. 73- 6, 8/ 15/ 1973, § 3)
103. Liability of Building Official. The Building Official or other
officer or representative of the Township charged with the enforcement of
the Code while acting for the municipality, shall not thereby render
himself liable personally, and he hereby is relieved from all personal
liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result
of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his official duties.
Any suit instituted against any Officer or other representative because of
an act performed by him in the lawful discharge of his duties and under the
provisions of the Code shall be defended by the legal representative of the
municipality until the final termination of the proceedings. In no case
shall the Building Official or any other officer or representative of the
Township be liable for costs in any action, suit or proceeding that may be
instituted in pursuance of the provisions of the Code, and any Officer or
other representative acting in good faith and without malice shall be free
from liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or by reason
of any act or omission in the performance of his official duties in connection
therewith. ( Ord. 73- 6, 8/ 15/ 1973, § 4)
104. Application for Appeal. The owner of a building or structure
or any other person may appeal from a decision of the Building Official to
the Board of Supervisors within thirty ( 30) days from the date of such
decision. The Board of Supervisors shall give their decision within thirty
30) days from the date of the appeal. The decision of the Board of
Supervisors shall be final unless appealed to a Court with proper jurisdiction
of such matters within thirty ( 30) days thereof. ( Ord. 73- 6,
8/ 15/ 1973, § 7)
27 -
5, § 201) ( 5, § 201)
Part 2
BOCA Building Code
See also Chapter 8, Flood Plains)
201. Adoption of Building Code. The Township of Douglass hereby
adopts, for the purpose of establishing rules and reglations for the
construction, alteration, equipment, fire protection and safety of
buildings and structures, including administration, buiding permits and
penalties, the building codes known as " BOCA National Building Code, BOCA
National Plumbing Code and National Electrical Code published by the
National Fire Protection Association, 1993 Editions," save and except such
portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, of which three
3) copies have been and are now filed in the Office of the Building
Official, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if
set out at length herein. From the date on which this amendment shall take
effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling in the construction of
all buildings and structures, and in all other subjects therein contained,
within the corporate limits of the Township. ( Ord. 73- 6, 8/ 15/ 1973, § 1; as
revised by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986; and amended by Ord. 93- 6, 8/ 16/ 1993)
202. Amendments Made in Building Code. The Building Code hereby
adopted is amended as follows:
1. " Township of Douglass" shall be inserted wherever the words " Name
of. Municipality" appear in brackets therein;
Whenever the term " legal officer" or " legal representative" is
used in this Code, it shall be held to mean the Township Solicitor.
Ord. 93- 61 -
2. Section 104 hereby is deleted in its entirety. [ Ord. 93- 61
3. Section 121 - Board of Appeals, hereby is deleted in its entirety.
See Part 1 of this Chapter for procedures to appeal decisions of Building
Official). [ Ord. 93- 6)
4. Section 112. 3. 1 shall be amended to read as follows:
The fees for building permits and all other activities described
herein which require payment of fees, shall be as established from
time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors."
Ord. 93- 61
5. Section 116. 4 shall be amended to read as follows:
116. 4. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall
violate any provision of this Part or of this Code or shall fail to
comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect,
construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violationofan
approved plan or directive of the Code Official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this Code, upon conviction
thereof in an action brought before a district justice in the manner
provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($ 1, 000. 00) plus costs and,
in default of payment of said fine and casts, to a term of
Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997 - 29 -
5, § 202( 5), cont' d) 5, § 202( 5), cont' d)
imprisonment not to exceed ninety ( 90) days. Each day that a
violation of this Part continues or each Section of this Part which
shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate
offense. [ Ord. 97- 2]
6. Section 117. 2 hereby is deleted. [ Ord. 96- 51
7. Section 202. 0 hereby is amended to read as follows:
Building Line: A line, established by Ordinance or designated
upon an officially adopted lot plan, beyond which a building shall not
extend. [ Ord. 93- 6]
8. Section 201. 0 is hereby amended to read as follows:
Alleys any public way primarily intended to provide vehicular
access to the rear of lots fronting upon public streets or avenues.
Building line: a line, established by ordinance or designated
upon an officially adopted lot plan, beyond which a building shall not
extend.
9. Section 1807. 2. 1 is hereby amended to read as follows:
1807. 2. 1. Deep Excavations: Whenever an excavation is made to a
depth of more than eight feet ( 8') below the established curb, the
person who causes such an excavation to be made, if afforded the
necessary license to enter the adjoining premises, shall preserve and
protect from injury at all times and at his own expense such adjoining
structure or premises which may be affected by the excavation. If the
necessary license is not afforded, it shall then be the duty of the
owner of the adjoining premises to make his building or structure safe
by installing proper underpinning or foundations or otherwise. Such
owner, if it be necessary for the prosecution of his work, shall be
granted the necessary license to enter the premises where the excavation
or demolition is contemplated.
10. Section 1807. 2. 2 is hereby amended to read as follows:
1807. 2. 2. Shallow Excavations: Wherever an excavation is made
to a depth less than eight feet ( 8') below the curb, the owner of a
neighboring building or structure the safety of which may be affected
by the proposed excavation, shall preserve and protect from injury and
shall support his building or structure by the necessary underpinning
or foundations. If necessary for that purpose, he shall be afforded a
license to enter the premises where the excavation is contemplated.
11. Section 1906. 1 is hereby deleted:
Ord. 73- 6, 8/ 15/ 1973; as amended by Ord. 93- 6, 8/ 16/ 1993; by Ord. 96- 5,
11/ 4/ 1996; and by Ord. 97- 2, 7/ 7/ 1997)
203. Interpretation. In interpreting any of the provisions of the
Code hereby adopted, the following principles shall be governing:
30 - Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997
5, 5203, cont' d) ( 5, 3203, cont' d)
1. The said Code shall not supersede any provision of any law of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or of any regulation promulgated by any
department or agency of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania by authority of
law, where such law or regulation is in conflict with or identical to the
provision of the said Code. Provided, however, any provision of the said
Code that is stricter than or in addition to any such law or regulation
governing a particular subject or activity shall be in effect and shall be
enforced within the Township subject to the penalties prescribed herein.
2. Mention in the Code or regulation thereby of any specific use of
property or of any business or industry shall not authorize such use of
property or establishment or carrying on of such business or industry in
the Township. It hereby is declared the intent of the Board of Supervisors
that permitted or prohibited uses of land and buildings within the Township
shall be governed by the Zoning Ordinance of the Township and its
amendments and supplements.
Ord. 73- 6, 8/ 15/ 1973, § 9; as revised by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
5204. Provisions to be Continuation of Existing Regulations. The
provisions of this Part so far as they are the same as those of ordinances
and/ or codes in force immediately prior to the enactment of this Part, are
intended as a continuation of such ordinances and codes and not as new -
enactments. The provisions of this Part shall not affect any act done or
liability incurred, nor shall they affect any suit or prosecution pending
or to be instituted to enforce any right or penalty or to punish any
offense under the authority of any of the repealed ordinances. ( Ord. 73- 6,
8/ 15/ 1973; as revised by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
31 - ,
5, § 301) ( 5, § 301)
Part 3
Attorney' s Fees for Collection of Municipal Claims
and Delinquent Taxes and Fees
301. Assessment of Attorney' s Fees and Collection of Delinquent
Taxes and Fees and Municipal Claims.
1. Douglass Township may include the costs to collect delinquent
taxes and fees and municipal claims attorney' s fees in accordance with the
schedule set forth in § 302 of this Part.
2. At least thirty ( 30) days before assessing the fees, Douglass
Township shall notify the property owner by certified mail and provide the
owner with an opportunity to pay the delinquent amount with the assessed
fees.
Ord. 96- 3, 6/ 17/ 1996, § 301)
302. Schedule of Attorney' s Fees. The following schedule of attorney'
s fees shall be applicable to collection of taxes and fees and municipal
claims:
A. Preparation of municipal claim or complaint - fifty dollars
50. 00).
B. Filing fee - twenty- five dollars ($ 25. 00).
C. Satisfaction fee - twenty- five dollars ($ 25. 00).
D. Litigation costs hourly rate of Solicitor' s fees to
Douglass Township plus minimum two hundred fifty dollars ($ 250. 00) for
each court appearance.
Ord. 96- 3, 6/ 17/ 1996, § 302)
Page Added 6/ 17/ 1996 32. 1 -
I
t
CHAPTER 6
CONDUCT
Part 1
Curfew
101. Definitions and Interpretation
102. Purposes
103. Curfew; Exceptions
104. Parents Not to Permit Violations
105. Procedure Upon Violation
106. Penalties
107. Procedures in Case of Repeated Violations or Other Factors
Interfering with Enforcement
108. Police Discretion in Age Determination
Part 2
Littering
6201. General Prohibitions
202. Sidewalks and Gutters to be Rept Clean
203. Occupants of Vehicles Not to Litter
204. Drivers of Trucks to Keep Contents Secure
205. Property to be Kept Free of Litter
206. Definitions
207. Abatement of Violations
208. Penalties
33 -
6, § 101)
Part 1
Curfew
6, § 101)
101. Definitions and Interpretation. As used in this Part, the
following terms shall have the meanings indicated, unless a different
meaning clearly appears from the context:
MINOR - person under the age of eighteen ( 18) years.
PARENT - any natural parent of a minor, as herein defined, or a
guardian, or any adult person responsible for the care and custody of a
minor. When used in this Part, " parent" shall mean one or both parents.
PUBLIC PLACE - any public street, alley, sidewalk, park, playground,
public building or vacant lot in the Township of Douglass.
REASONABLE EXCUSE - shall include the following:
A. Medical or other similar emergency.
B. Activities of junior firemen.
C. Employment.
D. School functions.
REMAIN - to stay behind, to tarry and to stay unnecessarily upon the
streets, including the congregating of groups ( or of interacting minors)
totaling four or more persons in which any minor involved would not be
using the streets, for emergencies or ordinary purposes such as mere
passage of going home.
In this Part, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular; and the masculine shall include the feminine and the
neuter.
Ord. 79- 2, 10/ 8/ 1979; as revised by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
102. Purposes. This is a Curfew Ordinance prescribing, in accordance
with prevailing community standards, regulations for the conduct
of minors on streets at night, for the protection of younger children in
the Township of Douglass from each other and from other persons on the
streets during nighttime hours, for the enforcement of parental control and
responsibility for their children, for the protection of the public from
nocturnal mischief by minors and for the reduction of the incident of
juvenile criminal activity, all for the good of minors, for the furtherance
of family responsibility, and for the public good, safety and welfare.
Ord. 79- 2, 10/ 8/ 1979; as revised by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
103. Curfew; Exceptions. It shall be unlawful for any minor to be
or remain in or upon any public highway, park or other public place within
the Township, or in any enclosure or vehicle which is on or in close
proximity to any such public place within the Township, between the hours
of 11: 00 P. M. and 5: 00 A. M. on the following day. Provided, however, that
during the period from October 20 through October 31 the presence of such
35 -
6, § 103, cont' d) 6, § 103, cont' d)
children at such places under such circumstances shall be unlawful between
the hours of 9: 30 P. M. and 5: 00 A. M. Exceptions to the above are the
following:
1. Minor accompanied by parent, guardian, or other person having
legal care or custody of such minor.
2. Minor possessing a written statement dated that day and signed by
parent, guardian, or other person having the legal care or custody of such
minor, which statement specifies the time, place, purpose and necessity of
the minor being in a public place contrary to this Part.
3. Minor lawfully employed making it necessary to be on or in highways,
streets, parks, etc., as stated above and possessing a current letter
certifying the same and signed by employer, parent or guardian.
4. Minor on an emergency errand.
5. Minor traveling to and from church, school or municipal activity
with parental permission statement as in § 102 above.
Ord. 79- 2, 10/ 8/ 1979; as revised by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
104. Parents not to Permit Violation. It is hereby made unlawful
for any parent, guardian, or the person having the legal care or custody of
a minor to allow or permit such minor to violate any of the provisions of
this Part without legal justification therefor. ( Ord. 79- 2, 10/ 8/ 1979; as
revised by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
105. Procedure upon Violation. Any minor found upon the streets,
alleys, parks or public places within the Township in violation of § 102
shall be taken into custody by the Township police or legally deputized
individual, be delivered to his parent( s), guardian, or person having the
legal custody of said minor, and be given a copy of this Part. A report
shall be filed and kept in a book for that specific purpose. If said
parent, guardian or person having the legal custody of said minor shall
again allow him to be on the streets, alleys, parks or public places in
violation_ of § 102, said parent, guardian, or person having the legal
custody of said minor so offending shall, upon the second offense, be
called along with offender and be so advised once again as to the penalty
provisions contained in this Part. Upon the third violation, said parent,
guardian or person will be remanded to the district justice for disposition.
( Ord. 79- 2, 10/ 8/ 1979; as revised by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
106. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate
any provision of this Part, upon conviction thereof in an action brought
before a district justice in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($ 1, 000. 00)
plus costs and,, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed ninety ( 90) days. Each day that a violation of
this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall be found to
have been violated shall . constitute a separate offense. ( Ord. 79- 2,
10/ 8/ 1979; as revised by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986; as amended by Ord. 96- 5,
11/ 4/ 1996; and by Ord. 97- 2, 7/ 7/ 1997)
36 - Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997
6, § 107) ( 6, § 107)
107. Procedure in Case of Repeated Violations or Other Factors
Interfering with Enforcement. Any minor who shall violate this Part more
than three ( 3) times may, at the discretion of the proper Township officials,
be reported to a society or organization the purpose of which is to
take charge of incorrigibles and delinquents, and proceedings shall then be
taken in the proper court for the permanent welfare of such minor and a
like procedure may be taken in cases where the arrest of the parent is not
effective, or where for any other reason the provisions of § 102 of this
Part cannot be made effective by the imposition of fines and penalties.
Ord. 79- 2, 10/ 8/ 1979; as revised by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
108. Police Discretion in Age Determination. The police officers of
the Township in taking minors into custody shall use their discretion in
determining age and in doubtful cases may require positive proof of age..
Until such proof is furnished, the officer' s judgment shall prevail. ( Ord.
79- 2, 10/ 8/ 1979; as revised by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997 - 37 -
6, § 201)
Part 2
Littering
6, § 201)
201. General Regulations. No person shall sweep, throw or deposit
litter in or upon any occupied, open or vacant property, whether owned by
such person or not, or in or upon any street, sidewalk, park or other
public place, or any pond, lake, stream or other body of water within
Douglass Township, except in public receptacles or private receptacles for
collection, or in a properly authorized dump. Persons placing litter in
public receptacles or in private receptacles for collection shall do so in
such manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements
upon any street, sidewalk or other public place, or upon private
property. ( Ord. 78- 2, 6/ 5/ 1978, § 1)
202. Sidewalks and Gutters to be Kept Clean. No person, including
merchants owning or occupying a place of business, shall sweep into or
deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within Douglass Township
the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public
or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property
shall keep the sidewalks and gutters in front of their premises free of
litter. ( Ord. 78- 2, 6/ 5/ 1978, § 2)
203. Occupants of Vehicles Not to Litter. No person, while a driver
or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or
other public place within the Township, or upon private property. ( Ord.
78- 2, 6/ 5/ 1978, § 3)
204. Driver' s of Trucks to Keep Contents Secure. No person shall
drive any truck or other vehicle within the Township unless the vehicle is
so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter from
being blown or deposited upon any streets, alley or other public place.
Ord. 78- 2, 6/ 5/ 1978, § 4)
205. Property to be Kept Free of Litter. The owner or person in
control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises
free of litter; provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the
storage of litter in private receptacles for collection. ( Ord. 78- 2,
6/ 5/ 1978, § 5)
206. Definitions. For the purpose of this Part, the following words
shall have the following meanings:
GARBAGE - putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER - " garbage," " refuse," and " rubbish" as defined herein and all
other waste materials.
REFUSE - all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes ( except body
wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleaning, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles, and solid market and industrial wastes.
39 -
6, § 206, cont' d) 6, § 206, cont' d)
RUBBISH - nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard,
tin cans, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials
Ord. 78- 2, 6/ 5/ 1978, § 6)
207. Abatement of Violations. The Supervisors of Douglass Township,
their agents or employees are authorized and empowered to notify the owner,
lessee or other person occupying or in control of property within the
Township, or the agent of such person, to properly dispose of litter
located on such property. The notice shall be by mail addressed to the
aforementioned person at his last known address. If such person so notified
refuses to comply with the notice within forty- eight ( 48) hours, the
Supervisors of Douglass Township may remove and dispose of such litter.
The expense of removal and disposal shall be paid by the owner, lessee or
other person occupying or in control of said property and shall be a lien
upon the land for which a lien may be filed by the Township Supervisors, in
the name of the Township, in the Court of Common Pleas of Montgomery County
within six ( 6) months from the date of the completion of the work of
removal and disposal, subject to the same proceedings for entry and revival
of judgment and execution as are provided by law for other municipal liens.
The Supervisors of Douglass Township may also maintain an action against
such owner or occupant in the name of the Township, to recover the amount
of such expense in the same way as debts of like amounts are by law recoverable,
and the same when recovered either by enforcement of lien or by
personal action shall be paid to the Township Treasurer to be held and used
for Township purposes. ( Ord. 78- 2, 6/ 5/ 1978, § 7)
208. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate
any provision of this Part, upon conviction thereof in an action brought
before a district justice in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($ 1, 000. 00)
plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed ninety ( 90) days. Each day that a violation of
this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall be found to
have been violated shall constitute a separate offense. ( Ord. 78- 2,
6/ 5/ 1978; as amended by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986; by Ord. 96- 5, 11/ 4/ 1996; and
by. Ord. 97- 2, 7/ 7/ 1997)
40 - Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997
CHAPTER 7
FIRE PREVENTION AND FIRE PROTECTION
Part 1
Fire Lanes
101. Fire Lanes Required for Public Buildings
102. Signs to be Erected
103. Parking in Fire Lanes Prohibited
104. Removal of Obstructions
105. Penalties
Part 2
Open Burning
201. Short Title
202. Policy
203. Definitions
204. Air Pollution Control Officer
205. Regulations
206. Regulations Pertaining to Burning Domestic Refuse
207. Penalties
Page Revised 4/ 7/ 1993 - 41 -
7, § 101) ( 7, § 101)
Part 1
Fire Lanes
101. Fire Lanes Required for Public Buildings. A fire lane having a
minimum width of twelve feet ( 12') with convenient access to a public
street or road shall be maintained to every building devoted to public use
within Douglass Township and shall be kept unobstructed to provide for
ingress and egress of fire department vehicles, equipment and personnel.
The marking of such fire lanes shall be done by and at the expense of the
property owner or occupier and as directed by the Board of Supervisors of
Douglass Township or its delegated agent. ( Ord. 82- 6, 6/ 21/ 1982, § 1)
102. Signs to be Erected. All fire lanes shall be designated by
official signs approved by the Board of Supervisors of Douglass Township,
or its delegated agent and shall be erected by and at the expense of the
property owner or occupier. ( Ord. 82- 6, 6/ 21/ 1982, § 2)
103. Parking in Fire Lanes Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
person, firm or corporation to stop or park a vehicle or otherwise obstruct
in any way a fire lane or otherwise to impede the ingress and egress of
fire department vehicles, equipment and personnel in such fire lanes.
Ord. 82- 6, 6/ 21/ 1982, § 3)
104. Removal of Obstructions. Any and all obstructions in a fire
lane may be removed by the Board of Supervisors of Douglass Township or its
duly authorized agent at the expense of the property owner or occupier
after notice to such owner or occupier. ( Ord. 82- 6, 6/ 21/ 1982, § 4)
105. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate
any provision of this Part, upon conviction thereof in an action brought
before a district justice in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($ 1, 000. 00)
plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed ninety ( 90) days. Each day that a violation of
this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall be found to
have been violated shall constitute a separate offense. ( Ord. 82- 6,
6/ 21/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986; by Ord. 96- 5, 11/ 4/ 1996; and
by Ord. 97- 2, 7/ 7/ 1997)
Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997 - 43 -
7, § 201) ( 7, § 201)
Part 2
Open Burning
201. Short Title. This Part shall be known and may be cited as the
Douglass Township Air Pollution Control Ordinance of 1992." ( Ord. 92- 3,
7/ 6/ 1992, 1)
202. Policy. Whereas pollution of the air is detrimental to the
health, comfort, living conditions, welfare and safety of the citizens of
Douglass Township, Montgomery County, it is declared to be the policy of
the Township to safeguard the citizens from air pollution. ( Ord. 92- 3,
7/ 6/ 1992, § 2)
203. Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used
in this Part, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, shall have
the meanings set forth below:
BOARD - Board of Supervisors of Douglass Township; Montgomery
County, Pennsylvania.
FLUE - any duct, passage, stack, chimney or conduit permitting
air contaminants to be emitted into the open air.
GARBAGE - all putrescible animal and vegetable matter resulting
from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
ODOR - that property of a substance which affects the sense of
smell.
OPEN BURNING - any unenclosed fire where air contaminants,
including smoke and/ or odor, are emitted to the open air, and are not
directed thereto through a flue.
PERSON - any individual, partnership, association, syndicate,
company, firm, trust, corporation or other entity recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties, including any governmental agency.
SALVAGE OPERATIONS - salvaging or reclaiming of any product or
material including, but not limited to, metals, chemicals, shipping
containers or drums.
SMOKE - extremely small solid particles produced by incomplete
combustion of organic substances and includes, but is not limited to,
fly ash, cinders, tarry mastery, unburned gases, soot or carbon and
gaseous combustion products.
TRADE WASTE - all solid or liquid material or rubbish resulting
from construction, building operations or other operation of any
business, trade or industry including, but not limited to, plastic
products, cartons, paint, grease, oil and other petroleum products,
chemicals, cinders and other forms of solid or liquid waste materials;
provided, however, that trade waste shall not include any coal refuse
associated with the mining or preparation of coal.
Ord. 92- 3, 7/ 6/ 1992, § 3)
Page Added 4/ 7/ 1993 - 44. 1 -
7, § 204)
204. Air Pollution Control Officer.
7, § 204)
1. The Air Pollution Control Officer shall be the Douglass Township
Fire Marshall.
2. Duties. The Air Pollution Control Officer shall have the powers
and duties to:
A. Enforce the provisions of this Part and the rules and regulations
contained therein.
B. Receive and initiate complaints or violations of the regulations
of this Part.
C. Enter and inspect any building, property, premises or place
for the purpose of investigating an actual or suspected source of open
burning or for the purpose of ascertaining the compliance or noncompliance
with any regulation of this Part.
D. Have access to and require information pertinent to any
matter under investigation.
E. Send written notice of any violation of this Part to the
person responsible for the violation.
F. Attend meetings of the Board when requested and file a
written report of violation of any regulations of this Part.
G. Institute prosecution for violation of the regulations of
this Part.
Ord. 92- 3, 7/ 6/ 1992, § 4)
205. Regulations.
1. Open burning is prohibited in Douglass Township except as hereinafter
provided. Exceptions:
A. Burning to prevent or abate a fire hazard, when approved by
the Air Pollution Control Officer.
B. Burning for the purpose of instructing personnel in fire
fighting, when approved by the Air Pollution Control Officer.
C. Burning for the prevention and control of disease or pests,
when approved by the Air Pollution Control Officer.
D. Burning in conjunction with the production of agricultural
commodities in their unmanufactured state on the premises of the farm
operation.
E. Burning of trees, shrubs and other native vegetation which
are cleared from land during or prior to the process of construction
when done in accordance with rules and regulations of the Department
of Environmental Resources as set forth in § 129. 14, Chapter 129 of
Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code. The term does not include
demolition wastes and dirt laden roots.
F. Burning for the purpose of destroying domestic refuse, when
the fire is on the premises of any structure occupied solely as a
dwelling by two ( 2) families or less and when such refuse results from
the normal occupancy of said structure.
44. 2 - Page Added 4/ 7/ 1993
7, § 205( 1) ( G)) 7, § 205( 1)( G))
G. Open burning of dry twigs, dry branches and other native
vegetation. Provided, however, open burning of dry twigs and dry
branches and native vegetation on piles larger than five ( 5) feet by
five ( 5) feet by five ( 5) feet shall be permitted only when approved
by the Air Pollution Control Officer.
H. Open burning for recreational or ceremonial purposes.
I. Open burning for cooking food.
2. No person shall cause, suffer or permit any open burning operation
whatsoever if said open burning operation is contrary to § 129. 14, Chapter
129 of Title 25, Rules and Regulations of the Department of Environmental
Resources.
3. No person shall in any manner hinder, delay, obstruct, resist,
prevent or in any way interfere with the Air Pollution Control Officer or
his assistants in the performance of their duty hereunder, or refuse such
personnel, after property identification, entrance at reasonable hours to
any premises.
4. No person shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any written
abatement notice service on such person, either personally or by registered
or certified mail, issued by the Air Pollution Control Officer of the
Township. Such notice shall set forth the violation of this Part and a
time within which the violation is to be abated. Any person receiving such
abatement notice may obtain an extension of time to comply therewith by
making application to and obtaining the approval of the Board.
Ord. 92- 3, 7/ 6/ 1992, § 5)
206. Regulations Pertaining to Burning Domestic Refuse. The following
regulations shall apply to burning domestic refuse:
A. Outdoor burning of domestic refuse shall be in an approved
burning barrel or other approved incinerator. An approved burning
barrel is a solid, sturdy, steel cylindrical container with a sealed
bottom with ventilation holes and an open top which, during outdoor
burning, is covered firmly and completely by a steel, spark -arresting
screen. Other approved incinerators are containers approved in
writing by the Township Fire Marshall after review and inspection,
with a volume no greater than a fifty- five ( 55) gallon drum with
containment, ventilation and spark -arresting features similar to those
of an approved burning barrel.
B. Outdoor burning of domestic waste shall be attended at all
times by a competent adult. Outdoor burning of domestic waste shall
not be conducted within twenty- five ( 25) feet of any building or other
structure, or on any road, alley, or public walkway, or in any area
specifically disapproved by the Air Pollution Control Officer.
C. The area within five ( 5) feet of any burning barrel or other
incinerator shall be completely clear of any combustible material
during outdoor burning.
D. Fire extinguishing equipment shall be readily available for
use during any outdoor burning.
Page Added 4/ 7/ 1993 - 44. 3 -
7, § 206( E)) ( 7, § 206( E))
E. Every outdoor fire shall be started and completely extinguished
after sunrise and before sunset. No outdoor fire shall be
started within an hour of sunset. The Air Pollution Control Officer
shall have the right to inspect outdoor burning.
F. No outdoor burning shall be conducted during periods of high
winds, declared drought, or weather inversion or other situations
deemed hazardous by the Air Pollution Control Officer.
G. All ventilation holes in the burning barrel or other incinerator
shall be kept open and free from clogging material. A spark -
arresting screen mesh shall be kept in place during outdoor burning.
H. No burning of plastic, rubber, garbage or animal waste shall
be permitted.
Ord. 92- 3, 7/ 6/ 1992, § 6)
207. Penalties.
1. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of
this Part, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a district
justice in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($ 1, 000. 00) plus costs
and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed ninety ( 90) days. Each day that a violation of
this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall be found to
have been violated shall constitute a separate offense. [ Ord. 97- 21
2. The Air Pollution Control Officer may institute an action in
equity for an injunction to restrain continuous violations of this Part in
the event the Air Pollution Control Officer has issued an abatementnotice
which is being violated and which is not then the subject of judicial
review.
Ord. 92- 3, 7/ 6/ 1992, § 7; as amended by Ord. 96- 5, 11/ 4/ 1996; and by Ord.
97- 2, 7/ 7/ 1997)
9
44. 4 - Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997
CHAPTER 8
FLOOD PLAINS
Part 1
General Provisions
101. Conformance with National Flood Insurance Program and State Flood
Plain Management Act
102. Applicability
103. Conflict
104. Validity
105. Municipal Liability
106. Definitions
Part 2
Technical Requirements
201. Improvement, Destruction, Fill
202. Anchoring
203. Placement of Buildings and Structures
204. Floors, Walls and Ceilings
205. Electrical Systems
206. Plumbing
207. Paintings and Adhesives
208. Storage
209. Relief from Strict Compliance with Requirements, of this Part
Part 3
Permits and Administration
301. Administration
302. Plan Requirements
303. Review by Technical Agencies
304. Other Permit Issuance Requirements
305. Inspection and Revocation
306. Start of Construction
307. Penalties
45 -
8, § 101) ( 8, § 101)
Part 1
General Provisions
101. Conformance with National Flood Insurance Program and State
Flood Plain Management Act. The purpose of these regulations shall be to
amend the Building Code of Douglass Township to include floodproofing
standards for new construction and development in accordance with the
requirements of Section 60. 3 of the National Flood Insurance Program, P. L.
93- 234 and the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, P. L. 851, No. 166
of 1978, and as either is amended. ( Ord. 84- 5, 5/ 7/ 1984, § 15. 100; as
amended by Ord. 96- 1, 1/ 5/ 1996)
102. Applicability. The regulations contained herein shall apply in
those areas defined and established as Flood Plain Conservation District in
Part 16 of the Douglass Township Zoning Chapter. Said part and related
maps and data shall be available in the Douglass Township Administration
Building for inspection. ( Ord. 84- 5, 5/ 7/ 1984, § 15. 101)
103. Conflict. It is not intended by this Chapter to repeal,
abrogate, annul or interfere with any existing ordinances or enactment, or
with any rule, regulation or permit adopted or issued thereunder, except
insofar as the same may be inconsistent or in conflict with any of the
provisions of this Chapter provided that where this Chapter imposes greater
restrictions than any such ordinance or enactment, then the provisions of
this Chapter shall control. ( Ord. 84- 5, 5/ 7/ 1984, § 15. 110)
104. Validity. Should any section or provision of this Chapter be
declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision
shall not affect the validity of the Chapter as a whole, or any other part
thereof. ( Ord. 84- 5, 5/ 7/ 1984, § 15. 11)
105. Municipal Liability. The granting of a building permit in or
near the Flood Plain Area shall not constitute a representation, guarantee
or warranty of any kind by the municipality, or by any official or employee
thereof of the practicability or safety of the proposed use and shall
create no liability upon Douglass Township, its officials, or employees.
The degree of floodproofing intended to be provided by this Chapter is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering
and scientific methods of study. This Chapter does not imply that
buildings constructed using these standards will always be totally free
from flood damages. ( Ord. 84- 5, 5/ 7/ 1984, § 15. 112)
1106. Definitions.
BASE FLOOD - the flood which has been selected to serve as the basis
upon which the flood plain management provisions of this and other
ordinances have been prepared; for purposes of this Chapter, the one
hundred year flood, as referenced in the current Douglass Township Flood
Insurance Study, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
Federal Insurance Administration.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION - the one hundred year flood elevation, as
referenced in the Douglass Township Flood Insurance Study, prepared by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, Federal Insurance Administration.
Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996 - 47 -
8, § 106, cont' d) ( 8, § 106, cont' d)
Within the approximated flood plain, alluvial soils flood plain, or areas
determined to be flood plain as documented by the Township Engineer, the
one hundred year flood elevation shall be established as a point on the
boundary of the approximated flood plain nearest to the construction site
in question.
BASEMENT - any area of the building having its floor subgrade ( below
ground level) on all sides. [ Ord. 87- 5]
BUILDINGS - a constructed edifice designed to stand more or less
permanently covering a space of land, usually covered by a roof and more or
less completely enclosed by walls, and serving as a dwelling, storehouse,
factory, gas or liquid storage tank, shelter for animals, or other useful
structure - distinguished from structures not designated for occupancy
such as fences or monuments) and from structures not intended for use in
one place ( as boats and trailers) even though subject to occupancy of which
at least fifty-one percent ( 51%) of actual cash value ( less land value) is
located above ground.
DEVELOPMENT - any man- made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, the
placement of manufactured homes, streets and other paving, utilities,
filling, grading, excavation, mining, dredging, or drilling operations and
the subdivision of land.
FLOOD - a temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land area.
FLOOD PROOFING any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents. [ Ord. 91- 3]
FLOOD PLAIN AREA - that area defined in Part 16 of the Douglass
Township Zoning Chapter as the Flood Plain Conservation District: the
flood plain definition contained therein is made part of this Part by
reference.
FLOODWAY - the channel of the river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
a designated height. [ Ord. 91- 3]
HISTORIC STRUCTURES - any structure that is:
A. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places ( a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting
the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
B. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a
registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by
the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
C. Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places
in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved
by the Secretary of Interior; or,
48 - Page Revised 10/ 22/ 1991
8, § 106, cont' d)
D. Individually
in communities with
certified either:
8, § 106, cont' d)
listed on a local inventory of historic places
historic preservation programs that have been
1) By an approved State program as determined by the
Secretary of the Interior; or,
2) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in States
without approved programs.
Ord. 91- 31
LOWEST FLOOR - the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area ( including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building' s lowest floor, provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of
the applicable non -elevation design requirements of this Ordinance.
Ord. 87- S]
MANUFACTURED HOME - a mobile home or a transportable, single- family
dwelling intended for permanent occupancy, office, or place of assembly,
contained in one ( 1) or more sections, built on a permanent chassis, which
arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except_ for minor and
incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and' constructed so that it
may be used with or without a permanent foundation. The term includes park
trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles which are placed on a
site for more than one hundred eighty ( 180) consecutive days. ( Ord. 91- 31
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK - a parcel of land under single ownership,
which has been planned and improved for the placement of two ( 2) or more
manufactured homes for non -transient use. [ Ord. 91- 31
NEW CONSTRUCTION - the construction, reconstruction, renovation,
repair, extension, expansion, alteration or relocation of a building,
structure, and/ or improvements such as streets, utilities, etc.
OBSTRUCTION - any wall, dam, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile,
abutment, projection, excavation, channel rectification, culvert, building,
fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across, or
projecting into any channel,, watercourse, or flood plain area which may
impede, retard, or change the direction of the flow of water, either in
itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water, or that
is placed where the flow of water might carry the same downstream to the
damage of life or property.
ONE HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD - a flood that has one chance in one hundred or
a one percent ( 19) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any one year.
For the purposes of this Chapter, the one hundred year flood ( base flood)
as defined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Federal Insurance
Administration, in the Flood Insurance Study, Douglass Township.
PERSON - any person, persons, partnership, business or corporation.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES - a vehicle which is ( i) built on a single
chassis; ( ii) four hundred ( 400) square feet or less when measured at the
largest horizontal projection; ( iii) designed to be self- propelled or
permanently towable by a light duty truck; and ( iv) designed primarily not
for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. [ Ord. 91- 31
Page Revised 10/ 22/ 1991 - 49 -
8, § 105, cont' d) ( 8, § 106, cont' d)
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION - the one hundred year flood elevation plus
a freeboard safety factor of one and one- half feet ( 111'). 0
START OF CONSTRUCTION - includes substantial improvement, and is the
date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was
within one hundred eighty ( 180) days of the permit date. The actual start
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure
on a site, such as the pouring of the slab or footings, the installation of
peirs, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading
and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/ or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers,
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garage or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. If
the actual start of construction does not occur within one hundred eighty
180) days, a time extension for the date of start up construction shall be
granted only if a written request is submitted by the applicant, which sets
forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the Building Inspector to approve
such a request. [ Ord. 87- 51
STRUCTURE — anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached
to the ground, including but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds,
cabins, manufactured homes and other similar items.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE - damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed fifty ( 50%) percent of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred. [ Ord. 91- 31
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT - any repair, reconstruction, or improvement
of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent ( 50%) of
the market value of the structure either:
A. Before the improvement or repair is started; or
B. , If the structure has been damaged, and is being restored,
before the damage occurred.
For the purpose of this definition, " substantial improvement" is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor,
or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does
not, however, include either:
C. Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which are, solely necessary to assure safe living conditions or;
D. Any alternative of a structure listed on a National Register
of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
Ord. 84- 5, 5/ 7/ 1984, § 15. 113; as amended by Ord. 87- 5, 12/ 7/ 1987, §§ 1, 2, 3;
and by Ord. 91- 3, 8/ 5/ 1991, §§ 1, 2) 0
50 - Page Revised 10/ 22/ 1991
8, § 201)
Part 2
Technical Requirements
8, § 201)
201. Improvement, Destruction, Fill.
1. Residential Structure -
A. Substantial improvements of structures shall have the lowest
floor ( including basement) elevated to at least one and one half feet
1'') above the Base Flood Elevation.
B. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement
of any kind to an existing structure, to an extent of an amount of
less than fifty percent ( 50%) of its market value, shall be elevated
and/ or floodproofed to the Base Flood Elevation.
C. Existing structures located in a designated floodway shall
not be expanded or enlarged unless the effect of the proposed expansion
or enlargement on flood heights is fully offset by accompanying
stream improvements.
2. Nonresidential Structure
A. Substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall
have the lowest floor ( including basement) elevated or floodproofed to
at least one and one- half feet ( 1Y) above the Base Flood Elevation.
B. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement
of any kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less
than fifty percent ( 50%) of its market value shall be elevated or
floodproofed to the Base Flood Elevation.
C. Existing . structures located in a designated floodway shall
not be expanded or enlarged unless the effect of the proposed expansion
or enlargement on flood heights is fully offset by accompanying
stream improvements.
3. Use of Openings in Encolsures Below a Structure' s Lowest
Floor. For all new construction and substantial improvements, fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
A minimum of two ( 2) openings having a total net area of not less than
one ( 1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be prov —ed. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher
than one ( 1) foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens,
louvers, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of flood waters.
4. Destruction of an Existing Structure - Structures located within
the Flood Plain Conservation District may be rebuilt if destroyed by fire
or other catastrophe provided that if located within the floodway the
Page revised 12/ 7/ 1987 - 51 -
8, § 201( 4), cont' d) 8, § 201( 4), cont' d)
reconstruction will not result in an increase in the Base Flood Elevation,
as referenced in the Douglass Township Flood Insurance Study, or as otherwise
defined in Part 16, Flood Plain Conservation District, of the Douglass
Township Zoning Chapter.
5. Fill If fill is used to raise the finished surface of the lowest
floor one and one- half feet ( 1Y) above the Base Flood Elevation, the
following requirements apply:
A. Fill shall extend beyond a structure for a sufficient distance
to provide acceptable access. For residential structures, fill
shall extend laterally fifteen feet ( 15') beyond the building line
from all points. For nonresidential structures, fill shall be placed
to provide access acceptable for the intended use. At -grade access,
with fill extending laterally fifteen feet ( 15') beyond the building
line, shall be provided to a minimum of twenty- five percent ( 25%) of
the perimeter of a nonresidential structure.
B. Fill shall consist of soil or rock materials only.
C. Fill material shall be compacted to provide the necessary
stability and resistance to erosion, scouring or settling.
D. Fill slopes shall be no steeper than one ( 1) vertical to two
2) horizontal ratio, unless substantiating data justifying steeper
slopes are submitted to and approved by the Building Inspector.
E. Fill shall be used only to the extent to which it does not
adversely affect adjacent properties.
6. For all buildings and structures regulated by this section, plans
submitted for building permits shall show the lowest floor or floodproofing
elevation of any propczed building, based upon National Geodetic Vertical
Datum of 1929.
7. All uses, activities and development occurring within the Flood
Plain Conservation District shall be undertaken only upon the issuance of a
permit.
8. Manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved
within the one hundred ( 100) year floodplain on sites ( i) outside of a
manufactured home park or subdivision, ( ii) in a new manufactured home park
or subdivision, ( iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park
or subdivision, or ( iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision
on which a manufactured home has incurred " substantial damage" as a
result of a flood, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that
the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base
flood elevation and shall be securlely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
Ord. 91- 31
Ord. 84- 5, 5/ 7/ 1984, § 15. 102; as amended by Ord. 87- 5, 12/ 7/ 1987, § 4; and
by Ord. 91- 3, 8/ 5/ 1991, § 3)
202. Anchoring.
1. All structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with accepted
engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse or other
movement, thus reducing the threat to life and property and decreasing the
52 - Page Revised 10/ 22/ 1991
is
11
8, § 202( 1), cont' d) ( 8, § 202( 1), cont' d)
possibility of the blockage of bridge openings and other restricted sections
of the watercourse.
2. All air ducts, large pipes and storage tanks located at or below
the Base Flood Elevation shall be firmly anchored in accordance with
accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation.
3. The requirements set forth in Section 610. 3 of Floodproof ing
Regulations and the F. E. M. A. Manual, " Manufacturing Home Installation in
Flood Hazard Areas, published September, 1985, shall be complied with.
4. All manufactured homes placed within the one hundred ( 100) year
floodplain shall have the lowest floor elevated above the one hundred ( 100)
year flood elevation and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of
over -the -top or frame ties to ground anchors. [ Ord. 91- 31
Ord. 84- 5, 5/ 7/ 1984, § 15. 103; as amended by Ord. 86- 7, 7/ 21/ 1986; and by
Ord. 91- 3, 8/ 5/ 1991, § 4)
203. Placement of Buildings and Structures.
1. Any additions permitted to nonconforming structures or new structures
permitted by variance shall be constructed and placed on the lot so
as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of water. In so doing,
consideration shall be given to their effect upon the flow and height of
flood waters. New structures shall be built in conformance with § 202 GA
and 2A).
Page Revised 10/ 22/ 1991 - 53 -
2. The following shall not be placed or caused to be placed in Flood
Plain Areas: fences, except two -wire fences, other structures or other
matter which may impede, retard or change the direction of the flow of
water, or that will catch or collect debris carried by such water,_ or-_t,hat
is placed where the natural flow of the stream or flood waters would carry
the same downstream to the detriment of either public or private property
adjacent to the Flood Plain Areas.
3. Under no circumstances shall buildings and/ or structures for the
following uses be permitted within the flood plain limits:
A. Hospitals ( public or private)
B. Nursing homes ( public or private)
C. Jails or prisons
D. New manufactured home parks or manufactured home subdivisions,
or substantial improvement to existing manufactured home parks..
Ord. 84- 5, 5/ 7/ 1984, § 15. 104; as amended by Ord. 87- 5, 12/ 7/ 1987)
204. Floors, Walls and Ceilings.
1. Wood flooring, used below the elevation of the Regulatory Flood
Elevation shall be installed to accommodate . lateral expansion of the
flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain, without incurring structural
damage to the building. Window frames, door frames, door jambs and other
components shall be made of metal or other water- resistant material.
2. All finished flooring below the elevation of the Regulatory Flood
Elevation shall be made of materials which are stable and resistant to
water damage resulting from submersion.
Page Revised 10/ 22/ 1991 - 53 -
8, § 204( 3)) 8, § 204( 3))
3. All carpeting or carpet cushions employed as a finished flooring
surface below the elevation of the Regulatory Flood Elevation shall be made
of materials which are, resistant to water damage resulting from submersion.
4. Other permitted floorings shall be in Class 1 as defined by
Section 901. 0 and applicable subsections of Floodproofing Regulations.
5. Plywood used below the elevation of the Regulatory Flood Elevation
shall be of an " exterior" or " marine" grade and of water- resistant or
waterproof variety.
6. Basement ceilingsbelow the elevation of the Regulatory Flood
Elevation shall have sufficient wet strength and be so installed as to
survive inundation.
7. Permitted wall/ ceiling materials shall be in Class 1 as defined by
Section 1001. 0 and applicable subsections of Floodproofing Regulations.
Ord. 84- 5, 5/ 7/ 1984, § 15. 105)
205. Electrical Systems.
1. All electrical water heaters, electric furnaces, and other critical
electrical installations shall be prohibited below the Regulatory Flood
Elevation.
2. Electrical distribution panels shall be placed at least three feet
3') above the Regulatory Flood Elevation.
3. Separate electrical circuits serving areas below the Regulatory
Flood Elevation shall be dropped from above.
4. All requirements of Chapter 12 of the Floodproofing Regulations
deemed applicable by the Douglass Township Engineer shall be complied with.
Ord. 84- 5, 5/ 7/ 1984, § 15. 106)
206. Plumbing.
1. Water heaters, furnaces and other critical mechanical installations
shall be prohibited below the elevation of the Regulatory Flood
Elevation.
2. No part of any on- site sewage disposal system shall be allowed
within the identified flood plain areas.
3. Water supply systems and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to preclude infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges
from the system into flood waters.
4. All gas and cit supply systems shall be designed to preclude the
infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the
systems into flood waters. Additional provisions shall be made for the
drainage of these systems in the event that flood water infiltration
occurs.
5. All requirements of Section 1302. 0 of Floodproofing Regulations
deemed applicable by the Douglass Township Engineer shall be complied with.
Specifically, in those blank spaces contained in Section 1302. 0 insert the
following measurements: I*
54 - Page Revised 10/ 22/ 1991
8, § 206( 5), cont' d) ( 8, § 206( 5), cont' d)
1302. 2. 2 - two feet ( 2');
1302. 3. 1 - three feet ( 3');
1302. 4. 1 - four feet ( 4').
Ord. 84- 5, 5/ 7/ 1984, § 15. 107)
207. Paintings and Adhesives.
1. Adhesives used below the elevation of the Regulatory Flood Elevation
shall have a bonding strength that is unaffected by inundation.
2. Doors and all wood trim used below the elevation of the Regulatory
Flood Elevation shall be sealed with a waterproof paint or similar product.
3. Paints or other finishes used below the elevation of the Regulatory
Flood Elevation shall be capable of surviving inundation.
Ord. 84- 5, 5/ 7/ 1984, § 15. 108)
208. Storage.
1. No materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or in times of
flooding, could be injurious to human, animal or plant life, shall be
stored in a floodplain area unless they . are properly anchored and/ or
floodproofed to preclude their causing damage to life and property.
2. All requirements of Chapter 11 of Floodproofing Regulations deemed
applicable by the Douglass Township Engineer shall be complied with.
Additionally, only items in Classes 1, X and XX shall be permitted as items
to be stored in structures within the floodplain areas.
3. The production or storage or use of any of the following dangerous
materials is strictly prohibited in floodplain areas:
A. Acetone
B. Ammonia
C. Benzene
D. Calcium carbide
E. Carbon Disulfide
F. Celluloid
G. Chlorine
H. Hydrochloric acid
I. Hydrocyanic acid
J. Magnesium
K. Nitricacid and oxides of nitrogen
L. Petroleum products ( gasoline, fuel oil, etc.)
M. Phosphorus
N. Potassium
0. Sodium
P. Sulphur and sulphur products
Q. Pesticides ( including insecticides, fungicides, and
rodenticides)
R. Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
S. Any materials stored in drums and any materials defined as
hazardous wastes by the Department of Environmental Resources. See 25
Pa. Code, Chapter 75, Subchapter D, Section 76261, relating the
Page Revised 10/ 22/ 1991 - 55 -
8, § 208, cont' d) 8, § 208, cont' d)
criteria for identification and listing of hazardous wastes, and all
amendments thereto.
Ord. 84- 5, 5/ 7/ 1984, § 15. 109)
209. Relief from Strict Compliance with Requirements of this Part.
1. If compliance with the elevation or f loodproof ing requirements
stated in this Part would result in an exceptional hardship for a landowner,
the Township Supervisors may, upon request, grant relief from the
strict application of the requirement.
2. Relief issued shall conform to the following general guidelines:
A. Substantial improvement of a residential structure which
cannot be elevated to one and one- half ( 131') feet above the base flood
elevation shall be elevated to the maximum extent possible. { Ord.
91- 31
B. Any modifications, alteration, reconstruction or improvement
of any kind to an existing residential structure, to an extent or
amount of less than fifty ( 50%) percent of its market value, which
cannot be elevated and/ or floodproofed to the base flood elevation
shall be elevated to the maximum extent possible. [ Ord. 91- 31
C. Substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure which
cannot be elevated or floodproofed to the required specifications
shall: ( 1) have the lowest floor ( including basement) elevated at
least one ( 1') foot above the base flood level, or ( 2) together with
attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below
the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components
having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and effects of buoyance. [ Ord. 91- 31
D. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement
of any kind to an existing nonresidential structure, to an extent or
amount less than fifty ( 50%) percent of its market value, which cannot
be elevated to the base flood elevation shall be elevated to the
maximum extent possible and floodproofed for the remaining height to
the base flood elevation in accordance with W2 class requirements
found in the flood proofing regulations. [ Ord. 91- 31
3. Requests for relief from the strict application of the provisions
of this Part may be granted by the Township in accordance with the following
procedures and criteria:
A. No relief shall be granted for any construction, development,
use or activity within any floodway that would cause any increase in
the Base Flood Elevatir -
B. If granted, relief shall involve only the least modification.
C. In granting relief, the Township may attach whatever reasonable
conditions and safeguards it considers necessary in order to
protect the public health, safety and welfare and to achieve the
objectives of this Chapter.
D. Whenever a relief is granted, the Township shall notify the
applicant in writing that:
56 - Page Revised 10/ 22/ 1991
8, § 209( 3)( D), cont' d) ( 8, § 209( 3)( D), cont' d)
1) the granting of relief may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
2) such relief may increase the risks to life and property.
E. In reviewing any request for relief, the Township shall
consider, but not be limited to, the following:
1) that failure to grant the relief would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant.
2) that the granting of the relief will not result in any
unacceptable or prohibited increased flood heights, additional
threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create
nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimization of the public, or
conflict with any other applicable local or state ordinances and
regulations.
3) that the granting of relief will not result in any
adverse impact on adjacent landowners either upstream or downstream.
F. A complete record of all requests for relief and related
actions shall be maintained by the Township. In addition, a report of
all requests for relief granted during the year shall be included in
the annual report to the Federal Insurance Administration.
G.` Under no circumstances shall any variance be granted which
would allow any of the development or activities specifically prohibited
in §§203( 3) and § 208( 3).
Ord. 84- 5, 5/ 7/ 1984, § 15; as amended by Ord. 91- 3, 8/ 5/ 1991, §§ 5, 6, 7, 8)
Page Revised 10/ 22/ 1991 - 57 -
8, § 301) ( 8, § 301)
Part 3
Permits and Administration
301. Administration. To insure that the aforementioned flood damage
controls are being employed in all new construction and improvements within
the Flood Plain Conservation District, the Building Inspector shall provide
the applicant information concerning the location of the District boundaries
relative to his proposed construction or improvements and the water
surface elevation of the one hundred year flood at the proposed construction
site. The source of this information shall be the Flood Insurance
Study for Douglass Township as prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, Federal Insurance Administration. ( Ord. 84- 5, 5/ 7/ 1984, § 15. 115)
302. Plan Requirements. In addition to the permit application
requirements normally required under the Douglass Township Zoning Chapter
and other applicable regulations, as amended, the Township Building Inspector
shall require the following specific information to be included as part
of the application for a building permit:
1. For structures to be elevated:
A. A plan showing the size of the proposed structures and its
relation to the lot where it is to be constructed.
B. A determination of elevations of the existing ground, proposed
finished ground, lowest floors, and floodproofing limits;
certified by a Registered Professional Engineer, Surveyor, or Architect.
Ord. 91- 31
2. For structures to be floodproofed in accordance with W2 class
requirements as indicated in the floodproofing regulations:
A. Plans showing details of all flood -proofing measures prepared
by a registered professional engineer or architect, and showing the
size of the proposed structure and its relation to the lot where it is
to be constructed.
B. A determination of elevations of existing ground, proposed
finished ground, lowest floors, and flood -proofing limits; certified
by a registered professional engineer, surveyor or architect.
C. A certificate prepared by the registered professional engineer
or architect who prepared the plans in subsection ( A), above,
that the structure in question, together with attendant utility and
sanitary facilities, is designed to satisfy the floodproofing requirements
of the W2 class in the above referenced Dublication.
D. All plans for structures which are intended to be made
watertight below the base flood level shall be prepared by a registered
professional engineer or architect who shall develop and/ or
review the structural design, specifications and plans for the construction
and shall certify that the design and methods of construction
are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting
the applicable provisions of § 209( 2)( C)( 2).
Ord. 91- 31
Page Revised 10/ 22/ 1991 - 59 -
8, § 302, cont' d) 8, § 302, cont' d)
3. For structures to be floodproofed in accordance with the W3 - W4
class requirements in the Office of the Chief of Engineers, U. S. Army,
publication number EP 1165 2 314, June, 1972, and as subsequently amended:
A. Plans showing details of all floodproofing measures, prepared
by a Registered Professional Engineer or Architect, and showingthe
size of the proposed structure and its relation to the lot where it is
to be constructed.
B. A determination of elevations of existing ground, proposed
finished ground, lowest floors, and floodproofing limits; certified by
a Registered Professional Engineer, Surveyor, or Architect.
C. A certificate prepared by the Registered Professional Engineer
or Architect who prepared the plans in A. above that the structure
in question, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities,
is designed to satisfy the floodproofing requirements of the
W3 - W4 classes in the above referenced publication.
Ord. 84- 5, 5/ 7/ 1984, § 15. 116; as amended by Ord. 87- 5, 12/ 7%1987, § 6; and
by Ord. 91- 3, 8/ 5/ 1991, §§ 9 and 10)
303_. Review by Technical Agencies. A copy of all applications and
plans for construction or development in the Flood Plain Conservation
District to be considered for approval shall be submitted by the Township
Building Inspector to the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources,
Montgomery County Conservation District, and appropriate municipal
agencies ( which could include, but isnot limited to, the Township Engineer),
ngineer),
for review and comment prior to the issuance of a building permit. !
The recommendations of all technical review agencies shall be considered by
the Township Building Inspector for possible incorporation into the proposed
plan. ( Ord. 84- 5, 5/ 7/ 1984, § 15. 117)
304. Other Permit Issuance Requirements. Prior to the issuance of
any building permit the Township Building Inspector shall review the
application for a permit to determine if all other necessary governmental
permits such as those required by State and Federal laws have been obtained
including those required by Act 537, the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act, the Pennsylvania Water Obstruction Act of 1913, and the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, Section 404, 33, U. S. C. 1334. No
permit shall be issued until this determination has been made. ( Ord. 84- 5,
5/ 7/ 1984, § 15. 118)
305. Insuection and Revocation.
1. During the construction period, the Township Building Inspector or
other authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the
work is progressing in compliance with the information provided in the
permit application and with all applicable Township laws and ordinances.
He shall make as many inspections during and upon completion of the work as
are necessary.
2. In the discharge of his duties, the Building Inspector shall have
the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or development in
the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of proper credentials, at
any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of this Chapter.
60 - Page Revised 10/ 22/ 1991
8, § 305( 3)) ( 8, § 305( 3))
3. In the event the Building Inspector discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or misrepresentation
by any applicant, the Building Inspector shall revoke the building permit
and report such fact to the Township for whatever action it considers
necessary.
4. A record of all such inspections and violations of this Chapter
shall be maintained.
Ord. 84- 5, 5/ 7/ 1984, § 15. 119)
306. Start of Construction. For purposes of implementation of these
provisions start of construction shall be considered as defined in this
Chapter. ( Ord. 84- 5, 5/ 7/ 1984, § 15. 120)
307. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate
any provision of this Part, upon conviction thereof in an action brought
before a district justice in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($ 1, 000. 00)
plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed ninety ( 90) days. Each day that a violation of
this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall be found to
have been violated shall constitute a separate offense. ( Ord. 84- 5,
5/ 7/ 1984; as amended by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986; by Ord. 96- 5, 11/ 4/ 1996; and
by Ord. 97- 2, 7/ 7/ 1997)
Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997 - 61 -
CHAPTER 9
GRADING AND EXCAVATION
Reserved to accommodate future ordinances)
63 -
CHAPTER 10
HEALTH AND SAFETY
Part 1
Vegetation Nuisances
101. Vegetative Growth a Nuisance Under Certain Conditions
102. Responsibility for Removing, Cutting or Trimming
103. Notice to Remove, Trim or Cut; Township May do Work and Collect
Costs
104. Penalties
Part 2
Storage of Abandoned Vehicles
201. Definitions
202. Motor Vehicle Nuisances Prohibited
203. Storage of Motor Vehicle Nuisances Permitted
204. Inspection; Notice to Comply
205. Authority to Remedy Noncompliance
206. Hearing
207. Penalties
208. Remedies Not Mutually Exclusive
Part 3
Hazardous Materials
301. Reimbursement for Extraordinary Expenses and Services in Connection
with Release or Threatened Release of Hazardous Materials
302. Administration
303. Enforcement
304. Unlawful Actual or Threatened Release of Hazardous Materials
305. Penalties
Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997 65 -
10, § 101) ( 10, § 101)
Part 1
Vegetation Nuisances
101. Vegetative Growth a Nuisance Under Certain Conditions. No
person, firm or corporation, owning or occupying any property within the
Township of Douglass shall permit any grass or weeds or any vegetation
whatsoever, not edible or planted for some useful or ornamental purpose, to
grow or remain upon such premises so as to exceed a height of six inches
6"), or to throw off any unpleasant or noxious odor, or to conceal any
filthy deposit, or to create or produce pollen. Any grass, weeds or other
vegetation growing upon any premises in the Township in violation of any of
the provisions of this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance and
detrimental to the health, safety, cleanliness and comfort of the inhabitants
of the Township. ( Ord. 72- 2, 6/ 21/ 1972; as revised by Ord. 86- 10,
12/ 1/ 1986)
102. Responsibility for Removing, Cutting or Trimming. The owner of
any premises, or the occupant of premises occupied by other than the owner,
shall remove, trim or cut all grass, weeds or other vegetation growing or
remaining upon such premises in violation of the provisions of § 101. ( Ord.
72- 2, 6/ 21/ 1972; as revised by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
103. Notice to Remove, Trim or Cut; Township May Do Work and Collect
Cost and Additional Amount. The Board of Supervisors, or any officer
or employee of the Township designated thereby for this purpose, is hereby
authorized to give notice, by personal service or by United States mail, to
the owner or occupant, as the case may be, of any premises whereon grass,
weeds or other vegetation is growing or remaining in violation of the
provisions of § 101 of this Part, directing and requiring such occupant to
remove, trim or cut such grass, weeds or vegetation so as to conform to the
requirements of this ordinance, within seven ( 7) days after issuance of
such notice. Whenever, in the judgment of the Enforcement Officer it shall
appear to be impracticable to give notice as above provided, either because
the owner or occupant cannot readily be found or because a search for the
owner or occupant would entail unreasonable delay, the Board of Supervisors
or any officer or employee of the Township designated thereby for that
purpose, may give notice by posting conspicuously on the property where
such nuisance exists, a notice or order directing and requiring that such
nuisance be abated within seven ( 7) days. In case any person, firm or
corporation shall neglect, fail or refuse to comply with such notice within
the period of time stated therein, the Board of Supervisors may order the
removal, trimming or cutting of such grass, weeds or vegetation, and the
cost thereof, together with a penalty of ten percent ( 10%) of the cost
thereof shall be collected by the Township from such person, firm or
corporation, in the manner provided by law. ( Ord. 72- 2, 6/ 21/ 1972; as
revised by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
104. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate
any provision of this Part, upon conviction thereof in an action brought
before a district justice in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($ 1, 000. 00)
plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997 - 67 -
10, § 104, cont' d) ( 10, § 104, cont' d)
imprisonment not to exceed ninety ( 90) days. Each day that a violation of
this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall be found to
have been violated shall constitute a separate offense. ( Ord. 72- 2,
6/' 21/ 1972; as revised by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986; as amended by Ord. 96- 5,
11/ 4/ 1996; and by Ord. 97- 2, 7/ 7/ 1997)
68 Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997
10, § 201)
Part 2
Storage of Abandoned Vehicles
10, § 201)
201. Definitions. As used in this Part, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears
from the context:
LESSEE - owner for the purpose of this Part when the lessor holds the
lessee responsible for maintenance and repairs.
MOTOR VEHICLE - any type of mechanical device, propelled by a motor,
in which persons or property may be transported upon public street or
highways, and including trailers or semi -trailers pulled thereby.
NUISANCE - any condition, structure, or improvement which shall
constitute a threat or potential threat to the health, safety, or welfare
of the citizens of the Township of Douglass.
OWNER - the actual owner, agent or custodian of the property on which
motor vehicles are stored, whether individual or partnership, association,
or corporation.
PERSON - a natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
or other legal entity.
In this Chapter, the singular shall include the plural; the plural
shall include the singular; and the masculine shall include the feminine
and the neuter.
Ord. 83- 4, 5/ 2/ 1983; as revised by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
202. Motor Vehicle Nuisances Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for
any person, owner or lessee to maintain a motor vehicle nuisance upon the
open private grounds of such person, owner or lessee within the Township.
A motor vehicle nuisance shall include any motor vehicle which is unable to
move under its own power and has any of the following physical defects:
1. Broken windshields, mirrors or other glass, with sharp edges.
2. One or more flat or open tires or tubes which could permit vermin
harborage.
3. Missing doors, windows, hood, trunk or other body parts which
could permit animal harborage.
4. Any body parts with sharp edges including holes resulting from
rust.
5. Missing tires resulting in unsafe suspension of the motor vehicle.
6. Upholstery which is torn or open which could permit animal and/ or
vermin harborage.
7. Broken headlamps or tail -lamps with sharp edges.
8. Disassembled chassis parts apart from the motor vehicle stored in
a disorderly fashion or loose in or on the vehicle.
10, § 202, cont' d) ( 10, § 202, cont' d)
9. Protruding sharp objects from the chassis.
10. Broken vehicle frame suspended from the ground in an unstable
manner.
11. Leaking or damaged oil pan or gas tank which could cause fire or
explosion.
12. Exposed battery containing acid.
13. Inoperable locking mechanism for doors or trunk.
14. Open or damaged floor boards including trunk and firewall.
15. Damaged bumpers pulled away from the perimeter of vehicle.
16. Broken grill with protruding edges.
17. Loose or damaged metal trim and clips.
18. Broken communication equipment antennae.
19. Suspended on unstable supports.
20. Such other defects which could threaten the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the Township.
Ord. 83- 4, 5/ 2/ 1983; as revised by Ord.. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
203. Storage of Motor Vehicle Nuisances Permitted. Any person,
owner or lessee who has one or more motor vehicle nuisances as defined in
202 above may store such vehicle( s) in the Township only in strict compliance
with the regulations provided herein. Such person, owner or lessee
must, first, apply for a permit for either temporary or permanent storage
and pay a fee to the Township such as may be provided from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors. The motor vehicle nuisance( s) must
be stored within a garage or other enclosed building or, outside within a
opaqued fence at least six feet ( 6') high which is locked at all times when
unattended. With the special approval of the Board of Supervisors motor
vehicle nuisances may also be stored outside in an area enclosed by a chain
link fence, at least six feet ( 6') high, screened by shrubbery around the
perimeter to the height of the fence, with an unobstructed gate capable of
admitting fire or emergency equipment. Such gate shall remain locked at
all times when unattended. In addition all gas and oil or other flammable
liquid shall be removed from the motor vehicle and it shall be kept free of
vermin infestation while being stored. The total area of storage of motor
vehicle nuisances may not exceed four hundred ( 400) square feet.
Nothing herein shall be construed to permit the storage of motor
vehicle nuisances contrary to the provisions of the Township Zoning Ordinance.
Ord. 83- 4, 5/ 2/ 1983; as revised by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
204. Inspection; Notice to Compl
1. The Enforcement Officer is hereby empowered to inspect grounds on
which motor vehicles are stored to determine if there is compliance with
the provisions of this Part. If noncompliance with the provisions of this
Part constitutes a nuisance, or if any condition, structure, or improvement
70 -
10, § 204, cont' d) ( 10, § 204, cont' d)
poses a threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the public, he shall
issue a written notice to be served by registered or certified mail upon
the owner of said premises, or, if the owner' s whereabouts or identity be
unknown, by posting the notice conspicuously upon the offending premises.
2. Said notice shall specify the condition or structure or improvement
complained of, and shall require the owner to commence to remove or
otherwise rectify the condition or structure or improvement as set forth
therein within ten ( 10) days of mailing or posting of said notice, and
thereafter, to fully comply with the requirements of the notice within a
reasonable time.
Ord. 83- 4, 5/ 2/ 1983; as revised by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
205. Authority to Remedy Noncompliance. If the owner of grounds on
which motor vehicles are stored does not comply with the notice to abate
the conditions, within the time limit prescribed, the Township shall have.
the authority to take measures to correct the conditions and collect the
cost of such corrections plus ten percent ( 10%) of all costs. The Township,
in such event and pursuant to its statutory or otherwise authorized
police powers, shall have the right and power to enter upon the offending
premises to accomplish the foregoing. ( Ord. 83- 4, 5/ 2/ 1983; as revised by
Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
206. Hearing.
1. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Enforcement Officer
may request and shall then be granted a hearing before the Board of Supervisors;
provided, he files with the Board of Supervisors within ten ( 10)
days after notice of the Enforcement Officer' s decision, a written petition
requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds
therefor. The hearing shall commence not later than thirty ( 30) days after
the date on which the petition was filed unless postponed for sufficient
cause.
2. After such hearing, the Board of Supervisors shall sustain, modify
or overrule the action of the Enforcement Officer.
Ord. 83- 4, 5/ 2/ 1983; as revised by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
207. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate
any provision of this Part, upon conviction thereof in an action brought
before a district justice in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($ 1, 000. 00)
plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed ninety ( 90) days. Each day that a violation of
this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall be found to
have been violated shall constitute a separate offense. ( Ord. 83- 4,
5/ 2/ 1983; as revised by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986; as amended by Ord. 96- 5,
11/ 4/ 1996; and by Ord. 97- 2, 7/ 7/ 1997)
208. Remedies Not Mutually Exclusive. The remedies provided herein
for the enforcement of this Part, or any remedy provided by law, shall not
be deemed mutually exclusive; rather they may be employed simultaneously or
consecutively, at the option of the Board of Supervisors. ( Ord. 83- 4,
5/ 2/ 1983; as revised by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997 - 71 -
t
10, § 301) ( 10, § 301)
Part 3
Hazardous Materials
301. Reimbursement for Extraordinary Expenses and Services in
Connection with Release or Threatened Release of Hazardous Materials. The
owner, manager or person in control of hazardous material shall reimburse
the Township, its fire company or other emergency services in connection
with the release or threatened release of hazardous materials in the
Township. Such expenses shall include all costs and fees for labor,
materials and/ or equipment used to monitor, extinguish, confine, neutralize,
contain, clean or remove any hazardous material that is or may be
involved in a fire or release or threatened release into the air, ground or
water, and shall include protective actions including evacuation to protect
the public health, safety and welfare. Extraordinary service shall include
service performed by Township departments or employees or any public or
private organization to mitigate a hazard or potential hazard or to provide
protective action. ( Ord. 94- 4, 6/ 6/ 1994, § 1)
302. Administration. Reimbursement for such extraordinary expenses
and services shall be paid to the Township. The Township, in turn, shall
distribute such reimbursement to itself and other organizations as appropriate.
( Ord. 94- 4, 6/ 6/ 1994, § 2)
303. Enforcement. The Township may enforce the provisions of this
Part by civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction. Reimbursement
shall include reasonable attorney fees. ( Ord. 94- 4, 6/ 6/ 1994, § 3)
304. Unlawful Actual or Threatened Release of Hazardous Materials.
It shall be unlawful to intentionally or negligently cause or permit the
actual or threatened release of hazardous materials in Douglass Township.
Ord. 94- 4, 6/ 6/ 1994, § 4)
305. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate
any provision of this Part, upon conviction thereof in an action brought
before a district justice in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($ 1, 000. 00)
plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed ninety ( 90) days. Each day that a violation c
this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall be found to
have been violated shall constitute a separate offense. ( Ord. 94- 4,
6/ 6/ 1994, § 5; as amended by Ord. 96- 5, 11/ 4/ 1996; and by Ord. 97- 2,
7/ 7/ 1997)
Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997 - 72. 1 -
CHAPTER 11
HOUSING
Part 1
Tenant Occupancy Report
101. Purposes
102. Definitions and Interpretation
103. Reports by Landlords
104. Reports by Persons Upon Becoming Landlords
105. Reports of Changes in Use or Occupancy
106. Duties of the Township Secretary
107. Enforcement and Remedies
Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997 - 73 -
11, § 101) ( I1, § 101)
Part 1
Tenant Occupancy Reports
101. Purposes. This Part is enacted to provide for the uniform and
equitable distribution of the tax levies in the Township of Douglass and
upon the inhabitants thereof and to promote the health, safety, morals and
general welfare of the inhabitants of the Township of Douglass. ( Ord.
72- 1, 5/ 3/ 1972; as revised by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
102. Definitions and Interpretation. As used in this Part, the
following terms shall have the meanings indicated, unless a different
meaning clearly appears from the context:
BUSINESS UNIT - a parcel of real estate, with or without improvements
located thereon utilized by any person or persons for any commercial
activity or purpose.
DWELLING UNIT - one or more rooms used for living and sleeping purposes
arranged for occupancy by one family or by one or more persons.
LANDLORD - a lessor, or person who acts as agent for the lessor, of
any parcel of real estate located in the Township, or a lessor, or person
who acts as agent for the lessor, of any improvements on real estate or any
building located in the Township.
PERSON - any individual, partnership, association, firm or corporation.
TENANT - a person who has the use, either by himself or with others,
of a dwelling unit or a business unit owned by a person other than himself,
for a period exceeding thirty ( 30) days.
Ord. 72- 1, 5/ 3/ 1972; as revised by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
103. Reports by Landlords. Within thirty ( 30) days from the effective
date of this Part, each landlord shall submit to the Township
Secretary, a report form supplied by the Tax Collector, which includes the
following information:
1. List of the dwelling units and business units owned by the landlord,
located within the Township of Douglass limits, whether occupied or
not occupied;
2. Address of each dwelling unit and business unit;
3. Brief description of each dwelling unit or business unit;
4. Whether or not said dwelling unit or business unit is inhabited or
utilized by tenants;
5. Names of the tenant or tenants utilizing the aforementioned
dwelling unit or business unit, if any.
Ord. 72- 1, 5/ 3/ 1972; as revised by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
75 -
11, § 104) ( 11, § 104)
104. Reports by Persons upon Becoming Landlords. After the effective
date of this Part, any person who becomes a landlord of any parcel
of real estate or any improvement on real estate or building located in the
Township of Douglass by agreement of sale, by deed, or by any other means,
shall, within thirty ( 3,0) days thereafter, report to the Township Secretary
the information and data set forth in § 103 above, and on forms to be
provided by the Tax Collector. ( Ord. 72- 1, 5/ 3/ 1972; as revised by Ord.
86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
105. Reports of Changes in Use or Occupancy. After the effective
date of this Part, each and every landlord of property within the Township
of Douglass shall report to the Township Secretary on a report form to be
supplied by the Tax Collector, any change in the use or occupancy of any
dwelling unit or business unit owned by such landlord. The reported change
shall include the name or names of new tenants of such dwelling unit or
business unit, the date when such change was effected, and the forwarding
address of the old tenant or tenants if known. A landlord of a hotel, inn
or boarding house shall not be required to report a person as a " tenant"
until that person has resided in such landlord' s establishment for a period
exceeding thirty ( 30) days. In the event that a dwelling unit or business
unit was used or utilized by a tenant and then becomes vacant, this change
shall also be reported to the Township Secretary. All reports required by
this section shall be made within ten ( 10) days after a landlord has
knowledge that such a unit has had a change in occupancy or has become
vacant. ( Ord. 72- 1, 5/ 3/ 1972; as revised by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
106. Duties of the Township Secretary. The Township Secretary,
under the authority of this Part, shall:
1. Maintain on file at the Township office, the names of the landlords
owning dwelling units and business units in the Township of Douglass,
said list to include the names of the current tenants of said dwelling
units and business units;
2. Maintain a supply of forms for landlords to use in making reports
to the Township Secretary as required by §§ 103, 104, and 105 of this Part;
3. Notify the Chief of Police and the Fire Chief of the Township of
the address and description of any dwelling unit or business unit that is
vacant, unoccupied and not in use.
Ord. 72- 1, 5/ 3/ 1972; as revised by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
107. Enforcement and Remedies.
1. Enforcement Notice.
A. If it appears to the Township that a violation of this Part
has occurred, the Township shall initiate enforcement proceedings by
sending an enforcement notice as provided in this Section.
B. The enforcement notice shall be sent to the violator and, if
applicable, the owner of record of the parcel on which the violation
has occurred, to any person who has filed a written request to receive
enforcement notices regarding that parcel and to any other person
requested in writing by the owner of record.
76 - Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997
u
I1, § 107( 1)( C)) 11, § 107( 1)( C))
C. An Enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
1) The name of the violator and, if applicable, the owner
of record and any other person against whom the Township intends
to take action.
2) The location of the violation and, if applicable, the
property in violation.
3) The specific violation with a description of the
requirements which have not been met, citing in each instance the
applicable provision of this Part.
4) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be completed.
5) That the recipient of the notice has the right to
appeal to the Board of Supervisors within a period of ten ( 10)
days.
6) That the failure to comply with the notice within the
time specified, unless extended by appeal to the Board of Supervisors,
constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly
described.
2. Enforcement Remedies.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has
violated or permitted the violation of the provisions of this Part
shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Township, pay a judgment of not more than six
hundred dollars ($ 600. 00) plus all court costs, including reasonable
attorney fees incurred by the Township as a result thereof. No
judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the
date of determination of a violation by the district justice. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township
may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil
procedure. Each day that a violation continues or each Section of
this Part which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute
a separate offense.
B. Nothing contained in this Section shall be construed or
interpreted to grant to any person or entity other than the Township
the right to commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this
Section.
C. District justices shall have initial jurisdiction over
proceedings brought under this Section.
Ord. 72- 1, 5/ 3/ 1972; as revised by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986; as amended by
Ord. 96- 5, 11/ 4/ 1996; and by Ord. 97- 2, 7/ 7/ 1997)
Page Added 7/ 7/ 1997 - 76. 1 -
CHAPTER 12
LIBRARIES
Reserved to accommodate future ordinances)
77 -
CHAPTER 13
LICENSES, PERMITS AND GENERAL BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Part 1
Peddlers and Solicitors
101. Definitions
102. License Required
103. Application for License
104. License Fee
105. Term of License
106. License to Contain Information and be Displayed
107. Hours of Operation
108. Prohibited Acts
109. Licensee May Not Operate from Fixed Location
110. Supervision of Licenses, Records to be Maintained
111. Grounds for Suspension of License
112. Excessive Noises Prohibited
113. Penalties
Part 2
Junk Yards
201. Definitions
202. Requirements
203. License Application; Fee
204. Record of Purchases to be Kept
205. Penalties
Part 3
Cable Television Franchise
301. Definitions
302. Grant of Authority
303. Franchise Term
304. Franchise Revocation Procedure
305. Franchise Fee
306. Insurance - Indemnity
307. Subscriber Fees and Records
308. System Description and Service
309. Street Occupancy
310. Employment Requirements
311. Emergency Cablecasting Authority
312. Notices
313. Subdivisions
314. Rules and Regulations
315. Assignability
316. Regulation of Basic Cable Service and Rates Charged Therefor
Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996 - 79 -
317. Finding of Lack of Effective Competition
318. Procedural Requirement
319. Modifications, Revisions and Enactments
Part 4
Police Escort and False Alarm Service Fees
401. Fee for Police Escort Service
402. Fee for False Alarm Service
Part 5
Parades
501. Title
502. Definitions
503. Permit Required
504. Permit Applications
505. Standards for Permit Issuance
506. Time Limit for Decision; Notice of Disapproval
507. Appeals
508. Alternate Permits
509. Notice to Officials
510. Contents of Permit
511. Duties of Permittee
512. Interference; Parking on Route
513. Revocation of Permit
514. Penalties
Appendix A. Application for Parade Permit
Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997
13, § 101) (
13, 5101)
Part 1
Peddlers and Solicitors
101. Definitions.
1. SOLICITING - the seeking or taking of contracts or orders for any
goods, wares, services or merchandise for future delivery, or for subscriptions
or contributions, upon any of the streets or sidewalks; or from house
to house; or by visitation to private residence; or by entering in or upon
private property within the Township of Douglass and shall further mean the
seeking or taking of contracts or orders for home or other building repairs;
improvement and alterations; and also orders or contracts for any
mechanical, electrical, plumbing or heating device or equipment for house;
or other building improvements or repairs, upon or from the places aforesaid
within the said Township.
2. PEDDLING - the selling or offering for sale of any goods, wares,
services or merchandise for immediate delivery which the person selling or
offering for sale carries with him in traveling, or has in his possession
or control, upon any of the streets or sidewalks; or from house to house;
or by visitation to private residences; or by entering in or upon private
property; within the said Township.
3. Provided: the words " soliciting" and " peddling" shall not apply:
A. To farmers seeking or taking orders for the sale of their own
products.
B. To the seeking or taking of orders by any manufacturer or
producer for the sale of bread and bakery products, meat and meat
products, or milk or milk products.
C. To the sale of goods, wares and merchandise donated by the
owners thereof, the proceeds whereof are to be applied to any charitable
or philanthropic purpose.
D. To any honorably discharged soldier, sailor or marine of the
military service who complies with the Act of Assembly of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania of 1867, April 8, P. L. 50, as amended, and who
procures from the Prothonotary of the proper county a certificate in
pursuance of the said Act of Assembly.
E. To the seeking or taking of orders, by insurance agents or
brokers, licensed under the insurance laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania for insurance.
F. To persons, corporations, partnerships and associations,
their agents or employees, who have complied with the provisions of
the Act of Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of 1935, P. L.
644, as amended, governing solicitations for charitable, benevolent,
patriotic or other purposes.
G. To any person taking orders for merchandise from dealers or
merchants, for resale to an ultimate consumer.
4. SOLICITOR - any person who shall engage in soliciting as hereinabove
defined.
81 -
13, § 101, cont' d) ( 13, § 101, cont' d)
5. PEDDLER - any person who shall engage in peddling as hereinabove
defined.. - •
6. PERSON any natural person, association, partnership, firm,
organization or corporation.
7. In this Part, the singular shall include the plural and the
masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
Ord. 33, 11/ 8/ 1971, § 1)
102. License Required. No person shall engage in soliciting or
peddling in the Township of Douglass without first having taken out a
license as herein provided. ( Ord. 33, 11/ 8/ 1971, § 2)
103. Application for License. Every person desiring to engage in
soliciting or peddling in the Township of Douglass shall first make application
to the Secretary of the Board of Supervisors for a license. If such
person shall also be required to obtain a license from any county officer,
he shall, on making such application exhibit a valid county license. The
said application shall be upon a blank provided by the Township Secretary
and shall contain at least the following information verified by oath or
affirmation.
1. Full name of the applicant and local address, if any.
2. Permanent address.
3. Name of employer or a statement that such applicant is selfemployed.
0 4. The nature of the goods, wares, servic-es or merchandise offered
for sale.
5. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been
convicted of any crime, and if the answer is in the affirmative, the nature
of the offense or offenses and the punishment or punishments imposed there.
6. The type of vehicle to be used, if any.
7. Upon request, the applicant shall also submit to fingerprinting
and furnish a photograph,
Provided: Where a person makes application for himself and' one or
more helpers, all applicable personal information specified above shall be
given for each helper and verified or affirmed by oath or affirmation by
him and an individual license shall be required for each helper. No
license under this Part shall be transferable from one person to another.
Ord. 33, 11/ 8/ 1971, § 3)
104. License Fee. No license shall be issued under this Part until
the fee established by resolution of the Board of Supervisors shall be paid
to the Township Secretary and it shall be for the use of the Township. A
separate application shall be filed and a separate permit fee shall be paid
by each person who shall actually conduct the soliciting or peddling and
shall apply where an employer desires to secure licenses for his employees,
agents or servants. ( Ord. 33, 11/ 8/ 1971, § 4; as amended by Ord. 86- 10, •
12/ 1/ 1986)
82 -
13, § 105) (
13, § 105)
105. Term of License. The license granted pursuant to this Part
shall be valid for thirty ( 30) days after the date of such license and upon
the expiration of any license, if the person holding the same shall desire
to continue or renew soliciting or peddling, he shall be required to file a
new application for a permit and pay a new license fee. Such licenses may
be issued, in advance, for consecutive thirty ( 30) day periods not exceeding
twelve in number, upon payment, in advance, of the fee established
by resolution of the Board, for each thirty ( 30) day period provided in
104 hereof. ( Ord. 33, 11/ 8/ 1971, § 5; as amended by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
106. License to Contain Information and be Displayed. Such license
when issued shall state, inter alia, the products to be sold or services to
be rendered by the licensee. Every solicitor or peddler shall at all
times, when engaged in soliciting or peddling in the Township of Douglass,
openly display such license upon his person to make it visible to all
police officers, Township officials and citizens. No solicitor or peddler
shall engage in selling any product or service not mentioned on such
license. ( Ord. 33, 11/ 8/ 1971, § 6; as amended by Ord. 96- 1, 1/ 5/ 1996)
107. Hours of Operation. No person licensed as a solicitor or
peddler under this Part shall engage in soliciting or peddling on any day
of the week before nine o' clock, ante meridian, or after eight o' clock,
post meridian. During the time of the year when Eastern Standard Time is
effective, the aforesaid hours shall be Eastern Standard Time, and during
the time of the year when Daylight Saving Time is effective, the aforesaid
hours shall be Daylight Saving Time. ( Ord. 33, 11/ 8/ 1971, § 7)
108. Prohibited Acts. No person
under this Part shall park any vehicle
or alleys of the Township in order to
goods, wares, services or merchandise;
deposit any refuse on any such streets
such person maintain or keep a street
vehicle upon any street or alley in the
in order to sell therefrom to persons
Ord. 33, 11/ 8/ 1971, § 8)
licensed as a solicitor or peddler
upon any of the streets, highways,
sort, rearrange or clean any of his
nor shall any such person place or
highways or alleys; nor shall any
or curbstone market by parking. any
Township for longer than necessary
residing in the immediate vicinity.
109. Licensee May Not Operate from Fixed Location. No person
licensed as a solicitor or peddler under this Part shall occupy any fixed
location upon any of the sidewalks or the streets, highways, alleys or
sidewalks of the Township for the purpose of soliciting or peddling with or
without any stand or counter. ( Ord. 33, 11/ 8/ 1971, § 9)
110. Supervision of Licensees, Records to be Maintained. The
Secretary shall keep a record of all licenses issued under this Part and
the Chief of Police shall apply daily for list of licenses issued hereunder
since the previous day. The Chief of Police shall supervise the activities
of all holders of such licenses. ( Ord. 33, 11/ 8/ 1971, § 10)
111. Grounds for Suspension of License. Any license issued under
this Part may be suspended or revoked at any time by the Secretary of the
Township of Douglass upon proof being furnished to him that the application
for the license contained false information or that the applicant or
Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996 - 83 -
13, § 111, cont' d) ( 13, § 111, cont' d)
licensee was convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude after the
issuance of such license and that the licensee was convicted of disorderly
conduct under any law of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any ordinance
of the Township of Douglass. ( Ord. 33, 11/ 8/ 1971, § 11)
112. Excessive Noises Prohibited. No person licensed as a solicitor
or peddler under this Part shall hawk or cry his wares or services upon any
of the streets or sidewalks of the Township nor shall he use any loud
speaker, bell, whistle or other device for announcing his presence by which
the public is annoyed. ( Ord. 33, 11/ 8/ 1971, § 12)
113. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate
any provision of this Part, upon conviction thereof in an action brought
before a district justice in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($ 1, 000. 00)
plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed ninety ( 90) days. Each day that a violation of
this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall be found to
have been violated shall constitute a - separate offense. ( Ord. 33,
11/ 8/ 1971, § 13; as amended by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986; by Ord. 96- 1, 1 5 1996;
by Ord. 96- 5, 11/ 4/ 1996; and by Ord. 97- 2, 7/ 7/ 1997)
is
84 - Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997
13, § 201)
Part 2
Junk Yards
5201. Definitions.
13, $ 201)
JUNK DEALER - any person who shall keep and maintain as yard, covered
or uncovered, space or place, within the limits of Douglass Township,
Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, for the purpose of and engaging in the
business of buying or selling, exchanging or storing of old or used
materials, metal, bottles, old glassware, old tinware or paper, iron, old
or wrecked automobiles, rags or any other such type of material commonly
called and referred to as " junk".
JUNK MATERIALS - any used metal, both ferrous and non- ferrous, old or
wrecked automobiles, bottles, old glassware, old tinware, paper, rags, iron
or any such materials commonly called and referred to as " junk materials".
JUNK YARD - any such yard, area, space or place, either covered or
uncovered, maintained and actually used for the purpose of accumulation, or
the buying or selling, storing or exchanging of any such junk materials.
PERSON - shall mean and include
hereby declared to mean any person
trust, club, society or corporation.
Ord. 12, 11/ 6/ 1961, § 1)
202. Requirements.
both the singular and plural, and is
co -partnership, association, firm,
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to locate, establish, maintain
or operate a junk yard within four hundred feet ( 400') of any Township,
County or State highways, or any dwelling house unless said dwelling house
is owned by the same person who holds title to the land upon which the junk
yard is located or proposed to be located.
2. No junk shall be stored in any junk yard, unless the same shall be
in a building or enclosed yard, and if such junk shall be stored in a junk
yard, such yard shall be enclosed by a fence at least eight feet ( 8') in
height, constructed of fireproof material and so constructed to retain all
junk materials within such junk yard, and also that such junk stored in
such enclosed yard if combustible or inflammable shall not be stored closer
than three feet ( 3') to such fence enclosing such yard; provided, however,
that such fencing shall not be required along railroad sidings.
3. All combustible materials and all inflammable rubbish, leaves,
weeds, grass, dead trees, brush and other materials not being stored
thereon as a part of the business conducted thereon shall be removed from
premises.
4. All storerooms and garages in junk yard shall be kept free from
rubbish, waste materials and old rags and papers not being stored therein
as a part of the business conducted thereon.
5. All oil, gasoline, oily waste and other greasy material shall be
kept in metal waste cans.
85 -
13, § 202, cont' d) ( 13, § 202, cont' d)
6. Fire extinguishers shall be installed and kept in close proximity
to areas within such junk yard wherein trash, metal or other waste
materials may be burned; and an unobstructed fire truck lane of at least
ten feet ( 10') in width into such yard from the main entrance thereof shall
be kept and maintained therein.
7. Such junk yard shall be checked and serviced at reasonable intervals
in the effective extermination of rodents in accordance with health
department standards.
8. Separate areas shall be established and maintained at reasonably
safe distances from buildings and scrap materials in the junk yard to be
used for the burning of old or wrecked automobiles and other junk materials
in such reasonable manner as to create the least possible detriment and
annoyance to occupants of adjoining properties.
9. Papers, rags and other loose junk materials shall be handled,
stored and maintained in such a way as to prevent the same from becoming
loose in such junk yard.
10. Whenever any motor vehicle shall be received on such premises as
junk, all gasoline and oil shall be drained and removed therefrom and none
shall be permitted to remain or be stored upon the premises. Further, all
such received junk motor vehicles frames shall be reduced to a baled
condition or removed from the premises within three ( 3) months after the
purchase or receipt thereof.
11. Every junk dealer shall keep a record in English of every purchase
or sale by him of any junk, a description of each article, the date and
hour of purchase and/ or sale and the person who bought or sold said junk. •
Ord. 12, 11/ 6/ 1961, § 2; as amended by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
203. License Application; Fee.
1. No person shall engage in business as a junk dealer in the Township
of Douglass without first .having obtained a license from the Township
Secretary for which license the fee, as established by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors shall be paid, for each and every calendar year, such
fee to be for the use of the Township of Douglass. Such license shall be
renewed annually on or before the first day of each year. Provided in any
case where a junk dealer' s business shall be established in the Township of
Douglass after the 30th day of June, in any year, the license fee payable
by the junk dealer for the remainder of the year shall be one- half (}) the
aforementioned yearly rate. No license issued under this Part shall be
transferrable from one person to another person. No person licensed under
this Part shall keep more than one place of business within the Township of
Douglass, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania for the purpose of buying,
selling and dealing in junk. Nor shall any such person engage in business
as a junk dealer in any other place than the place designated upon this
license. The license shall be posted conspicuously upon the premises
licensed thereunder.
2. Any person desiring to obtain a license to engage in business as a
junk dealer shall make application therefor, in person, to the Township
Secretary. The applicant shall supply his name, place and date of birth, •
address, residence, the address at which he will receive notices under this
13, § 203, cont' d) ( 13, § 203, cont' d)
Part, and statement as to whether he has been ever convicted in any jurisdiction
of any crime and if so, what crime, where and when.
Ord. 12, 11/ 6/ 1961; as amended by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
204. Record of Purchases to be Kept. Every dealer in junk shall
keep at his place of business a record of all purchases in accordance with
accepted accounting practices. ( Ord. 12, 11/ 6/ 1961, § 3)
205. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate
any provision of this Part, upon conviction thereof in an action brought
before a district justice in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($ 1, 000. 00)
plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed ninety ( 90) days. Each day that a violation of
this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall be found to
have been violated shall constitute a separate offense. ( Ord. 12,
11/ 6/ 1961; as amended by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986; by Ord. 96- 5, 11/ 4/ 1996; and
by Ord. 97- 2, 7/ 7/ 1997)
Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997 - 87 -
13, § 301)
13, § 301)
Part 3
Cable Television Franchise*
301. Definitions. For purposes of this Part the following terms,
phrases, words, abbreviations and their derivations shall have the meaning
given herein.
BASIC SERVICE - the simultaneous delivery by the grantee to television
receivers ( or any other suitable types of audio -video communication
receivers) of all subscribers in Douglass Township, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania, of all signals of over -the -air television broadcasters
required by the FCC to be carried by a CATV System as defined hereinabove.
COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION SYSTEM or CATV SYSTEM - any facility
which ( 1) in whole or in part receives directly or indirectly over the air
and amplifies or otherwise modifies the signals and programs broadcast by
one or more television and AM and FM radio stations and distributes such
signals by wire or cable to subscribing members of the public who pay for
such services; ( 2) distributes by cable or wire, news, weather and other
information including Civil Defense -type information, as an incidental part
of CATV service to all subscribers; ( 3) distributes any and all other
lawful communications of a specialized nature, to include any special
television program or event for which a separate and distinct charge is
made to the subscriber in a manner commonly known and referred to as pay
television, as may be permitted by the Federal, State and/ or local
regulatory agencies.
FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION or FCC - that agency as presently
constituted by the Communications Act of 1934 as amended or any successor
agency.
FRANCHISE - the non- exclusive rights granted hereunder to construct
and operate a cable television system along the public ways within all
areas in Douglass Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
GRANTEE - Eastern Pennsylvania Cablevision, Inc., a Pennsylvania
corporation and its lawful successor, transferee or assignee.
GRANTOR - Douglass Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, in its
present incorporated form, or in any form which may subsequently be
adopted.
GROSS SUBSCRIBER REVENUES - those revenues derived from the supplying
of basic service and net revenue from pay service. Basic service revenues
and net revenue from pay service do not include revenues derived from
leased channels, advertising, installation charges or miscellaneous income,
including late charges, sale of obsolete equipment and sale of converters,
derived from the CATV System in Douglass Township, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania.
Consult Appendix C of the codification for the names and dates of other
franchisees or transfers of franchise.
13, § 301, cont' d) ( 13, § 301, cont' d)
NET REVENUE FROM PAY SERVICE - those revenues derived from the supplying
of pay service less the direct cost to grantee for the carriage and
delivery of pay service to the grantee for local distribution.
PAY SERVICE - the delivery by the grantee to television receivers ( or
any other suitable type of audio -video communication receivers) of
grantee' s subscribers in Douglass Township, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania, of signals for which a per program or per channel charge is
made by grantee.
PUBLIC WAY - the surface, the air space above the surface and the area
below the surface of any public street, highway, lane, path, alley, sidewalk,
boulevard, drive or other public right- of- way, including public
utility easements or rights- of- way, now or hereafter held by Douglass
Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, and the grantee to the use
thereof for the purpose of installing and maintaining the grantee' s cable
television system.
SUBSCRIBER - any person who contracts to purchase the regular service
and/ or any one or more of such other services as may be provided by the
grantee' s CATV System.
Ord. 80- 3, 11/ 17/ 1980, Art. 1)
302. Grant of Authority. There hereby is granted to grantee and its
successors and assigns the non- exclusive right and privilege to construct,
maintain and operate in, over, under and along the present and future
public ways, poles, lines, cables, necessary wiring and other apparatus for
the purpose of receiving, amplifying, transmitting and distributing television,
electronic, electrical and radio signals, audio and video, to the ,
inhabitants of Douglass Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania. Notwithstanding
anything to the contrary contained herein, grantee shall not
disturb any public ways without prior written consent of grantor, which
consent shall not be withheld unreasonably. Grantee shall obtain occupancy
permits as required from the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or
from Douglass Township, as the case may be. ( Ord. 80- 3, 11/ 17/ 1980, Art.
2)
303. Franchise Term. The term of this franchise shall be one year
and shall be renewed automatically each year without any further action of
grantor provided that the fees referred to in § 305 hereof are paid currently
to grantor. ( Ord. 80- 3, 11/ 17/ 1980, Art. 3)
304. Franchise Revocation Procedure.
1. Whenever grantee shall willfully fail, refuse or neglect to
operate or maintain the CATV System in accordance with the terms of this
Part or to comply with the conditions of any street occupancy permit, or in
any other way violate the terms and conditions of this franchise, the
grantor may notify the grantee in writing setting forth the nature and
facts of such noncompliance it believes have occurred. If within thirty
30) days following such written notification the grantee has not furnished
proof that corrective action has been taken or is being actively and
expeditiously pursued, or evidence that the alleged violations did not
occur, the grantor shall place a request for termination of this Part on •
the agenda of the next regular meeting of the Board of Supervisors.
13, § 304, cont' d) ( 13, § 304, cont' d)
2. If, after considering the grantor' s request for termination of
this Part and hearing all interested parties, the Board of Supervisors
determines that noncompliance of grantee was with just cause, it shall
direct grantee to comply within such time and manner and on such terms and
conditions as are reasonable.
3. If the Board of Supervisors determines that such noncompliance was
without just cause, then - the Board of Supervisors may adopt a resolution
that forthwith terminates this Part and directs the grantee to remove
promptly from the public ways all of its facilities within six ( 6) months
from the date the grantee receives the written copy of said resolution or
to find a purchaser for the CATV System reasonably acceptable to Douglass
Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
No revocation or termination of this Part shall be effected unless the
Board of Supervisors, at any regular or special meeting at which all
interested parties have had an opportunity to be heard, shall have adopted
a resolution setting forth the reasons for the termination.
5. The grantee shall not be declared at fault or be subject to any
sanction under any provision of this Part in any case in which performance
of any such provision is prevented for reasons beyond the grantee' s control.
In the event performance by the grantee of any provision of this
Part is prevented for reasons beyond the grantee' s control, the subject
provision of this Part or any related provision shall be renegotiated.
Ord. 80- 3, 11/ 17/ 1980, Art. 4)
305. Franchise Fee.
1. The grantee shall pay to the grantor, in consideration of the
granting of the franchise to use the public ways for the operations of a
CATV System, three percent ( 3%) of its annual gross subscriber revenues
from the residents of grantor during the period of its operation under this
Part. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, in the
event that grantee voluntarily ( for purposes hereof voluntarily shall mean
without any order, instruction or approval of the FCC) pays a percentage of
gross subscriber revenues in excess of three percent ( 3%) as provided
herein to any municipality within grantee' s area of operation in eastern
Pennsylvania, the grantee shall pay the same percentage to the grantor. If
the grantee pays a percentage of gross subscriber revenues in excess of
three percent ( 3%) to any municipality in its service area in eastern
Pennsylvania pursuant to an order, instruction or approval of the FCC,
grantor shall have the right to petition and apply to the FCC for a similar
higher percentage increase which, if approved by the FCC, shall become the
percentage paid by the grantee to the grantor pursuant to the terms hereof.
Provided, however, if the grantee substantially changes the manner of
charging for basic service or pay service so that gross subscriber revenues
are eliminated or significantly decreased, the franchise fee to be paid
shall be renegotiated.
2. The grantee shall file with the grantor, within one hundred and
twenty ( 120) days after the expiration of each calendar year, a statement
certified by its chief financial officer, indicating its gross subscriber
revenue received by grantee during the preceding calendar years. Payment
of the annual franchise fee shall be payable to the grantor at the time
such statement is filed. ( Ord. 80- 3, 11/ 17/ 1980, Art. 5)
91 -
13, § 306) ( 13, § 306)
306. Insurance - Indemnit
1. At all times during the term of this Part, the grantee shall
obtain, pay all premiums for, and file with the grantor, written evidence
of payments of premiums and/ or copies of certificates for the following:
A. A general comprehensive public liability policy and a property
damage insurance policy indemnifying,_ defending and saving
harmless the grantor from and against all claims by any person on
account of injury to or death of a person or persons or on account of
property damage occasioned by the operating of the grantee hereunder
with a minimum liability of five hundred thousand dollars
500, 000. 00) per personal injury or death of any one person or
property damage to the property of any one person and one tillion
dollars ($ 1, 000, 000. 00) for personal injury or death of any two or
more persons or damage to the property of two or more persons in any
one occurrence.
B. The insurance policies called for herein shall require thirty
30) days' written notice of any modification thereof or cancellation
to the grantor and the grantee.
Ord. 80- 3, 11/ 17/ 1980, Art. 6)
307. Subscriber Fees and Records.
1. The grantee shall be permitted to charge its subscribers such
rates as it, in its sole discretion, may from time to time elect.
2. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, the
rate charged by grantee for basic service shall not exceed one hundred
twenty- five percent ( 125%) of the average of the rates charged for the same
service by the following cable television companies or their successors or
assigns in the following communities:
Company
Berks Cable TV
Suburban Cable TV
Service Electric Company
Community
Reading, Pennsylvania
Pottstown, Pennsylvania
Allentown, Pennsylvania
Provided, however, that at no time shall grantee be required to reduce its
rate if said average is at any time reduced.
3. The rate charged to senior citizen subscribers for basic service
shall be one dollar ($ 1. 00) less than the rate generally charged by the
grantee for basic service, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained
herein. For the purposes hereof, a " senior citizen subscriber"
shall mean a subscriber who is sixty- five ( 65) years of age or older and
who is either the owner or primary tenant of the premises receiving basic
service and who the grantor certifies to the grantee satisfies the requirements
( other than the requirement of being a subscriber) of this sentence.
Ord. 80- 3, 11/ 17/ 1980, Art. 7)
92-
13, § 308) ( 13, § 308)
308. System Description and Service.
1. The grantee' s CATV System or any replacement thereof shall comply
in all respects with the capacity, capability and technical performance
requirements set forth in the FCC' s Rules for Cable Television including
applicable amendments thereto and including public, education, government
and leased access channels.
2. Grantee shall provide, without charge, one service outlet to each
police and fire station, each public and private school building, each
public library building and such municipally owned buildings, as may be
designated by the grantor provided, however, that, if it is necessary to
extend grantee' s trunk or feeder lines more than three hundred feet ( 300')
solely to provide service to any such school or public building, the
grantor shall have the option either of paying grantee' s direct costs for
such extension in excess of three hundred feet ( 300'), or of releasing
grantee from the obligation to provide service to such building. Furthermore,
grantee shall be permitted to recover, from any public building owner
entitled to free service, the direct cost of installing when requested to
do so, more than one outlet, or concealed inside wiring, or a service
outlet requiring more than one hundred feet ( 100') of drop cable.
Ord. 80- 3, 11/ 17/ 1980, Art. 8)
309. Street Occupancy.
1. Grantee shall utilize existing poles, conduits and other facilities
whenever possible.
2. All transmission lines, equipment and structures shall be so
installed and located as to cause minimum interference with the rights and
reasonable convenience of property owners who join on any street. Suitable
barricades, flags, lights, flares or other devices shall be used at such
times and places as are reasonably required for the safety of all members
of the public.
3. Grantee shall, at its own expense and in a manner approved by the
grantor, restore to its approximate original condition any damage or
disturbance caused to the public ways or to private property as a result of
its operations or construction on its behalf.
4. Grantee shall have the authority to trim trees at its own expense
as may be necessary to protect its wires and facilities.
Ord. 80- 3, 11/ 17/ 1980, Art. 9)
310. Employment Requirements. The grantee shall not refuse to hire
nor discharge from employment, nor discriminate against any person regarding
compensation, terms, conditions or privileges of employment because
of sex, race, color, creed or national origin. ( Ord. 80- 3, 11/ 17/ 1980,
Art. 10)
311. Emergency Cablecasting Authority.
1. During any legally declared local, regional or national emergency,
the Chairman of the Board of Supervisors of the grantor or the Chief of the
93 -
13, § 311, cont' d) 13, § 311, cont' d)
Fire or Police Department shall have the right and authority to interrupt
the regular television programs carried on grantee' s CATV System to transmit
information deemed vital to the public interest.
2. The grantor shall have the right to require the grantee to install,
at the grantee' s antenna site, and at the grantor' s expense, the equipment
required to permit the interruption of all regular television programs in
order to transmit from said location, on all channels simultaneously, to
grantee' s subscribers during an emergency. Any equipment so installed by
grantor shall remain the property of grantor and may be removed at any time
by grantor.
Ord. 80- 3, 11/ 17/ 1980, Art. 11)
312. Notices. Any notices, requests, instructions or other documents
to be given hereunder, shall be in writing and shall be sent by certified
mail, return receipt requested. ( Ord. 80- 3, 11/ 17/ 1980, Art. 13)
313. Subdivisions. Grantor agrees to amend its subdivision ordinance
so as to require a party seeking subdivision approval to notify grantee of
the subdivision request if underground utilities are required therein. If
the grantee is not notified of the subdivision or the opening of the utility
trenches by the builder and/ or developer of the subdivision, grantee shall
not be required to install cable in any such subdivision if grantee, in its
discretion, deems such installation uneconomical. Even if developer and/ or
builder notifies grantee of the subdivision approval and opening of
trenches, grantee shall not be required to install cable in the subdivision
if in grantee' s opinion such installation is not economically feasible.
Nothing contained herein shall give grantee a cause of action against
grantor and grantor shall not be held liable for any direct or indirect
damages, costs or loss of profits by grantee if notice of the subdivision or
opening of trenches is not given to grantee as provided herein. ( Ord. - 80- 3,
11/ 17/ 1980, Art. 14)
314. Rules and Regulations. Grantor may prescribe additional rules
and regulations in regard to the operation and maintenance of cable television
systems within Douglass Township to cover any change of circumstances
or new circumstances in the future. Provided, however, that grantor shall
not adopt additional rules and regulations which will interfere unreasonably
with the operations of grantee. ( Ord. 80- 3, 11/ 17/ 1980, Art. 15)
315. Assignability. Grantee shall not assign franchise granted
hereby except upon the express authority of grantor duly noted upon the
minutes of the Board of Supervisors of Douglass Township by a resolution
permitting said assignment and finding that the assignee is qualified under
the terms of this Part. Provided, however, that grantor shall not refuse
permission to assign the franchise herein granted to a subsidiary of
grantee. ( Ord. 80- 3, 11/ 17/ 1980, Art. 16)
316. Regulation of Basic Cable Service and Rates Charged Therefor.
Douglass Township, certified by the Federal Communications Commission to
regulate basic cable service rates by filing FCC Form 328, January 31, 1994,
in accordance with the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition
Act, hereby adopts a regulation indicating that it will follow the 10
94 - Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996
13, § 316, cont' d) ( 13, § 316, cont' d)
regulations established by the Federal Communications Commission pursuant
to the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act, as amended,
and hereby incorporates those regulations now promulgated or hereafter
promulgated or revised. ( Ord. 80- 3, 11/ 17/ 1980; as added by Ord. 94- 3,
5/ 16/ 1994, § 316)
317. Finding of Lack of Effective Competition. The Board of
Supervisors of Douglass Township hereby makes an initial finding of lack of
effective competition as that phrase and term is defined by the
aforementioned Act and the regulations adopted and promulgated pursuant
thereto with regard to basic cable service by Suburban Cable Television
Company, Inc., within Douglass Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
Ord. 80- 3, 11/ 17/ 1980; as added by Ord. 94- 3, 5/ 16/ 1994, § 317)
318. Procedural Requirements. The establishment and evaluation of
any and all rates for basic cable service shall be subject to procedural
requirements to provide formal notice to the public and the cable
television company and to provide an opportunity for interested parties to
make their views known, by written submissions and formal statements. A
written decision shall be made by the Board of Supervisors. All procedural
requirements shall comply to Federal Communication Commission regulations.
Ord. 80- 3, 11/ 17/ 1980; as added by Ord. 94- 3, 5/ 16/ 1994, § 318)
319. Modifications, Revisions and Enactments. Such modifications,
revisions and enactments as may be approved and established by the Federal
Communications Commission implementing the Cable Television Consumer
Protection and Competition Act are incorporated as the applicable
regulations for basic cable service rate regulation within Douglass
Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania. ( Ord. 80- 3, 11/ 17/ 1980; as
added by Ord. 94- 3, 5/ 16/ 1994, § 319)
Page Added 6/ 17/ 1996 - 94. 1 -
13, § 401) ( 13, § 401)
Part 4
Police Escort and False Alarm Service Fees
401. Fee for Police Escort Service. A fee, as established by
resolution, shall be paid to Douglass Township for each police escort
service provided by Douglass Township Police Department. This fee shall be
charged to and paid by the party requesting such service. ( Ord. 79- 1,
8/ 20/ 1979, § 1; as amended by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
402. Fee for False Alarm Service. A fee, as established by
resolution, shall be paid to the Douglass Township for each false alarm
service provided by Douglass Township Police Department. This fee shall be
charged to and paid by the owner of premises having such alarm. ( Ord.
79- 1, 8/ 20/ 1979, § 2; as amended by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
95 -
13, § 501)
501. Title.
Parade Ordinance
1)
13, § 501)
Part 5
Parades
This Part shall be known and may be cited as the
of the Township of Douglass." ( Ord. 95- 2, 10/ 17/ 1995,
502. Definitions. As used in this Part, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
CHIEF OF POLICE - the Chief of Police of Douglass Township,
Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
PARADE - any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant
or procession of any kind or any similar display in or upon any
street, park or other public place in the Township.
PARADE PERMIT - a permit as required by this Part.
PERSON - any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
SUPERVISORS - the Board of Supervisors of Douglass Township,
Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP - Douglass Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
Ord. 95- 2, 10/ 17/ 1995, § 2)
503. Permit Required.
1. No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any
parade unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the Chief of
Police.
2. Exceptions. This Part shall not apply to:
A. Funeral processions.
B. Wedding processions.
C. Students going to and from school or classes or participating
in educational activities; provided, that such conduct is under the
immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities.
This exception does not apply to parades organized by a school or any
body thereof more than twenty- four ( 24) hours prior to the occurrence.
D. A governmental agency acting within the scope of its
functions.
Ord. 95- 2, 10/ 17/ 1995, § 3)
504. Permit Applications. A person seeking issuance of a parade
permit shall file an application with the Chief of Police on forms provided
by such officer.
A. Filing Period. An application for a parade permit shall be
filed with the Chief of Police not fewer than thirty ( 30) days nor
is more than sixty ( 60) days before the date on which it is proposed to
conduct the parade.
Page Added 6/ 17/ 1996 - 96. 1 -
13, § 504( B)) 13, § 504( B))
B. Contents. The application for a parade permit shall set forth
the following information:
1) The name, address and telephone number of the person
seeking to conduct such parade.
2) If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on
behalf of or by an organization, the name, address and telephone
number of the headquarters of the organization and of the authorized
and responsible heads of such organization.
3) The name, address and telephone number of the person
who will be the parade chairman and who will be responsible for
its conduct.
4) The date when the parade is to be conducted.
5) The route to be traveled, the starting point and the
termination point.
6) The approximate number of persons who, and animals` and
vehicles which will, constitute such parade, the type of animals
and a description of the vehicles.
7) The hours when such parade will start and terminate.
8) A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or
only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be
traveled.
9) The location by streets of any assembly area for such
parade.
10) The time at which units of the parade will begin to
assemble at any such assembly area or areas.
11) If the parade is designed to be held by and on behalf
of or for any person other than the applicant, the applicant for
such permit shall file with the Chief of Police a communication
in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade authorizing
the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf.
12) Any additional information which the Chief of Police
shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to
whether a permit should be issued.
C. Late Applications. The Chief of Police, where good cause is
shown therefor, shall have the authority to consider any application
hereunder which is filed fewer than thirty ( 30) days before the date
such parade is proposed to be conducted.
Ord. 95- 2, 10/ 17/ 1995, § 4)
505. Standards for Permit Issuance. The Chief of Police shall issue
a permit as provided hereunder when, from a consideration of the application
and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds
that:
A. The conduct of the parade will not so substantially interrupt
the safe and orderly movement of traffic within the Township on and
contiguous to the proposed route to create a real and present danger
to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Township.
96. 2 Page Added 6/ 17/ 1996
13, § 505( B)) 13, § 505( B))
B. The conduct of the parade will not create a real and present
danger to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the
Township by preventing firefighting equipment, ambulances, rescue
vehicles and/ or police vehicles from being able to reach any property
in the Township.
C. The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of
so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service
to portions of the Township other than that to be occupied by the
proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto.
D. The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly
points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire
and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to
such assembly areas.
E. The conduct of such parade will not interfere with movement
of firefighting equipment in route to a fire.
F. The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause
injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or to
create a disturbance.
G. The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to
its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delay
in route.
Ord. 95- 2, 10/ 17/ 1995, § 5)
506. Time Limit for Decision; Notice of Disapproval. The Chief of
Police shall act upon the application for a parade permit within ten ( 10)
days after the filing thereof. if the Chief of Police disapproves the
application he shall mail to the applicant, by certified mail within ten
10) days after the day upon which the application was filed, a notice of
his action stating with specificity the reasons for his denial of the
permit. Said notice shall also advise the applicant of his or her right to
file an appeal and shall advise him or her of the procedure for filing an
appeal by providing him or her with a copy of § 507, " Appeals." ( Ord. 95- 2,
10/ 17/ 1995, § 6)
507. Appeals. Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal
the denial of a parade permit to Board of Supervisors. The appeal shall be
taken by sending a letter to the Township Secretary requesting that the
Board of Supervisors hear an appeal of the decision to deny a parade
permit. This letter must be sent by certified mail or delivered to Douglass
Township Building, 1320 East Philadelphia Avenue, Gilbertsville, PA
19525, and must be received by the Township Secretary within ten ( 10) days
from the date on which the applicant received notice of the denial of the
application for a parade permit. The Board of Supervisors must render a
decision on said appeal, in writing, within ten ( 10) days of the receipt of
the appeal. ( Ord. 95- 2, 10/ 17/ 1995, § 7)
508. Alternate Permits. Where the Chief of Police, after applying
the standards set forth in § 505, above, shall find that the application for
issuance of a permit for a parade on the date, at the time and over the
route requested by the application must be denied, he may, in addition to
Page Added 6/ 17/ 1996 - 96. 3
13, § 508, cont' d) ( 13, § 508, cont' d)
advising the applicant of the denial of the application, also issue an
alternate permit which authorizes the conduct of the parade on a date, at a
time or over a route different from that named by the application. The
alternate permit shall be sent to the applicant by certified mail, together
with the letter required by § 506, above, shall also advise the applicant
that, if the applicant wishes to accept the alternate permit, the applicant
must mail or deliver a letter to the Township Secretary of Douglass Township,
1320 East Philadelphia Avenue, Gilbertsville, PA 19525, in which the
applicant accepts the alternate permit and, further, advising the applicant
that this letter must be received within ten ( 10) days after receipt by the
applicant of the letter sent to the applicant pursuant to § 506, above. The
applicant shall also be advised that, unless the applicant accepts the
alternate permit within ten ( 10) days, the alternate permit will be void
and have no effect. Finally, the applicant shall also be advised that the
applicant may either accept the alternate permit or pursue an appeal of the
denial of a parade permit for the date, time and route requested by the
applicant by following the procedure set forth in § 507, above, An alternate
parade permit issued pursuant to this Section shall be issued pursuant
to the standards set forth in § 505, above, and if accepted by the applicant
in the manner provided above, shall have the effect of a parade permit under
this Part. ( Ord. 95- 2, 10/ 17/ 1995, § 8)
509. Notice to Officials. Immediately upon the issuance of a parade
permit, the Chief of Police shall send a copy thereof to the following:
A. Board of Supervisors.
B. Township Secretary,
C. The Township Solicitor.
D. The Fire Chief.
E. The Director of Public Works.
Ord. 95- 2, 10/ 17/ 1995, § 9)
510. Contents of Permit. Each permit shall state the following
information:
A. The starting time.
B. The portions of the streets to be traveled that may be
occupied by the parade.
C. The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions
thereof.
D. Such other information as the Chief of Police shall find
necessary to the enforcement of this Part.
Ord. 95- 2, 10/ 17/ 1995, § 10)
511. Duties of the Permittee.
1. Permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and
conditions and with all applicable laws.
i
96. 4 - Page Added 6/ 17/ 1996
r1
13, § 511( 2)) ( 13, § 511( 2))
2. The parade chairman or other person heading or leading such
activity shall carry the parade permit upon his person during the conduct
of the parade.
Ord. 95- 2, 10/ 17/ 1995, § 11)
512. Interference; Parking on Route.
1. Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or
impede or interfere with any parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or
animal participating or used in a parade.
2. Driving Through Parade. No driver of a vehicle shall drive
between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or
persons are in motion and are conspicuously designed as a parade.
3. Parking on Parade Route. The Chief of Police shall have the
authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict parking of
vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of a route of
a parade. The Chief of Police shall post signs to such effect, and it
shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in
violation thereof.
Ord. 95- 2, 10/ 17/ 1995, § 12)
513. Revocation of Permit. Any permit for a parade or assembly
issued pursuant to this Part may be summarily revoked by the Chief of
Police at any time when, by reason of the occurrence of a disaster, public
calamity, riot or other emergency, the Police Chief determines that the
safety of the public or property requires such revocation. Notice of such
action shall be delivered in writing to the permittee by personal service
or by certified mail. ( Ord. 95- 2, 10/ 17/ 1995, § 13)
514. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate
any provision of this Part, upon conviction thereof in an action brought
before a district justice in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($ 1, 000. 00)
plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed ninety ( 90) days. Each day that a violation of
this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall be found to
have been violated shall constitute a separate offense. ( Ord. 95- 2,
10/ 17/ 1995, § 14; as amended by Ord. 96- 5, 11/ 4/ 1996; and by Ord. 97- 2,
7/ 7/ 1997)
Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997 - 96. 5 -
13, App. A)
2.
Application for Parade Permit
Douglass Township
Applicant:
Address:
Telephone:
Sponsoring Organization:
Address:
3. Chairman ( if different from # 1, above)
Name:
4.
A.
B.
C.
Address:
Telephone:
Purpose of Parade:
Date of Parade:
Time: Assemble
Location: Assemble:
Route:
Disband:
Parade Plan
Start Terminate
D. Number and description of units expected to be involved:
Floats: __—
Bands:
Vehicles:
People:
Page Added 6/ 17/ 1996 96. 7
13, App. A)
CHAPTER 14
MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS
Part 1
Mobile Home Parks
101. Definitions
102. Permits; Sale of Mobile Home Space
103. Fees
104. Application for Permit
105. Water Supply
106. Sewage Disposal
107. Electrical Distribution System
108. Service Buildings and Other Community Service Facilities
109. Refuse Disposal
110. Fire Protection
111. Fuel
112. Supervision; Responsibilities of the Park Management
113. Revocation of Permit
114. Penalties
97 -
14, § 101) ( 14, § 101)
Part 1
Mobile Home Parks
101. Definitions. As used in this Chapter, the following terms
shall have the meanings indicated, unless a different meaning clearly
appears from the context:
MOBILE HOME - a single- family dwelling which is designed after assembly
and fabrication, for transportation, on streets and highways on its
own running gear, and which may be temporarily or permanently affixed to
real estate, used for nontransient residential purposes, and constructed
with the same, or similar, electrical, plumbing, and sanitary facilities as
immobile housing.
MOBILE HOME PARK - any plot of ground which is leased or rented, and
upon which two or more mobile homes, occupied for dwelling or sleeping
purposes, are located.
MOBILE HOME SPACE - a plot of ground within a mobile home park,
designated for the accommodation of one mobile home and leased or rented
for that purpose.
OWNER - any individual, firm, trust, partnership, corporation, company,
association, or other legal entity which rents or leases spaces in a
mobile home park.
PERMIT - the written approval as issued by the Board of Supervisors,
authorizing a person to operate and maintain ' a mobile home or a mobile home
park under the provisions of this Chapter.
SERVICE BUILDING - a structure which contains operational, office,
recreational, sanitary, maintenance, or other facilities built for the use
of the mobile home park residents or owner.
SEWER CONNECTION - all pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the
drain outlet of the mobile home to the inlet of the corresponding sewer
riser pipe.
SEWER RISER PIPE - that portion of the sewer lateral which extends
vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at each mobile home
space.
WATER CONNECTION - all pipes, fittings, and appurtenances from the
water riser pipe to the water inlet pipe of the distribution system within
the mobile home.
WATER RISER PIPE - that portion of the water service pipe which
extends vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at a designated
point on each mobile home lot.
WATER SERVICE PIPE - all pipes, fittings, valves and appurtenances
from the water main of the park distribution system to the water outlet of
the distribution system within the mobile home.
Ord. 18, 12/ 9/ 1963; as revised by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
0
14, § 102) ( 14, § 102)
102. Permits; Sale of Mobile Home Space.
1. Annual Permit Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to
maintain, construct, alter or extend any mobile home park within the limits is
of the Township unless he holds a permit issued by the Board of Supervisors
in the name of such person for the specific maintenance, construction,
alteration, or extension proposed. The municipal permit shall be conspicuously
posted in the office or on the premises of the mobile home park at
all times and shall remain in effect for one ( 1) year.
2. Application to Township. The applicant shall also submit an
application to the Board of Supervisors using a form furnished by the Board
of Supervisors for a permit to operate a mobile home park in the Township.
3. Renewal Permits. Renewal permits shall be issued by the Board of
Supervisors upon furnishing proof by the applicant that his park continues
to meet standards prescribed by this Part.
4. Inspection of Mobile Home Parks. A representative of the Board of
Supervisors may inspect a mobile home park at reasonable intervals, and at
reasonable times, to determine compliance with this Township.
5. Compliance of Existing Mobile Home Parks
A. Mobile home parks in existence at the date of adoption of
this Part may be continued so long as they otherwise remain lawful.
B. Any subsequent new construction, alteration or extension of
an existing mobile home park shall comply with the provisions of the
Township subdivision and zoning ordinances.
C. Any existing mobile home park which in the opinion of the
Board of Supervisors creates a safety hazard shall be required to
comply with this Part within a reasonable period of time as determined
by the Board of Supervisors.
6. Individual Mobile Homes. Individual mobile homes permitted in
areas as set forth in the zoning ordinance and not located in a mobile home
park shall not be required to obtain a mobile home park permit; however,
they shall be required to obtain zoning and building permits as prescribed
by the Township ordinances. Individual mobile homes shall comply with all
other applicable municipal ordinances and regulations governing singlefamily
homes.
7. Inspection; Revocation of Permit. Whenever, upon inspection of
any mobile home park, it is determined that conditions or practices exist
which are in violation of any provision of this Part, or of any regulations
adopted pursuant thereto, the Board of Supervisors shall give notice in
writing in accordance with the provisions of this Part to the person to
whom the permit was issued, advising him that unless such conditions or
practices are corrected within a reasonable period of time specified in the
notice, the license to operate in the Township shall be suspended. At the
end of such period, such mobile home park shall be inspected and, if such
conditions or practices have not been corrected, the Board of Supervisors
shall suspend the license and give notice in writing of such suspension to
the person to whom the permit is issued.
Ord. 18, 12/ 9/ 1963; as revised by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986) •
100 -
14, § 103) 14, § 103)
103. Fees. All fees shall be set by the Board of Supervisors
pursuant to resolution on a calendar year on a " pro rata" basis. ( Ord. 18,
12/ 9/ 1963; as revised by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
104. Application for Permit. Application for the mobile home park
permit shall be filed in triplicate with the Board of Supervisors. The
application shall be in writing, signed by the owner and shall include the
following:
1. name and address of the owner;
2. location and legal description of the mobile home park;
3. plans and specifications of all buildings, improvements and
facilities constructed or to be constructed within the mobile home park;
and
4. such further information as may be requested by the various
municipal agencies to enable them to determine if the proposed park will
comply with legal requirements.
Ord. 18, 12/ 9/ 1963; as revised by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
105. Water Supply.
1. General Requirements. An adequate supply of water shall be
provided for mobile homes, service buildings, and other accessory facilities
as required by this Chapter. Where a public water supply system of
satisfactory quantity, quality and pressure is available, connection shall
be made thereto and its supply shall be used exclusively. Where a satisfactory
public water supply system is not available, the development of a
private water supply system shall be approved by the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Resources or other authorities having jurisdiction
over water supply systems.
2. Fire Hydrants. Where a public supply of water is provided, fire
hydrants shall be installed as agreed upon by the Board of Supervisors and
the agency responsible for supplying water.
3. Individual Water -Riser Pipes and Connections
A. Individual water -riser pipes shall be located within the
confined area of the mobile home stand at a point where the water
connection will approximate a vertical position, thereby insuring the
shortest water connection possible and decreasing susceptibility to
water pipe freezing.
B. The water -riser pipe shall have a minimum inside diameter of
three- quarter ( 3/ 4) inches and terminate at least four ( 4) inches
above the ground surface. The water outlet shall be provided with a
cap when a mobile home does not occupy the lot.
C. Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent freezing of
service lines, valves and riser pipe and to protect risers from
heaving and shoving actions of ground during freezing weather.
Surface drainage shall be diverted from the location of the riser
pipe.
101 -
14, § 105, cont' d) 14, 5105, cont' d)
D. A shut- off water valve below the frost line shall be provided
near the water -riser pipe in each mobile home lot. Underground
stop -and -waste valves are prohibited unless their types of manufacture
and their method of installation are approved by the Board of Supervisors.
Ord. 18, 12/ 9/ 1963; as revised by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
106. Sewage Disposal.
1. General Requirements. An adequate and safe sewerage system shall
be provided in all parks for conveying and disposing of sewage from mobile
homes, service buildings and other accessory facilities.
2. Individual Sewer Connections
A. Each mobile home stand shall be provided with at least a four
4) inch diameter sewer riser pipe. This sewer riser pipe shall be
imbedded in poured concrete, minimum twelve ( 12) inch diameter and
minimum eighteen ( 18) inch depth. The rim of the riser pipe shall
extend at least one- half ( 1/ 2) inch above ground elevation. The sewer
riser pipe shall be so located on each stand that the sewer connection
to the mobile home drain outlet will approximate a vertical position.
B. The sewer connection ( see § 101 for definition) shall have a
nominal inside diameter of not less than three ( 3) inches, and the
slope of any portion thereof shall be at least one- fourth ( 1/ 4) inch
per foot. All joints shall be watertight.
C. All materials used for a sewer connection shall be semirigid,
corrosive resistant, nonabsorbent and durable. The inner
surface shall be smooth.
D. Provisions shall be made for plugging the sewer riser pipe
when a mobile home does not occupy the lot. Surface drainage shall be
diverted away from the riser.
Ord. 18, 12/ 9/ 1963; as revised by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
107. Electrical Distribution System.
1. General Requirements. Every park shall contain an electrical
wiring system consisting of wiring, fixtures, equipment and appurtenances
which shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the Township
ordinances regulating such systems.
2. Power Distribution Lines. Main power lines not located underground
shall be suspended at least eighteen .( 18) feet above the ground, and shall
have a minimum vertical clearance of eight ( 8) feet above any mobile home,
service building or other structure.
Ord. 18, 12/ 9/ 1963; as revised by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
108. Service Buildings and Other Community Service Facilities.
1. The requirements of this section shall apply to service buildings,
recreation buildings and other community service facilities when constructed
such as: management offices, repair shops, and storage areas;
laundry facilities; indoor recreation areas. 0
102 -
14, § 108, cont' d) ( 14, § 108, cont' d)
2. All structural requirements shall be in accordance with the
Township ordinances regulating same.
Ord. 18, 12/ 9/ 1963; as revised by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
109. Refuse Disposal. The storage, collection, and disposal of
refuse in the mobile home park shall be so managed as to not create health
hazards, rodent harborages, insect -breeding areas, accident or fire hazards
or air pollution, and shall be in accordance with the Township ordinances.
Ord. 18, 12/ 9/ 1963; as revised by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
110. Fire Protection. Fire protection provisions shall be in accordance
with the Township ordinances. ( Ord. 18, 12/ 9/ 1963; as revised by
Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
111. Fuel. All piping from outside fuel storage tanks or cylinders
to mobile homes shall be copper or other acceptable metallic tubing and
shall be permanently installed and securely fastened in place. All fuel
storage tanks or cylinders shall be securely fastened in place and shall
not be located inside or beneath the mobile home or less than five ( 5) feet
from any mobile home exit. ( Ord. 18, 12/ 9/ 1963; as revised by Ord. 86- 10,
12/ 1/ 1986)
112. Supervision; Responsibilities of the Park Management.
1. The person to whom a permit for a mobile home park is issued shall
operate the park in compliance with this Part and shall provide adequate
supervision to maintain the park, its facilities and equipment in good
repair and in a clean and sanitary condition.
2. The park management shall supervise the placement of each mobile
home on its mobile home stand which includes securing its stability and
installing all utility connections.
3. The park management shall give the Board of Supervisors or their
representative free access to all mobile home lots, service buildings and
other community service facilities for the purpose of inspection.
4. The management shall maintain a register containing the names and
addresses of all park occupants. Such register shall be available to any
authorized person inspecting the park.
5. The management shall notify the local Pennsylvania Department of
Health immediately of any suspected communicable or contagious disease
within the park.
Ord. 18, 12/ 9/ 1963; as revised by A. O.
113. Revocation of Permit. Whenever, upon inspection of any mobile
home park, it is determined that conditions or practices exist which are in
violation of any provision of this Part, or of any regulations adopted
pursuant thereto, the Building Official shall give notice in writing to the
person to whom the permit was issued, advising them that unless such
conditions or practices are corrected within the period of time specified
in the notice, the permit to operate shall be suspended. At the end of
such period, such mobile home park shall be reinspected and, if such
103 -
14, § 113, cont' d) ( 14, § 113, cont' d)
conditions or practices have not been corrected, the Building Official
shall suspend the permit and give notice in writing of such suspension to
the person to whom the permit is issued. An aggrieved party may file an
appeal to the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the Local Agency Law.
Ord. 18, 12/ 9/ 1963; as revised by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
114. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate
any provision of this Part, upon conviction thereof inanaction brought
before a district justice in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than one thousand dollars
1, 000. 00) plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs,
to a term of imprisonment not to exceed ninety ( 90) days. Each day that a
violation of this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall:
be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense. ( Ord.
18, 12/ 9/ 1963; as revised by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986; as amended by Ord.
96- 5, 11/ 4/ 1996; and by Ord. 97- 2, 7/ 7/ 1997)
104 Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997
CHAPTER 15
MOTOR VEHICLES
Part 1
General Regulations
101. Definitions and Interpretation
102. Manner of Adopting Permanent Traffic and Parking Regulations
103. Provisions to be a Continuation of Existing Regulations
104. Temporary and Emergency Regulations
105. Experimental Regulations
106. Traffic on Streets Closed or Restricted for Construction,
Maintenance or Special Events
107. Use of Streets by Processions and Assemblages
108. Authority of Police Officers
109. Authorization for Use of Speed Timing Devices
Part 2
Traffic Regulations
201. Maximum Speed Limits Established on Certain Streets
202. Maximum Speed Limits Established on Certain Bridges and Elevated
Structures
203. Maximum Speed Limits Established for Certain Vehicles on Hazardous
Grades
204. Maximum Speed Limits Established in Parks
205. Traffic Signals at Certain Locations
206. Intersections Where Turn Prohibited on Red Signal
207. One -Way Streets Established
208. Turning at Certain Intersections Prohibited or Restricted
209. Right Turns Only Permitted at Certain Intersections
210. U - Turns Prohibited at Certain Locations
211. No Passing Zones Established
212. Through Highways Established
213. Stop Intersections Established
214. Yield Intersections Established
215. Restrictions on Use of Pushcarts
216. Skates, Coasters, Sleds and Other Toy Vehicles
Part 3
Restrictions on Size, Weight and Type of Vehicle and Load
301. Vehicle Weight Limits Established on Certain Streets and Bridges
302. Restrictions on Size of Vehicles on Certain Streets and Bridges
303. Restrictions as to Weight and Size of Vehicles on Certain Streets
and Bridges
304. Truck Traffic Restricted on Certain Streets
Ii1.10
Part 4
General Parking Regulations
401. Vehicles to be Parked Within Marked Spaces
402. Parking Prohibited at All Times in Certain Locations
403. Parking Prohibited in Specific Locations Certain Days and Hours
404. Parking of Trucks, Buses and Certain Other Vehicles Prohibited in
Certain Locations
405. Parking Time Limited in Certain Locations Certain Days and Hours
406. Special Purpose Parking Zones Established; Parking Otherwise
Prohibited
407. Standing or Parking on Roadway for Loading or Unloading
408. Residential Permit Parking
409. Penalty for Violation
Part 5
Removal and Impoundment of Illegally Parked Vehicles
501. Applicability and Scope
502. Authority to Remove and Impound
503. Tow Away Zones Designated
504. Designation of Approved Storage Garages, Bonding, Towing and Storage
505. Payment of Towing and Storage Charges
506. Reclamation Costs
507. Records of Vehicles Removed and Impounded
508. Restrictions upon Removal of Vehicles
509. Penalty
510. Reports and Disposition of Unclaimed Vehicles
Part 6
Snow and Ice Emergency
601. Declaration of Snow and Ice Emergency
602. Parking Prohibited, Driving of Motor Vehicles Restricted, on Snow
Emergency Routes During Emergency
603. Snow Emergency Routes Designated
604. Penalty for Violation
106 - Page Corrected 4/ 7/ 1993
r
15, § 101) ( 15, § 101)
Part 1
General Regulations
101. Definitions and Interpretation.
1. Words and phrases, when used in this Chapter, except for sections
or Parts to which different or additional definitions apply, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in The Vehicle Code ( the Act of June 17, 1976,
P. L. 162 No. 81), as amended, except that, in this Chapter, the word
street" may be used interchangeably with the word " highway", and shall
have the same meaning as the word " highway" as defined in the Vehicle Code.
2. The term " legal holidays" as used in this Chapter shall mean and
include: New Year' s Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
3. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural
shall include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
102. Manner of Adopting Permanent Traffic and Parking Regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances, as parts of ordinances, as amendments to ordinances, or as
amendments to this chapter, except where the law specifically authorizes
less formal action. ( Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
103. Provisions to be Continuation of Existing Regulations. The
provisions of this Chapter, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances
and regulations in force immediately before the enactment of this
Chapter, are intended as a continuation of those earlier ordinances and
regulations, and not as new enactments. Nothing in this Chapter shall
affect any act done or liability incurred, or any suit or prosecution
pending or to be instituted under any of those repealed or superseded
ordinances or regulations. ( Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
104. Temporary and Emergency Regulations. The Police Chief shall
have the following powers to regulate traffic and parking temporarily and
in time of emergency:
1. in the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/ or parking regulations; and
2. in the case of emergency or to facilitate public works, or in the
conduct of parades, processions or public events, to restrict or prohibit
traffic and/ or parking in limited areas for periods of not more than
seventy- two ( 72) hours.
Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Police Department in the same manner as permanent regulations. Any person
who shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of any such
regulations, or who shall move, remove, destroy, injure or deface any sign
0 or marking erected, posted or made to give notice of any such regulation,
MWOM
15, § 104, cont' d) ( 15, § 104, cont' d)
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set forth in the
law or elsewhere in this Chapter 15 for a violation of such nature, and, in
case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set forth in the law
or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not more than twenty- five
dollars ($ 25. 00) together with costs of prosecution.
Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
105. Experimental Regulations. The Board of Supervisors may, from
time to time by resolution, designate places upon and along the highways in
the Township of Douglass where for a period of not more than ninety ( 90)
days, specific traffic and/ or parking regulations, prohibitions and restrictions
shall be in force and effect, and shall designate such locations
by proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions and restrictions
shall be effective as if they had been specified in this chapter. No
person shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of any such
regulation, prohibition or restriction, and no person shall move, remove,
destroy or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made by authority
of this section. Any person who shall violate any provision of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set forth
in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such nature, and
in case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set forth in the
law or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not more than twenty- f.ive
dollars ($ 25. 00) together with costs of prosecution; provided, the
purpose of this section is to allow for the test and experimental determination
of the feasibility and desirability of permanent changes in the
ordinances of the Township relative to traffic and parking. ( Ord. 86- 10,
12/ 1/ 1986)
106. Traffic on Streets Closed or Restricted for Construction,
Maintenance or Special Events.
1. Board of Supervisors shall have authority to close any street or
specific part of a street to vehicular traffic and to place barriers or
station police officers at each end of the closed portion, while construction
or maintenance work is under way or a special event is being conducted
on the closed portion. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a
vehicle upon any such closed portion.
2. Board of Supervisors shall have authority to establish a restricted
traffic area upon any street where construction or maintenance
work is under way and to station flagmen at each end of the restricted
portion. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any
such restricted traffic area at any time when the flagman is displaying a
sign directing that vehicle to stop, or is signaling that vehicle, by a
flag or other device, not to proceed.
3. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of twenty- five dollars ($ 25. 00) and
costs.
Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
108 -
15, § 107) 15, § 107)
107. Use of Streets by Processions and Assemblages.
1. For the purpose of this section, the words " assemblage" and
procession" shall have the following meanings:
ASSEMBLAGE - a gathering of people without vehicles, which
interferes with the movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on any
street;
PROCESSION - a group of individuals, vehicles, animals and/ or
objects moving along a street in a way that interferes with the normal
movement of traffic. A procession shall not include a funeral caravan
or military convoy.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
assemblage unless the person organizing or conducting the assemblage first
obtains a -permit from the Police Chief, which shall be issued without fee.
Application for the permit shall be made at least one week in advance of
the day on which the assemblage is proposed to be held, but in any case
where a state -designated highway is proposed to be used, application shall
be made at least three ( 3) weeks in advance of the proposed date. The
permit shall state the place where and the date when the assemblage is to
be held, the hour when the assemblage may convene and the hour by which it
shall have been completely dispersed. It shall be unlawful for any person
to hold or to participate in any assemblage unless the permit has been
granted, or at any time or place other than that authorized by the permit.
3. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
procession unless the person organizing or conducting the procession first
obtains a permit from the Police Chief, which shall be issued without fee.
Application for the permit shall be made at least two ( 2) weeks in advance
of the day when the procession is proposed to be held, but in any case
where a state -designated highway is proposed to be used, application shall
be made at least three ( 3) weeks in advance of the proposed date. The
permit shall specify the date on which the procession is to be held, the
route to be followed by the procession, the hour when and place where
participants may commence to assemble and form before the procession is
under way, the time when the procession may commence to move along its
route, and the time by which the end of the procession shall have reached
the end of the route of the procession and the procession shall have been
disbanded. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or to participate
in any procession unless the permit shall have been granted, or under any
conditions as to time or route or otherwise than those stated in the
permit.
4. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of twenty- five dollars ($ 25. 00) and
costs.
Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
108. Authority of Police Officers. The police officers of the
Township are hereby given authority to direct traffic on the highways of
the Township and at intersections thereof. ( Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
9
109 -
15, § 109) 15, § 109)
109. Authorization for Use of Speed Timing Devices. The Township
Police Department is hereby authorized to use all mechanical or electrical
speed timing devices for the determination of speed of a motor vehicle as i are approved or will be approved by the Department of Transportation of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in accordance with Title 75, § 3368 P. C. S.
This section authorizes the use of said devices upon all highways
within the Township, be they Township, county or state highways, and does
also hereby elect to exercise all powers granted to " local authorities"
under the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, 75 P. S. §§ 1101
et seq. ( 1977) as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by
the General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
110 -
15, § 201) ( 15, § 201)
Part 2
Traffic Regulations
201. Maximum Speed Limits Established on Certain Streets.
1. Maximum speed limits are established on portions of specified
streets, as follows, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a
vehicle, on any part of a street where a maximum speed limit applies, at a
higher speed than the maximum prescribed for that part of the street:
Maximum Speed
Street Between Limit
Bartman Avenue Philadelphia Ave. and Broad St. 35 mph
Bow Lane within Winding Lane 35 mph
Buchanan Drive within Presidential Estates 35 mph
Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996 - ill -
Buchert Road Gilbertsville Road and New
Hanover line 35 mph
Congo- Niantic Road Hoffmansville Rd. and Niantic Rd. 35 mph
County Line Road Montgomery Ave. and Swamp Creek Rd. 35 mph
Cross Road Grosser Rd. and Upper Pottsgrove
line 35 mph
Elm Street within Colonial Manor 35 mph
Estate Road within Presidential Estates 35 mph
Grosser Road Gilbertsville Rd. and Swinehart Rd. 35 mph
Highland Avenue Douglass Street and Boyertown Boro 35 mph
Hoffmansville Road Twp. line at Little Rd. to
Greenhill Rd. 35 mph
Hoffmansville Road Greenhill Road to County line 40 mph
Holly Road Entire length 35 mph
Hoover Court within Presidential Estates 35 mph
Jackson Road Philadelphia Ave. and Swinehart Rd. 35 mph
Lark Lane within Winding Creek 35 mph
Lincoln Court within Presidential Estates 35 mph
Linsenbeidler Road Congo Road and Sassamansville Road 35 mph
Lone Pine Road Niantic Road and Paper Mill Road 35 mph
Maple Street within Colonial Manor 35 mph
Merkel Road Philadelphia Ave. and Jackson Rd. 35 mph
Middle Creek Road Swamp Creek Rd. to New Hanover line 35 mph
Moore Drive within Flint 35
35
mph
Nathan Avenue within Colonial Manor mph
Oak Street within Colonial Manor 35 mph
Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996 - ill -
15, § 201, cont' d)
Street Between
Oberholtzer Road County Line Rd. and Hoffmansville
Rd.
Onyx Lane within Flint
Paper Mill Road Entire length
Pine Lane
Ritter Road
Rhoads Avenue
Roosevelt Drive
Sassamansville Rd.
Second Avenue
Second Street
Spruce St., East
Swamp Creek Road
Thrush Drive
Truman Court
within Flint
Sweinhart Rd. and Berks County line
Douglass Street and Boyertown Boro
within Presidential Estates
Hoffmansville Rd. and Middle
Creek Rd.
Merkel Road and Jackson Road
within Presidential Estates
within Colonial Manor
County Line Road and Wilson Ave.
within Winding Creek
within Presidential Estates
Virmay Drive Gilbertsville Road and Merkel Road
within Nelmor Park II and Flint
Werstler Avenue within Nelmor Park I
within Nelmor Park II
Wren Road within Winding Creek
Yoder Avenue Gilbertsville Road and Merkel Road
15, § 201, cont' d)
Maximum Speed
Limit
35 mph
35 mph
35 mph
35 mph
35 mph
35 mph
35 mph
35 mph
35 mph
25 mph
35 mph
35 mph
35 mph
35 mph
35 mph
35 mph
35 mph
35 mph
35 mph`
35 mph
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of thirty- five dollars ($ 35. 00).
Any person exceeding the maximum speed limit by more than five ( 5) miles
per hour shall pay an additional fine of two dollars ($ 2. 00) per mile for
each mile in excess of five ( 5) miles per hour over the maximum speed
limit.
Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986; as amended by Ord. 93- 5, 7/ 6/ 1993; and by Ord.
95- 1, 4/ 3/ 1995)
202. Maximum Speed Limits Established on Certain Bridges and Elevated
Structures.
I. Maximum speed limits are established, as follows, on certain
bridges and elevated structures, and it shall be unlawful for any person to
drive a vehicle on any such bridge or elevated structure, at a higher speed
than the maximum prescribed for that bridge or elevated structure:
Bridge or Maximum Speed
Elevated Structure Location Limit
Reserved)
112 Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996
11
15, § 202, cont' d)
2. Any person who violates
conviction, be sentenced to pay is Any person exceeding the maximum
per hour shall pay an additional
each mile in excess of five ( 5)
limit.
Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
15, § 202, cont' d)
my provision of this section shall, upon
a fine of thirty- five dollars ($ 35. 00).
speed limit by more than five ( 5) miles
fine of two dollars ($ 2. 00) per mile for
miles per hour over the maximum speed
203. Maximum Speed Limits Established for Certain Vehicles on
Hazardous Grades.
1. The following are declared to be hazardous grades, and, upon any
such hazardous grade, no person shall drive a vehicle, having a gross
weight in excess of that referred to for that grade, in the direction
stated for that grade, at a speed in excess of that established in this
section for that grade, and, if so stated for a particular grade, the
driver of every such vehicle shall stop the vehicle before proceeding
downhill:
Required to
Maximum Maximum Stop Before
Direction Gross Speed Proceeding
Street Between of Travel Weight Limit Downhill
Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of thirty- five dollars ($ 35. 00).
Any person exceeding the maximum speed limit by more than five ( 5) miles
per hour shall pay an additional fine of two dollars ($ 2. 00) for each mile
in excess of five ( 5) miles per hour over the maximum speed limit.
Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
204. Maximum Speed Limits Established in Parks.
1. A speed limit of thirty- five ( 35) miles per hour is established on
all streets and roadways in the public parks maintained and operated by the
Township of Douglass, except in the following locations, where the lower
maximums, as specified, shall apply:
Maximum Speed
Park Street Location Limit
Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of thirty- five dollars ($ 35. 00) .
Any person exceeding the maximum speed limit by more than five ( 5) miles
per hour shall pay an additional fine of two dollars ($ 2. 00) per mile for
each mile in excess of five ( 5) miles per hour over the maximum speed
limit.
Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
113 -
15, § 205) 15, § 205)
205. Traffic Signals at Certain Locations.
1. At the following locations, traffic signals as indicated below •
shall be erected ( or are ratified if previously erected), and traffic at
those locations shall be directed by those signals:
Location
Route 100 and Grosser Road
Route 100 and Jackson Road
Route 100 and County Line Road
Route 100 and Gilbertsville Shopping Center
Route 100 and Route 73
2. Any driver of a vehicle who disobeys the directions of any traffic
signal shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of twenty- five
dollars ($ 25. 00) and costs.
Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
206. Intersections Where Turn Prohibited on Red Signal.
1. The following are established as intersections where drivers of
vehicles headed in the direction or directions indicated are prohibited
from making a right turn ( or a left turn from a one- way street into another
one- way street) on a steady red signal:
Intersection Vehicles Traveling on Facing
Reserved)
2. Any driver of a vehicle who violates any provision of this section
shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of twenty- five dollars
25. 00) and costs.
Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
207. 0ne- Way Streets Established.
1. The following are established as one- way streets, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on any one- way street other than
in the direction established for traffic on that street:
Street
Douglass Street
Montgomery Avenue
Boyertown Shopping
Plaza
From To
Route 73 Highland Ave.
Highland Ave. Route 73
East and entrance
Direction of Travel
South
North
North
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of twenty- five dollars ($ 25. 00) - and
costs.
Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
114 -
11
15, § 208) ( 15, § 208)
208. Turning at Certain Intersections Prohibited or Restricted.
1. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, of the type
indicated, traveling upon the first -named street at any of the following
intersections, in the direction or directions indicated in each case, to
make a left turn and/ or a right turn into the second -named street, as
indicated, at any time when such a turn is prohibited by this section:
Vehicles Direction Not to Type of Vehicle
Traveling on of Travel Make Into When Applicable to
Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of twenty- five dollars ($ 25. 00) and
costs.
Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
209. Right Turns Only Permitted at Certain Intersections.
1. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, traveling upon
the first -named street at any of the following intersections, in the
direction or directions indicated in each case, to make other than a right
turn, at any time stated, both left turns and straight -across traffic being
prohibited:
Vehicles Traveling on Direction of Travel
Reserved)
Not to make
left turn into
or travel
Times straight across
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of twenty- five dollars ($ 25. 00) and
costs.
Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
210. U - Turns Prohibited at Certain Locations.
1. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, traveling upon
any of the following portions of streets, in the direction or directions
indicated for that street, to make a U- turn:
Street Portion
Reserved)
Direction of Travel
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of twenty- five dollars ($ 25. 00) and
costs.
Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
115 -
15, § 211)
211. No Passing Zones Established.
15, § 211)
1. The following are established as no passing zones, and it shall be
unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to overtake or pass another vehicle
or to drive on the left side of the roadway in any no passing zone:
Street Direction of Travel Between
Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of twenty- five dollars ($ 25. 00) and
costs.
Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
212. Through Highways Established.
1. The following highways are established as through highways, thus
authorizing stop or yield signs to be erected facing traffic approaching
every intersection with the through highway except for those intersections
with traffic signals, or with exceptions or modifications as indicated
below. Every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop or yield sign authorized
by this section shall stop the vehicle or yield right- of- way as
required by Section 3323( b) or 3323( c) of the Vehicle Code, as the case may
be, and shall not proceed into or across the through highway until he has
followed all applicable requirements of that section of the law:
Highway Between
Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of twenty- five dollars ($ 25. 00) and
costs.
Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
213. Stop Intersections Established.
1. The following intersections ( in addition to intersections with the
through highways established by § 212) are established as stop intersections,
and official stop signs shall be erected ( or are ratified if previously
erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the
second -named street ( the intersecting of through street) on the first -named
street ( the stop street) in the direction or directions indicated for that
intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection on
the first named or stop street, in the direction indicated in each case,
shall stop the vehicle as required by Section 3323( b) of the Vehicle Code,
and shall not proceed into or across the second -named or intersecting or
through street until he has followed all applicable requirements of that
section of the law.
116 - Page Corrected 4/ 7/ 1993
L`
15, § 213, cont' d)
Stop Street
Bartman Avenue
Bird Neck Road
Bow Lane
Brookside Court -
Stafford Square
Brookside Drive
Buchert Road
Cleaver Road
Congo- Niantic
Conrath Road
County Line Road
except traffic
making right turns)
County Line Road
Cross Road
Detar Road
Diehl Drive
East Buchert Road
Englesville Road
Fairview Circle
Fifth Street
Fourth Street
Grosser Road
Hallowell Road
Hawthorne Avenue
Hemlock Drive
Henry Road
Highland Avenue
Himmelwright Road
Hoffman Road
Intersecting or
Through Street
East Philadelphia Avenue
Private road to the Boyertown
Disposal Plant
West Branch Road
Gilbertsville Road
Brookside Drive
Brookside Court - Stafford Sq.
Gilbertsville Road
East Buchert Road ( except traffic
making right
turns)
East Buchert Road
Sweinhart Road
Hoffmansville Road
Niantic Road
West Branch Road
Holly Road
Montgomery Avenue
Grosser Road
Big Road
Gilbertsville Road
Buchert Road
Sweinhart Road
Hoffman Road
Montgomery Avenue
Montgomery Avenue
Gilbertsville Road
Congo Road
Overholtzer Road
Grosser Road
Grosser Road
Miller Road
Niantic Road
Douglass Street
Miller Road
Congo- Niantic Road
Little Road
Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996 - 117 -
15, § 213, cont' d)
Direction of Travel
Southbound
Southbound
Westbound
Westbound
East and Westbound
North and Southbound
Westbound
Eastbound
Northbound
Eastbound
Southbound
Northbound
Westbound
Southbound
Southbound
Eastbound
Southbound
Eastbound
Westbound
Eastbound
Northbound
Eastbound
Eastbound
Eastbound
Eastbound
Westbound
Southbound
Southbound
Westbound
Southbound
Eastbound
East and Westbound
Westbound
Southbound
15, § 213, cont' d) 15, § 213, cont' d)
Intersection or
Stop Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Holly Road County Line Road Westbound
Jackson Road East Philadelphia Avenue Northbound
Sweinhart Road Westbound
Kulp Road Sassamansville Road Westbound
Linsenbigler Road Congo Road Westbound
Sassamansville Road Eastbound
Little Road Hoffmansville Road Southbound
Lone Pine Road Paper Mill Road Northbound
Niantic Road Southbound
Mega Lane Cross Road Westbound
Merkel Road East Philadelphia Avenue Northbound
Jackson Road Westbound
Middle Creek Road Congo Road Eastbound
Swamp Creek Road Southbound
Montgomery Avenue Highland Avenue Southbound
Rhoads Avenue Southbound
Moser Road Congo- Niantic Road Eastbound
Miller Road Westbound
Municipal Drive Big Road Southbound
Oak Street Swamp Pike Southbound
Overholtzer Road County Line Road Westbound
Hoffmansville Road Northbound
Paper Mill Road Miller Road Northbound
West Branch Road East and Westbound
Pheasant Circle Hoffman Road Northbound
Renninger Road County Line Road Westbound
Hoffmansville Road Northbound
Rhoads Avenue Douglass Street Eastbound
Rick Road Cross Road Eastbound
Ritter Road Sweinhart Road Eastbound
Sassamansville Rd. Hoffmansville Road Northbound
Schlegel Road Middle Road ( except traffic
making right turns) North and Southbound
Second Avenue Jackson Road Westbound
Merkel Road Eastbound
Sixth Street Montgomery Avenue Eastbound
Smith Road Congo Road Westbound
Specht Road Buchert Road Northbound
Moyer Road Southbound
118 - Page Revised 6/ 17{ 1996
15, § 213, cont' d) 15, § 213, cont' d)
1. The following intersections ( in addition to intersections with the
through highways established by § 212) are established as yield intersections,
and official yield signs shall be erected ( or are ratified if
previously erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the
second - named street ( the through street) on the first - named street ( the
yield street) in the direction or directions indicated for that intersection.
Every driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection on the
first - named or yield street, in the direction indicated in each case, shall
slow down or stop the vehicle as required by Section 3323( c) of the Vehicle
Code, and then yield the right- of- way as required by that subsection of the
Vehicle Code.
Yield Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of twenty- five dollars ($ 25. 00) and
costs.
Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
215. Restrictions on Use of Pushcarts.
1. The word " pushcart," as used in this section, shall mean a
vehicle, other than a pedalcycle, propelled solely by human power, and used
or intended for use for the display, transport, exhibit or sale of goods,
wares or merchandise.
Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996 - 119 -
Intersecting or
Stop Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Swamp Creek Road County Line Road Westbound
Sweinhart Road Englesville Road Northbound
Grosser Road Southbound
Jackson Road Southbound
Swenson Road Cross Road Westbound
Gilbertsville Road Eastbound
Virmay Drive Gilbertsville Road East and Westbound
Merkel Road Westbound
Weller Road Congo- Niantic Road Westbound
Werstler Avenue Swamp Pike Northbound
Wild Run Road West Branch Road Westbound
Wilson Avenue East Philadelphia Avenue Southbound
Yoder Avenue Gilbertsville Road Eastbound
Merkel Road Westbound
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of twenty- five dollars ($ 25. 00) and
costs.
Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986; as amended by Ord. 93- 1, 3/ 1/ 1993; and by Ord.
93- 8, 10/ 19/ 1993; and by Ord. 96- 1, 1/ 15/ 1996)
214. Yield Intersections Established.
1. The following intersections ( in addition to intersections with the
through highways established by § 212) are established as yield intersections,
and official yield signs shall be erected ( or are ratified if
previously erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the
second - named street ( the through street) on the first - named street ( the
yield street) in the direction or directions indicated for that intersection.
Every driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection on the
first - named or yield street, in the direction indicated in each case, shall
slow down or stop the vehicle as required by Section 3323( c) of the Vehicle
Code, and then yield the right- of- way as required by that subsection of the
Vehicle Code.
Yield Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of twenty- five dollars ($ 25. 00) and
costs.
Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
215. Restrictions on Use of Pushcarts.
1. The word " pushcart," as used in this section, shall mean a
vehicle, other than a pedalcycle, propelled solely by human power, and used
or intended for use for the display, transport, exhibit or sale of goods,
wares or merchandise.
Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996 - 119 -
15, § 215, cont' d) 15, § 215, cont' d)
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to propel a pushcart upon any
sidewalk in any business district except as necessary to move the pushcart
to a location from which it is to be loaded or unloaded or from which
goods, wares or merchandise are to be sold or dispensed under permit from
Board of Supervisors as provided in subsection 3 of this section.
3. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a pushcart upon any
sidewalk except for the purpose of selling or dispensing from that pushcart
goods, wares or merchandise to passersby under permit from Board of Supervisors.
Every such permit shall be issued to the person making application
for the permit, upon payment of a fee, which shall be for the use of the
Township, of one hundred dollars ($ 100. 00) for any calendar year, fifty
dollars ($ 50. 00) for any six-month period, or twenty- five dollars ($ 25. 00)
for any three month period. The permit shall be granted to the applicant,
upon payment of the fee, and upon his signing an agreement with Board of
Supervisors that he shall be bound by the conditions imposed by Board of
Supervisors and made a part of the permit, dealing with the following
matters:
A. Restricting or limiting the parking of the pushcart to one or
more stated locations upon the sidewalk and to stated days and hours
at each location;
B. Stating requirements to be adhered to in connection with the
disposal of garbage and refuse resulting from the operations carried
on;
C. Requiring that there be no violation of any law, ordinance or
regulation pertaining to health, sanitation and the handling of food
or drink.
4. Any person who violates any provision of this section, or any
condition of any permit granted under this section, shall be guilty of a
summary offense, and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of
twenty- five dollars ($ 25. 00) and costs.
Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
216. Skates, Coasters, Sleds and Other Toy Vehicles.
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on a sled upon any
sidewalk in the Township, or upon any roadway unless that roadway is on a
portion of a street blocked off for sledding by authority of § 105 of Part 1
or § 215 of Part 2 of this Chapter. Provided: nothing in this subsection
shall prevent a pedestrian from pulling a sled, with or without a rider,
upon a sidewalk.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in rollerskating or
to ride upon or propel any coaster or other toy vehicle upon:
A. any street except in order to cross the roadway; or
B. any sidewalk located in a business district, except that
nothing in this paragraph shall prevent a pedestrian from pulling a
coaster or other toy vehicle, with or without a rider, upon a
sidewalk.
3. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of five dollars ($ 5. 00) and costs.
Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
120 -
15, § 301) ( 15, § 301)
Part 3
Restrictions on Size, Weight and Type of Vehicle and Load
301. Vehicle Weight Limits Established on Certain Streets and
Bridges.
1. On the following bridges and streets or parts of streets, by
authority granted by Section 4902( a) of the Vehicle Code, it shall be
unlawful for any person or persons to drive any vehicle or combination
having a gross weight in excess of the maximum prescribed below for that
bridge or street or part of street, as the case may be:
Maximum
Street or Bridge Between Gross Weight
Cross Rd. Bridge 5 tons ( temp.)
Kulps Rd. Bridge 5 tons
Schlegel Rd. Bridge 5 tons
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under Sections 4902( a) and 4902( 8- 1) of the Vehicle Code, and,
upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of one hundred fifty
dollars ($ 150. 00) plus one hundred fifty dollars ($ 150. 00) for each five
hundred ( 500) pounds, or part thereof, in excess of three thousand ( 3, 000)
pounds over the maximum allowable weight, and costs.
Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
302. Restrictions on Size of Vehicles on Certain Streets and
Bridges.
1. On the following bridges and streets or parts of streets, by
authority granted by Section 4902( a) of the Vehicle Code, it shall be
unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle or combination in violation of
the size restrictions prescribed below for that bridge or street or part of
street:
Street or Bridge Between Restriction
Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under Section 4902( a) and Section 4902( g- 1) of the Vehicle Code,
and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of seventy- five
dollars ($ 75. 00) and costs.
Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
303. Restrictions as to Weight and Size of Vehicles on Certain
Streets and Bridges.
1. By reason of hazardous traffic conditions and other safety factors,
by authority granted by Section 4902( b) of the Vehicle Code, it shall
be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle or combination in violation
121 -
15, § 303, cont' d) ( 15, § 303, cont' d)
of the restriction prescribed below for that bridge or street or part of
street.
Street or Bridge Between Restriction
Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under Section 4902( b) and 4902( 8- 1) of the Vehicle Code, and,
upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than twentyfive
dollars ($ 25. 00) and not more than one hundred dollars ($ 100. 00) and
costs.
Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
304. Truck Traffic Restricted on Certain Streets.
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle other than
a passenger car on any of the following streets or parts of streets:
All streets in the Colonial Manor Development
All streets in the Nelmor Park II and Flint Developments
Provided: nothing in this section shall prohibit - any person from
driving an emergency vehicle on any of those streets or parts of streets,
or from driving on any of those streets or parts of streets a truck or
other commercial vehicle making local deliveries to or pickups from
premises located along that street or part of a street.
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of twenty- five dollars ($ 25. 00) and
costs.
Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
122 -
15, § 401) ( 15, § 401)
Part 4
General Parking Regulations
401. Vehicles to be Parked Within Marked Spaces. Wherever a space
is marked off on any street for the parking of an individual vehicle, every
vehicle parked there shall be parked wholly within the lines bounding that
space, and it shall be a violation of this article for any person to park a
vehicle or allow it to remain parked otherwise. ( Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
402. Parking Prohibited at All Times in Certain Locations. Parking
shall be prohibited at all times in the following locations:
Street Side Between
Congo Road Both E. Philadelphia Avenue to Smith Road
Gilbertsville Road Both Swamp Pike to Township Boundary
Grosser Road Both Gilbertsville Road to Route 100
Martin Avenue Both Fire Co. No. 1 and cul- de- sac
Wilson Avenue East Alley at the former St. Luke' s to a
point 50 feet therefrom
Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
403. Parking Prohibited in Certain Locations Certain Days and Hours.
Parking shall be prohibited in the following locations at all times on the
days and between the hours indicated in this section, as follows:
Street Side Between Days Hours
Fourth Street North Montgomery St. Monday thru 6 A. M. to 6 P. M.
and Borough of Saturday
Boyertown
Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
404. Parking of Trucks, Buses and Certain Other Vehicles Prohibited
in Certain Locations. It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or to
allow to remain parked, on any of the following streets or parts of
streets, any vehicle other than a passenger car ( which shall not include
any bus, motor home or passenger car attached to a trailer of any kind):
Street Between
Reserved)
Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
123 -
15, § 405) ( 15, § 405)
405. Parking Time Limited in Certain Locations Certain Days and
Hours. No person shall park a, vehicle, or allow it to remain parked, for
longer than the time indicated, in any of the following locations, at any
time on the days and between the hours indicated:
Parking
Street Side Between Days Hours Time Limit
Reserved)
Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
406. Special Purpose Parking Zones Established; Parking Otherwise
Prohibited. The following are established as special purpose parking
zones, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on to
allow it to remain parked, in any such zone, except as specifically
provided for that zone:
Location Authorized Purpose
Douglass Park Park Use Only
Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
407. Standing or Parking on Roadway for Loading or Unloading. It
shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle ( other
than a pedalcycle) on the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at
the edge or curb of any street, except that standing or parking for the
purpose of loading or unloading persons or property shall be permitted
Monday through Saturday, between the hours of 9: 00 a. m. and 11: 30 a. m. and
between the hours of 1: 30 p. m, and 4: 00 p. m., and for no longer than
necessary for the loading or unloading.
Street Side Between
Reserved)
Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
408. Residential Permit Parking.
1. Findings and Purpose: The Township of Douglass finds that:
A. certain residential areas in the Township are subjected to
commuter vehicle packings, therefore depriving the residents of those
areas of spaces in which to park their own vehicles;
B. those residential streets are also subjected to a high degree
of commuter traffic which substantially reduces the quality of the
ambient air level; and
124 -
1. 5, § 408, cont' d) ( 15, 4408, cont' d)
C. the establishment of a parking permit program for certain
affected areas should facilitate efficient movement of traffic by
providing for parking preference during certain hours of the day and
days of the week. Therefore, the Township considers it to be in the
interest of the people of the Township to provide for the establishment
of a residential permit parking program to insure primary access
to available parking spaces by neighborhood residents and also to
provide a cleaner ambient air level.
2. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, words and terms
listed in this subsection, as follows, shall have the following meanings:
COMMUTER VEHICLE - a motor vehicle parked in a residential area
by a person not a resident of that residential area;
PROPRIETOR - a person who owns or leases real estate within a
residential area of which he is not a resident, but who owns or
manages a business enterprise or professional office maintained at
that address; for the purpose of this section, a proprietor shall be
entitled to one ( 1) parking permit for that business or professional
office address;
RESIDENT - a person who owns or leases real property within a
residential area and who maintains either a voting residence, or bona
fide occupancy, or both, at that address;
RESIDENTIAL AREA - a contiguous area containing public highways
or parts of public highways primarily abutted by residential property
or residential and non -business property ( such as schools, parks,
places of worship, hospitals and nursing homes).
3. Criteria: The residential areas designated in subsection - 4 of
this section are those deemed impacted and hence eligible for residential
parking on the basis of the following criteria:
A. During any period between the hours of 7: 00 a. m. and 6: 30
p. m., Monday through Saturday, except legal holidays, the number of
vehicles parked ( or standing), legally or illegally, on the streets in
the area is equal to seventy percent ( 70%) or more of the legal, on -
street parking capacity of the area. For the purpose of this
criterion, a legal parking space shall be twenty ( 20) linear feet.
B. During the same period as specified in A, directly above, ten
percent ( 10%) or more of the vehicles parked ( or standing) on the
streets in the area are not registered in the name of a person
residing in the area. For the purpose of this criterion, the latest
available information from the Bureau of Motor Vehicles and Licensing
of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation regarding
registration of motor vehicles shall be used.
Provided: in determining that a specific area identified as
impacted and eligible for residential permit parking is designated as
a residential permit parking area, the following factors are taken
into consideration:
125 -
15, § 408, cont' d) 15, § 408, cont' d)
1) the local and metropolitan needs with respect to clean
air and environment;
2) the possibility of a reduction in total vehicle miles
driven in the Township;
3) the likelihood of alleviating traffic congestion,
illegal parking and related health and safety hazards;
4) the proximity of public transportation to the
residential area;
5) the desire and need of the residents for residential
permit parking and their willingness to bear the administrative
costs in connection with it; and
6) the need for parking in excess of the residential
permit parking program in proximity to establishments located in
the residential permit parking area and used by the general
public for religious, health or educational purposes.
4. Designation of residential permit parking areas: The following
are designated as residential permit parking areas:
Area Bounded by and Including
Grosser Road Entire length
Signs shall be erected along the streets in each residential permit parking
area, indicating the days, hours, locations and conditions under which
parking shall be by permit only.
5. Application for permit: Application for a residential parking
permit shall be made to the Chief of Police by the person desiring the
permit, who shall be only the owner or the driver of a motor vehicle who
resides on or is a proprietor of property immediately adjacent to a street
or other location within a residential parking permit area. A separate
application shall be required for each motor vehicle, and each application
shall be accompanied by a ten dollar ($ 10. 00) permit fee, which shall be
for the use of the Township, to be applied to the cost of administering the
residential permit parking program. Each application shall contain the
following information: the name of the owner or the driver, as the case may
be, of the motor vehicle; the address of the resident or the proprietor, as
the case may be; the make, model and registration number of the motor
vehicle; and the driver number as taken from the applicant' s current
driver' s license. At the discretion of the Chief of Police, the applicant
shall be required, at the time of making application, to present his
driver' s license and the vehicle registration card.
6. Issuance of permit: Upon receipt of the application and the
permit fee, and determination by him that the information upon the application
shows that the applicant is entitled to a residential parking
permit, the Chief of Police shall issue to the applicant a residential
parking permit, which shall be valid for the remainder of the calendar
year. The permit shall display the serial and registration numbers of the
motor vehicles, the residential parking area number, and the expiration
date. The permit shall be renewable annually before the expiration date, 0
MM
15, § 408( 6), cont' d) 15, § 408( 6), cont` d)
Upon making application for renewal and payment of the ten dollar ($ 10. 00)
permit fee. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any
person to display other than the current and valid permit while standing or
parking in a residential permit parking area at any time when those permits
are to be displayed.
7. Temporary and exemption parking permits: Temporary parking
permits may be issued by the Chief of Police, upon payment of a fee of two
dollars ($ 2. 00), to bona fide visitors of residents of a designated residential
permit parking area, and exemption parking permits may be issued,
without payment of a fee, to handicapped persons.
8. Responsibility of permit holder:
A. Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary,
the holder of a residential parking permit shall be permitted
to stand or park a motor vehicle operated by him in any designated
residential parking area during those times when parking of motor
vehicles is permitted in that area. While a vehicle for which a
residential parking permit has been issued is so parked, that permit
shall be displayed so as to be clearly visible through the windshield
of the vehicle. A residential parking permit shall not guarantee or
reserve to the holder a parking space within a designated residential
permit parking area.
B. A residential parking permit shall not authorize its holder
to stand or park a motor vehicle in any place where or at any time
when stopping, standing or parking of motor vehicles is prohibited or
set aside for other specified types of vehicles, nor shall the permit
exempt its holder from the observance of any traffic or parking
regulation other than residential permit parking regulation or restriction.
C. No person other than the permit holder whose name appears on
the permit shall use a residential parking permit or display it on a
vehicle operated; any such use or display by a person other than the
permit holder shall constitute a violation of this section by the
permit holder and by the person who so used or displayed the parking
permit.
D. It shall constitute a violation of this section for any
person falsely to represent himself as eligible for a residential
parking permit or to furnish false information in an application to
the Chief of Police in order to obtain a residential parking permit.
1) Revocation of permits: The Chief of Police shall have
authority to revoke the residential parking permit of any permit
holder found to be in violation of any provision of this section.
Upon written notification to him of the revocation, the permit
holder shall surrender the permit to the Chief of Police.
Failure to do so, when so requested, shall constitute a violation
of this section. Provided: any person receiving such a notice
may, within ten ( 10) days after the date of the notice, appeal to
Board of Supervisors for a hearing on the revocation, and the
decision of Board of Supervisors shall be final.
46 ( Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
127 -
15, § 409) ( 15, § 409)
409. Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this Part
shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
twenty- five dollars ($ 25. 00) and costs. Provided: it shall be the duty of
the police officers of the Township to report to the appropriate official
all violations of any provision of this Part, indicating, in each case:
the Section violated; the license number of the vehicle involved in the
violation; the location where the violation took place; and any other facts
that might be necessary in order to secure a clear understanding of the
circumstances attending the violation. The police officer making the
report shall also attach to or place upon every such vehicle a notice
stating that the vehicle was parked in violation of this Part. The notice
shall contain instructions to the owner or driver of the vehicle that if he
will report to the office of the Township Secretary and pay the sum of ten
dollars ($ 10. 00) within forty- eight ( 48) hours after the time of the
notice, that act will save the violator from prosecution and from payment
of the fine and costs prescribed in the first sentence of this Section.
Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986; as amended by Ord. 97- 1, 2/ 18/ 1997)
9
128 - Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997
15, § 501)
Part 5
0 Removal and Impoundment of Illegally Parked Vehicles
15, § 501)
501. Applicability and Scope. This Part is enacted under authority
of Section 6109( a- 22) of the Vehicle Code , and gives authority to the
Township to remove and impound those vehicles which are parked in a tow
away zone and in violation of parking regulations of this Chapter. Vehicles
which have been abandoned ( as defined by the Vehicle Code) or which
are parked in such a manner as to interf ere with traf f is or pose a hazard
to others, may be towed under the provisions of the Pennsylvania Motor
Vehicle Code. ( Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
502. Authority to Remove and Impound. The Township of Douglass
shall have authority to remove and impound, or to order the removal and
impounding, of any vehicle parked overtime or otherwise illegally, provided
that the circumstances of its parking were within the conditions stated in
501 of this Part. Provided: no such vehicle shall be removed or impounded
except in strict adherence to the provisions of this Part, or the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code. ( Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
503. Tow Away Zones Designated. The following designated streets
and/ or parking lots are hereby established as towaway zones. Signs shall
be posted to place the public on notice that their vehicles may be towed
for violation of the Township parking regulations:
Street Side Between
Parking Lot
Reserved)
Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
504. Designation of Approved Storage Garages; Bonding; Towing and
Storage. Removal and impounding of vehicles under this Chapter shall be
done only by " approved storage garages" that shall be designated from time
to time by Board of Supervisors. Every such garage shall submit evidence
to Board of Supervisors that it is bonded or has acquired liability insurance
in an amount satisfactory to Board of Supervisors as sufficient to
indemnify owners of impounded vehicles against loss or damage to those
vehicles while in the custody of the garage keeper for the purpose of
towing or storage. The approved storage garage shall submit to Board of
Supervisors its schedule of charges for towing and storage of vehicles
75 Pa C. S. A. §§ 101 et seq. as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified
or reenacted by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
129 -
15, § 504, cont' d) ( 15, § 504, cont' d)
under this Chapter, and, when the schedule is approved by Board of Supervisors,
those charges shall be adhered to by the approved storage garage;
no different schedule of charges shall be demanded of or collected from any
person whose vehicle is removed or impounded under this Chapter by any
approved storage garage. The Board of Supervisors shall delete from its
list of approved storage garages any garage that makes any unapproved
charge in connection with any vehicle removed or impounded under this
Chapter. ( Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
505. Payment of Towing and Storage Charges. The payment of towing
and storage charges shall not relieve the owner or driver of any vehicle
from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation of the provision
of this Chapter for which the vehicle was removed or impounded. ( Ord.
86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
506. Reclamation Costs. In order to reclaim his vehicle, the owner
shall pay towing and storage costs, plus a twenty- five dollar ($ 25. 00) fee
of which ten dollars ($ 10. 00) shall be transferred to the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation by the garage to which the vehicle was taken.
Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
507. Records of Vehicles Removed and Impounded. The Township shall
cause a record to be kept of all vehicles impounded under this Part and
shall be able at all reasonable times to furnish the owners or the agents
of the owners of those vehicles with information as to the place of storage
of the vehicle. ( Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
508. Restrictions upon Removal of Vehicles. No vehicle shall be
removed under the authority of this Part or the Vehicle Code if, at the
time of the intended removal, the owner or the person for the time being in
charge of the vehicle is present and expresses a willingness and intention
to remove the vehicle immediately. ( Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
509. Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this
Part shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of fifty
dollars ($ 50. 00) together with all costs of disposing of the vehicle under
provisions of the Vehicle Code, 75 P. S. §§ 7301 et seq. ( 1977), as hereafter
amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the General Assembly of
Pennsylvania. ( Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
510. Reports and Disposition of Unclaimed Vehicles. If after a
period of fifteen ( 15) days the vehicle in storage remains unclaimed, a
report shall be filed with PennDOT in accordance with § 7311 of The Vehicle
Code, by the person having legal custody of the vehicle. If the vehicle
has not been claimed after thirty ( 30) days, the vehicle may be transferred
to a licensed Salvor who will then be responsible for filing the proper
reports and disposing of the vehicle in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 73 of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code ( 75 Pa C. S. A. §§ 101 et
seq., as amended). ( Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
130 -
15, § 601)
Part 6
Snow and Ice Emergency
15, § 601)
601. Declaration of Snow and Ice Emergency. In order to facilitate
the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards of snow and ice on the
snow emergency routes named in § 903 of this Part, the [ designated official),
in his discretion, may declare a snow and ice emergency ( designated
in this Part as a " snow emergency"). Information on the existence of a
snow emergency may be given by the Township through radio, newspaper or
other available media, and information on the termination of the emergency
may be given by use of the same media. ( Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
602. Parking Prohibited, Driving Motor Vehicles Restricted, on Snow
Emergency Routes During Emergency. After any snow emergency is declared,
it shall be unlawful, at any time during the continuance of the emergency,
for any person:
1. to park a motor vehicle or to allow that vehicle to remain parked
anywhere on any snow emergency route designated in § 603 of this Part; or
2. to drive any motor vehicle on any such snow emergency route,
unless that vehicle is equipped with snow tires or chains.
Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
603. Snow Emergency Routes Designated. The following are designated
as snow emergency routes:
Street
Reserved)
Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
Between
604. Penalty for Violation.
1. If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under
601 of this Part, a person shall park a motor vehicle or allow a motor
vehicle to remain parked anywhere upon a snout emergency route, that person
shall be guilty of a violation of this Part, and, upon conviction, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than fifteen dollars ($ 15. 00) and
costs.
2. If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under
601 of this Part, a person shall drive a motor vehicle upon a snow emergency
route, without having that vehicle equipped with snow tires or
chains, that person shall be guilty of a violation of this Part, and, upon
conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of twenty- five dollars
25. 00) and costs.
Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
131 -
0 CHAPTER 16
PARKS AND RECREATION
Part 1
Park Regulations
101. Definitions
102. Park Hours
103. Prohibited Conduct
104. Reservation for Specific Uses
105. Authority to Close Areas
106. Enforcement
107. Penalties
Page Corrected 4/ 7/ 1993 - 133 -
16, 5101) ( 16, 5101)
Part 1
Park Regulations
101. Definitions. As used in this Part, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears
from the context:
PARK OR PARKS - unless specifically limited, shall be deemed to
include all parks, playgrounds, recreation areas, tennis courts, beaches,
recreation structures and facilities, and also entrances and approaches
thereto, and all other land or property or structures, now or hereafter ,
owned or acquired by the Township for park or recreational purposes.
PERSON - any natural person, corporation, organization of persons,
company, association or partnership.
RULES AND REGULATIONS - any rules and regulations hereby or hereafter
promulgated by the Board of Supervisors under the authority herein conferred.
Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
102. Park Hours. All parks shall be opened daily to the public at
such hours as the Board of Supervisors may from time to time designate, but
in no event shall any person be permitted to be in attendance in any park
between 11: 00 P. M. and sunrise during Daylight Savings Time, or between
10: 00 P. M. and sunrise during Standard Time, unless special permission be
granted by the Board of Supervisors. ( Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
103. Prohibited Conduct. No person in attendance at a park shall:
1. Injure, deface, remove, cut or damage any of the trees, plants,
shrubs, turf, buildings, structures, signs or fixtures, or any other
property of the Township of Douglass located within the park.
2. Litter any area of the park with garbage, paper, bottles, cans or
other waste material; nor dispose of the same in any way except in receptacles
designated for such purpose.
3. Kindle or maintain any fire in the park except in fireplaces or
areas specially designated for that purpose and located by authority of the
Board of Supervisors.
4. Remove any bench, seat, table or other appliance without permission
of the Board of Supervisors.
5. Injure, deface, destroy or remove any notice, rule or regulation
posted at any place within the park by authority of the Board of Supervisors;
nor shall any notice or placard be posted within the park other
than by authority of said Board.
6. Set up any booth, table or stand for the sale of any article or
service whatsoever within the limits of the park without permission of the
Board of Supervisors; distribute, sell, service or rent any services or
commodity or solicit for any purpose without permission of the Board of
Supervisors.
135 -
16, § 103, cont' d) ( 16, 5103, cont' d)
7. Operate, stop or park any vehicle, bicycle or other means of
conveyance except in areas where permitted or designated by proper authority
of the Township, or operate the same in a reckless or negligent manner
or in excess of any posted speed limit or in such a manner as to become a
nuisance to other area users.
8. Operate commercial vehicles, unless providing authorized services.
9. Bring onto the premises, possess or consume any alcoholic beverage
or illegal drugs of any kind; no person shall enter the park in an intoxicated
state or otherwise be under the influence of alcohol or illegal
drugs.
10. Carry or discharge any firearms, slingshots, firecrackers, fireworks
or other missile propelling instruments or explosives or arrows, or
otherdangerous weapons which have such properties as to cause annoyance or
injury to any person or property, unless permission has been granted by the
Board of Supervisors in designated areas; police officers in the performance
of their duties will be exempt from these provisions.
11. Play ball, swim, golf, pitch horseshoes, engage in archery, camp
or launch, dock or land any boat, engage in finding buried objects with
special detectors, or participate in any other form of recreation, sporting
endeavor or pastime, except in those areas which may be designated from
time to time for that purpose by the Board of Supervisors.
12. Disrobe or change clothing except in buildings or facilities made
available for that purpose.
13. Disturb the peace by any conduct so as to annoy any other person
using the park for recreational purposes.
14. Operate a snowmobile, minibike, motorcycle, or any vehicle
recreational or otherwise except on designated roads, trails, or areas set
aside for their use.
15. Use threatening, abusive, insulting, profane or obscene language
or words.
16. Commit any disorderly or immoral acts.
17. Hold any public meeting or rally with more than five ( 5) persons
or engage in any marching or driving as members of a military, political or
other organization without permission of the Board of Supervisors, which
requires a statement of information, including the name of the organization,
its purpose, number of persons expected to be invited, expected
duration and name( s) of person( s) in charge.
18. Disobey a proper order of a police officer or Board of Supervisors
member, or disobey or disregard or fail to comply with any rule or
regulation, warning, prohibition, instruction or direction given by an
authorized person and posted or displayed by sign, notice, bulletin, card,
poster, or when notified or informed as to its existence by the Board of
Supervisors or an authorized person.
19. Hunt for, capture or kill, or attempt to capture or kill, or aid
or assist in the capturing or killing of, in any manner, any wild bird or
wild animal of any description, either game or otherwise, and to that end, .
136 -
16, § 103( 19), cont' d) ( 16, § 103( 19), cont' d)
it is unlawful for any person to carry onto or possess in any park, a
shotgun or rifle or pistol or firearm of any make or kind unless specific
permission is granted for a designated area by authority of the Board of
Supervisors.
20. Allow pets to run at large out of control.
Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
104. Reservation for Specific Uses. The use of all parks shall be
on a first come, first served basis unless otherwise reserved:
1. By annual permission granted by the Board of Supervisors for the
scheduling of various league games, etc;
2. For school or college athletic games, practice, contests, or
exhibitions;
3. For regularly scheduled school district or municipal recreation
programs;
4. By permission granted by the Board of Supervisors for a specific
requested use.
Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
105. Authority to Close Areas. Recreation facilities which become
hazardous for public use due to weather, water, fire or unforeseeable
conditions may be closed only at the discretion of the Board of Supervisors.
( Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
106. Enforcement. The police officers of the Township are charged
with enforcement of the provisions of this Part. ( Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
107. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate
any provision of this Part, upon conviction thereof in an action brought
before a district justice in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than one thousand dollars
1, 000. 00) plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs,
to a term of imprisonment not to exceed ninety ( 90) days. Each day that a
violation of this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall
be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense. ( Ord.
86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986; as amended by Ord. 96- 5, 11/ 4/ 1996; and by Ord, 97- 2,
7 7/ 1997)
Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997 137 -
1
CHAPTER 17
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
Reserved to accommodate future ordinances)
139 -
10 CHAPTER 18
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
Part 1
General Regulations
101. Definitions
102. Use of Public Sewers Required
103. Sewers and Connections
104. Rules and Regulations Governing Building Sewers and Connections to
Sewers
105. Prohibited Discharges
106. Enforcement
107. Declaration of Purpose
Part 2
Sewage Management Program
201. Short Title; Introduction; Purpose
202. Definitions
203. Applicability
204. Permit Requirements
40 § 205. Inspections
206. Operation
207. Maintenance
208. System Rehabilitation
209. Liens
210. Disposal of Septage
211. Administration
212. Appeals
213. Penalties
40
Page Revised 4/ 7/ 1993 - 141 -
18, § 101) ( 18, § 101)
Part 1
40 General Regulations
101. Definitions. Unless the context specifically and clearly
indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this Part shall be as
follows:
ACT - the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the
Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U. S. C. § 1251, et seg.
AUTHORITY - the Berks -Montgomery Municipal Authority, a
Pennsylvania municipal authority.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER -
A. A principal or executive officer of at least the level
of vice president, if the industrial user is a corporation.
B. A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user
is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively.
C. A duly authorized representative of the individual
designated above if such representative is responsible for the
overall operation of the facilities from which the indirect
discharge originates.
IMPROVED PROPERTY - any property within the Township of Douglass,
Montgomery County, upon which there is erected a structure intended
for continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human
beings and from which structure sewage and/ or industrial waste shall
be or may be discharged.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE - the discharge or introduction of pollutants
from any source regulated under § 307( B) or ( C) of the Act into the
sewage system ( including holding tank waste discharged into the
system).
INDUSTRIAL USER - a source of indirect discharge of industrial
waste which does not constitute a discharge of pollutants under
regulations issued pursuant to § 402 of the Act.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE - any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or form
of energy, discharge, rejected or escaping in the course of any
industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process, or waste
conversion, storage or recycling process, or in the course of the
development, recovery or processing of natural resources, as distinct
from sewage, including such ground, surface or stormwater as may be
present and blended therewith.
OWNER - any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable,
sole or partial, of any property located in Douglass Township,
Montgomery County.
PERSON - any individual, partnership, co -partnership, firm,
company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity or other legal entity, or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall
include the feminine, the singular shall include the plural where
indicated by the context.
Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994 - 143 -
18, § 101, cont' d) 18, § 101, cont' d)
POLLUTION - the manmade or man -induced alteration of the
chemical, physical, biological or radiological integrity of water.
POLLUTANT - any dredged soil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical waste, biological
materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment,
rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal and agricultural
waste discharged into water.
PRETREATMENT the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of
pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging
or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the Authority' s system.
The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or
biological processes or by processed changes using other means, except
as prohibited by 40 C. F. R. § 403. 6( d).
SEWAGE SYSTEM - all of the facilities, as of any particular time,
for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage and
industrial waste in the Township of Douglass, Montgomery County,
owned, maintained and operated by the Authority.
SHALL - is mandatory. " May" is permissive.
WASTEWATER - the liquid and water carried industrial or domestic
waste from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and
insti- tutions which contributes into or enters the Authority' s
system. Waste water includes sewage.
Ord. 93- 7, 10/ 4/ 1993, Art. I)
102. Use of Public Sewers Required.
1. Conditions Requiring Connection. The owner of any improved
property located within the Township and accessible to and whose principal
building is within one hundred fifty ( 150) feet of the sewer system, shall
make connection therewith in such manner as the Township and the Authority
may require, within sixty ( 60) days after notice to such owner from the
Township or Authority to make such connection, for the purpose of discharge
of all waste water from such improved property, subject to such limitations
and restrictions as shall be established herein or otherwise shall be
established by the Township or the Authority from time to time. In no
event shall any pollutant or any toxic waste be discharged into the sewage
system by any industrial user, significant industrial user, or any person,
except under and pursuant to written contract with the Authority and/ or
under and pursuant to a permit issued by the Authority. Unless expressly
manifested to the contrary, it shall be assumed hereinafter, that all
reference to the reception of waste water and sewage exclude therefrom any
and all pollutants and toxic waste and other industrial discharge except as
may be authorized to be included by specific and individual contract with
the Authority and/ or pursuant to a permit issed by the Authority.
2. Discharge to Sewers Only. All sewage and industrial waste from
any improved property, after connection of such improved property with the
sewer as required in accordance with § 102( 1), hereinabove set forth, shall
be conducted into a sewer, subject to such limitations and restrictions as
established hereinafter or otherwise as may be established by the
Authority, from time to time.
144 - Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994
18, § 102( 3)) ( 18, § 102( 3))
3. Unlawful to Discharge Other Than to Sewers.
A. No person shall place or deposit or permit to be placed or Is deposited upon public or private property within the Township any
sewage or waste water in violation of § 9102( 1),( 2) hereinbefore set
forth.
B. No person shall discharge or permit to be discharged to any
natural outlet or waters of the State within this Township any sewage
or waste water in violation of § 102( 1),( 2) hereinbefore set out,
except where suitable treatment has been provided which is satisfactory
to the Authority. [ Ord. 93- 71
C. This Section shall not apply to discharges of stormwater
under and pursuant to 40 C. F. R. § 122. 26( a)( 3).
D. No person shall use or authorize anther to use, in the
construction, modification or repair of any sewage plumbing in any
structure or part of any sewage system, any pipe, pipe fitting, solder
or flux that is not lead free.
4. Privy Vaults, Cesspools, Etc.
A. No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar
receptacle shall be used and maintained at any time upon any improved
property which has been or is connected to a sewer or which shall be
required under § 102( 1) to be connected to a sewer.
B. Every such privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or
similar receptacle in existence shall be abandoned and, at the
discretion of Township, shall be cleansed and filled under the
direction and supervision of Township, and any such privy vault,
cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle not so
abandoned, and, if required by the Township, cleansed and filled,
shall constitute a nuisance and such nuisance may be abated as
provided by law, at the expense of the owner of such improved
property.
C. No connection from any cesspool, privy vault, sinkhole,
septic tank or similar receptacle shall be made with any sanitary
sewer lateral or main.
5. Notice to Connect. Notice to connect to the Authority' s system
shall be made by the Township forwarding to the owner a copy of this Part,
including any amendment theretofore in effect and a written document
ordering the connection.
Ord. 93- 7, 10/ 4/ 1993, Art. II)
103. Sewers and Connections.
1. Group Connections. Except as otherwise provided in this § 103,
each improved property shall be connected separately and independently to
the sewer through a building sewer. Grouping of more than one ( 1) improved
property on one ( 1) building sewer lateral shall not be permitted, except
under special circumstances and for good sanitary reasons or other good
cause shown, but then only after special permission of the Authority, in
writing, shall have been secured. [ Ord. 93- 71
2. Costs of Connection.
building sewer lateral and
building sewer lateral to the
Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994
All costs and expenses
all costs and expenses
sewer shall be borne by
145 -
of construction of a
of connection of a
the owner of the
18, § 103( 2), cont' d) ( 18, § 103( 2), cont' d)
improved property to be connected; and such owner shall indemnify and save
harmless this Township and the Authority from all loss or damage that may
be occasioned, directly or indirectly, as a result of construction of
a building sewer lateral or of connection of a building to the sewer.
3. Location of Connection.
A. A building sewer shall be connected to the sewer at the place
designated by the Authority and where the lateral is provided.
B. The invert of a building sewer lateral at the point of
connection shall be at the same or a higher elevation than the invert
of the sewer. A smooth, neat joint shall be made and the connection
of a building sewer to the lateral shall be made secure and
watertight.
4. Powers of Township; Liens. If the owner of any improved property,
located in the Township and accessible to and whose principal building is
within one hundred fifty feet ( 150) from the sewer system, after sixty ( 60)
days notice from the Township, in accordance with § 102( 1), shall fail to
connect such improved property, as required, the Township may make or cause
to be made such connection and may collect from such owner the costs and
expenses thereof. In such case, the Township shall forthwith, upon
completion of work, send an itemized bill of the costs of the construction
of such connection to the owner of the improved property to which
connection has been so made, which bill shall be payable forthwith. In
case of neglect or refusal by the owner of such improved property to pay
said bill, the Township shall file municipal liens for said construction
within six ( 6) months of the date of the completion of construction of said
connection, the same to be subject in all respects to the general law
provided for the filling and recovery of municipal liens.
Ord. 93- 7, 10/ 4/ 1993, Art. III)
104. Rules and Regulations Governing Building Sewers and Connections
to Sewers.
1. Discharge. It shall be unlawful to discharge without an appropriate
Authority permit to any natural outlet within the Township of
Douglass, Montgomery County, in any area under the jurisdiction of the
Authority, and/ or to the Authority any waste water except as authorized by
the Authority' s inspector and the Authority' s engineer in accordance with
the provisions of this Part and the Authority' s regulations.
2. Owner' s Responsibility for Maintenance. Every sewer line of any
improved property shall be maintained in a sanitary and safe operating
condition and in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Berks -
Montgomery Municipal Authority by the owner of such improved property at
the owner' s sole expense.
3. Authority to Issue Permit. No owner of improved property shall
repair or install sewer connections to the Authority' s system or allow the
same to be done for him except upon the issuance of an appropriate permit
by the Berks -Montgomery Municipal Authority in accordance with its rules
and regulations.
4. Authority Regulations to Govern Connections. No plumber or
plumbing firm shall be permitted to repair or install any sewer connections
to the Authority' s system except in accordance with the Authority' s rules
and regulations. 0
Ord. 93- 7, 10/ 4/ 1993, Art. IV)
146 - Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994
18, § 105) 18, § 105)
105. Prohibited Discharges.
1. No user shall contribute to or cause to be contributed, directly
or indirectly, any pollutant or waste water which will interfere with the
operation or performance of the Authority' s system. A user shall not
contribute any of the following substances to the Authority:
A. Discharges of trucked or hauled waste.
B. Discharges of any waste water containing any radioactive
wastes or isotopes with a half life or concentration which may exceed
limits established by the Municipal Authority inspector and/ or
Authority engineer pursuant to applicable State or Federal
regulations.
C. Any waste water which causes a hazard to human life or
creates a public nuisance.
D. Surface water from roofs, pavements, streets, yards or any
other source shall not be allowed to drain into the sanitary sewer
system.
E. Condensing water of air conditioning or refrigeration
equipment, excluding condensate, shall not be allowed to enter the
sanitary sewer system.
F. Waters from floor drains, sump pumps, wall gutters, roof
leaders, French drains or perforated pipe shall not be allowed to
enter the sanitary sewer system.
G. Discharge Prohibitions. No user shall contribute or cause to
be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or waste water
which will interfere with the operation or performance of the
Authority' s system whether or not the user is subject to National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards or any other National, State or
local pretreatment standards or requirements. A user shall not
contribute the following substances to the Authority:
1) Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their
nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient, either alone or by
interaction with other substances, to cause fire, explosion or
any other injury to the Authority' s system or to the operation of
the system. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited
to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene,
ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, per
chlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides, sulfides and any
substance having more than one hundred ( 100) ppm of fat, oil or
grease.
a) No waste stream shall be discharged to the
Authority which has a closed cup flash point of less than
one hundred forty ( 140) degrees Fahrenheit or sixty ( 60)
degrees Centigrade using the test methods specified in 40
C. F. R. § 261. 21. This prohibition shall also apply to
aqueous solutions containing less than twenty five ( 25)
percent alcohol by volume.
2) Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction
to the flow in the sewer or other interference with the operation
of the waste water treatment facilities, or which may pass
Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994 - 147 -
18, § 105( 1)( G), cont' d) 18, § 105( 1)( G), cont' d)
through to suface waters, such as, but not limited to, petroleum
oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, grease, garbage with particles
greater than one half ( 1/ 2) inch in any dimension, animal guts or
tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hide or fleshing, entrails,
whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or
marble dust, metal, glass straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags,
spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar,
asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or
lubricating oil, mud or glass grindings or polishing wastes.
3) Any waste water having a PH less than six ( 6. 0) or
higher than eight and a half ( 8. 5), or waste water having any
other corrosive properties capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment and/ or personnel of the Authority' s system.
4) Any waste water containing toxic pollutants in
sufficient quantity, either singulary or by interaction with
other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any waste water
treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals,
create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the Authority' s
system, or exceed the limitations set forth in a categorical
pretreatment standard. A toxic pollutant shall include, but not
be limited to, any pollutant identified pursuant to Section
307( a) of the Act.
5) Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids,
which either singulary or by interaction with other wastes are
sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life, or are
sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and
repair or are capable of causing any worker health and/ or safety
problems.
6) Any substance which may cause the system' s effluent or
any other product of the Authority' s operation, such as residues,
sludges or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse, or
which could interfere with the reclamation process. In no case
shall a substance discharged to the Authority' s system cause the
system to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal
criteria, guidelines or regulations applicable to sludge use or
disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the
Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substance Control Act or State criteria
applicable to the sludge management method being used.
7) Any substance which will cause the Authority' s system
to violate its NPDES and/ or State disposal system permit or the
receiving water quality standard.
8) Any waste water having a temperature which will inhibit
biological activity in the Authority' s treatment process, such
as, but not limited to, dye waste and vegetable tanning
solutions.
9) Any waste water having a temperature which will inhibit
biological activity in the Authority' s treatment plant resulting
in interference and in all events any waste water which, alone or
in conjunction with other waste water, causes the plant' s in
fluent to exceed one hundred four ( 104) degrees Fahrenheit ( forty
40) degrees Celsius).
148 - Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994
t
18, § 105( 1)( G), cont' d) 18, § 105( 1)( G), cont' d)
10) No waste water containing total solids of such
character and quantity that unusal attention or expense is
required to handle such materials for sewage treatment.
11) Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants
B. O. D., etc.), released at a flow rate and/ or pollutant
concentration which a user knows, or has reason to know, will
cause interference to the Authority' s plant. A user, who
discharges such pollutant causing interference, shall not be
responsible therefore if, and only if, (a) the user did not know,
or have reason to know, that the discharge would cause
pass- through or interference, and ( b) the user was at the time in
compliance with existing limits for each pollutant in its
discharge, or, in the absence of limits, its discharge at the
time of the pass- through or interference has not changed
materially from its prior discharges occurring when the Authority
was in compliance with its NPDES permit. In no case shall a
sludge load have a flow rate or contain concentration or
quantities of pollutants that exceed, for any time period longer
than fifteen ( 15) minutes, more than five ( 5) times the average
twenty- four ( 24) hour concentration, quantities or flow during
normal operations.
2. In order to insure the health and welfare of the community in
general, the Authority is authorized to refuse to permit any person to
discharge sewage and/ or industrial waste into the sewer system in the
absence of compliance by the said person with the Authority' s rules and
regulations.
3. The Authority shall adopt rules and regulations as it shall deem
necessary and proper relating to sewer connections, sewer service,
pretreatment, pollution standards, inspection and recording, rates and
fines and such other matters as may be necessary for the continued safe and
efficient operation of the sewer system.
4. The Authority shall adopt rules and regulations enforcing the pretreatment
requirements of the Act, which rules and regulations shall be
applicable to all users withing the Township of Douglass.
Ord. 93- 7, 10/ 4/ 1993, Art. IV)
Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994 149 -
18, § 106) ( 18, § 106)
106. Enforcement.
1. Responsibility. The Sewer Authority is hereby authorized to
impose penalties and fines for noncompliance by any person with its rules
and regulations. Additionally, the Authority is authorized to deny to
persons the right to work on the system; to deny service to persons; and to
terminate service to persons; all for failure to comply with its rules and
regulations and this Part. The Authority shall use its police powers for
the enforcement of this Part and its regulations.
2. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any
provision of this Part, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before
a district justice in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($ 1, 000. 00)
plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed ninety ( 90) days. Each day that a violation of
this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall be found to
have been violated shall constitute a separate offense. [ Ord. 97- 21
3. The Authority is specifically authorized to enforce the provisions
of the Solid Waste Management Act, ( 1980, July 7th P. L. 380, No. 97) in
accordance with the enforcement provisions contained therein for municipalities.
4. False Reports. Any person who knowingly makes any false statements,
representations or certification in any application, record, report,
plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to the
Authority' s rules and regulations, or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly
renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under the
Authority' s rules and regulations shall be prosecuted in accordance with
the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for submitting false reports
to authorities together - with any and all other criminal penalties
applicable to such conduct, and to that end, the Authority is hereby
authorized to commence enforcement for such violation in accordance with
the procedure authorized by law,
5. Fines and costs imposed under provisions of this Part shall be
enforceable and recoverable in the manner and at the time provided by
applicable law,
6. The Authority shall appoint a Municipal Authority inspector who
shall have the powers, duties and qualifications prescribed by this Part or
otherwise prescribed by the Authority. The duties of the Municipal
Authority inspector shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
A. To make any required inspections and supervise any tests
necessary to insure that all provisions of this Part and the
Authority' s regulations are being faithfully complied with, and to
remove or correct or require the removal or correction of any work or
materials that are faulty and/ or not approved.
B. To observe and prevent, whenever possible, any infraction of
the Authority' s regulations and any and all Federal, State and
Township regulations applicable to the inhabitants of the geographical
area served by the Authority.
C. The Municipal Authority inspector shall, upon properly
identifying himself, be given access to any structure or area in order
150 Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997
18, § 106( 6)( C), cont' d) 18, § 106( 6)( C), cont' d)
to fulfill his/ her duty to make inspections to determine whether any
drainage connection is adequate, faulty, improperly used, neglected or
abandoned or whether any unlawful repair, alteration, installation or
addition has been made thereon. Such inspections shall be made at
times reasonably convenient to the occupants.
D. When an investigation reveals any condition that is or may be
unsanitary, inadequate, violative of the Authority' s regulations or
dangerous to life or health, the inspector shall issue an order to the
owner of the property wherein such condition exists to take such
action as may be necessary and adequate to correct and completely
abate and remove the unlawful or objectionable condition. The order
shall be in writing. A copy shall be sent or served on the owner and
shall state the nature of the correction ordered. The condition shall
be abated or corrected by the owner within the time stated in order.
E. The inspector shall have the right to enter the premises of
any user at any time during operations to determine whether the user
is complying with all requirements of this Part and any waste water
discharge permit or order issued thereunder. However, before such
entry, the inspector shall first obtain permission to enter. Users
shall allow the inspector ready access to all parts of the premises
for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and
copying and the performance of any additional duties.
1) Where a user has security measures in force which
require proper identification and clearance before entry into its
premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its
security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable
identification, the inspector will be permitted to enter without
delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
Z) The inspector shall have the right to set up on the
user' s property, or require installation of, such devices as are
necessary to conduct sampling and/ or metering of the user' s -
operations.
3) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy
access to the facility to be inspected and/ or sampled shall be
promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of
the inspector and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing
such access shall be born by the user.
4) Unreasonable delays in allowing the inspector access to
the user' s premises shall be a violation of this Part.
5) In connection with said inspection, the Inspector shall
have the right to take such samples of any solid, semisolid,
liquid or contained gaseous materials as he may deem appropriate.
for analysis. If such analysis is in fact made, copies of the
results of same shall be made available to the property operator
within five ( 5) days after receipt of same by the Authority.
F. If permission to enter is not obtained or the inspector has
been refused access to a building, structure or property or any part
thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that
there may be a violation of these regulations, or that there is a need
Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994 - 150. 1 -
18, § 106( 6)( F), cont' d) ( 18, § 106( 6)( F), cont' d)
to inspect and/ or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling
program of the Authority designed to verify compliance with this
regulation or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the
overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the
inspector may seek issuance of a search warrant from the appropriate
Commonwealth official authorized to issue a search warrant. Probable
cause shall exist where ( a) the inspector has been refused access to
the property, building, premises, place, book, record, log or physical
evidence or has been prevented from taking samples or conducting
tests; and ( b) the sampling, testing, inspectionor examination is
authorized and required by this Part or the Authority' s regulations
and/ or any other applicable law, or ( c) that the inspector has reason
to believe that a violation of this Part or the Authority' s
regulations shall or will occur giving rise to the necessity for such
inspection, sampling, test or examination.
7. Any discharge to the Authority' s system in contravention of this
Part, the Authority' s regulations, any permit issued by the Authority or
any other applicable law, State or Federal, isherebydeclared to be a
public nuisance which the Authority may, after notice, declare to be a
nuisance and prosecute as authorized herein or by any other applicable
statute, including the Pennsylvania Water Pollution Control Act, 35 P. S.
Section 691. 1 et sem.
Ord. 93- 7, 10/ 4/ 1993, Art. V; as amended by Ord. 96- 5, 11/ 4/ 1996; and by
Ord. 97- 2, 7/ 7/ 1997)
107. Declaration of Purpose. It is declared that enactment of this
Part is necessary for the protection, benefit and preservation of the
health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of this Township as well as
the preservation of the constitutionally guaranteed natural waterways of
the Township. The same can only be guaranteed by insuring against the
introduction of pollutants into the Authority' s system such as will interfere
with the operation of the system or contaminate the system' s end
products, or the receiving waters, or the atmosphere, or such as would
otherwise impinge, impede or interrupt the Authority' s system. ( Ord. 93- 7,
10/ 4/ 1993, Art. VII)
150. 2 - Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997
I8, § 201)
Part 2
Sewage Management Program
18, § 201)
201. Short Title; Introduction; Purpose.
1. This Part shall be known and may be cited as " A Sewage Management
Program for Douglass Township."
2. As provided by the municipal codes, the Clean Streams Law, 35 P. S.
691. 1 to 691. 1001, and the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, Act of
January 24, 1966, P. L. 1535, as amended, 35 P. S. § 750. 1 et seq., known as
Act 537, municipalities have the power and the duty to provide for adequate
sewage treatment facilities and for the protection of the public health by
preventing the discharge of untreated or inadequately treated sewage.
Accordingly, a sewage management program is established by this Part to
effectively prevent and abate water pollution and hazards to the public
health caused by improper treatment and disposal of sewage.
3. The purpose of this Part is to provide for the inspection, maintenance
and rehabilitation of on - lot sewage disposal systems; to further
permit the Township to intervene in situations which are public nuisances
or hazards to the public health; and, to establish penalties and appeal
procedures necessary for the proper administration of a sewage management
program.
4. A public education effort, including brochures, shall be implemented
to make homeowners aware of what they are required to do and why it is
important.
Ord. 92- 5, 10/ 5/ 1992, § 1)
202. Definitions.
ACT 537 - the Act of January 24, 1966, P. L. 1535, as amended, 35 P. S.
750. 1 et seq., known as the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act.
AUTHORIZED AGENT - a certified sewage enforcement, officer, code
enforcement officer, professional engineer, plumbing inspector, Township
Secretary or any other qualified or licensed person who is delegated by the
Township to function within specified limits as the agent of the Township
to carry out the provisions of this Part.
BOARD - the Board of Supervisors, Douglass Township, Montgomery
County, Pennsylvania.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER ( C. E. O.) - an individual employed by the
Township to administer and enforce other ordinances in the Township.
COMMUNITY SEWAGE SYSTEM - any system, whether publicly or privately
owned, for the collection of sewage from two ( 2) or more lots, and the
treatment and/ or disposal of the sewage on one ( 1) or more lots or at any
other site.
DEPARTMENT - the Department of Environmental Resources of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania ( D. E. R.).
Page Corrected 6/ 17/ 1996 - 150. 2. 1 -
18, § 202, cont' d) ( 18, § 202, cont' d)
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE SYSTEM - a system of piping, tanks or other facilities
serving a single lot and collecting and disposing of sewage in whole 40
or in part into the soil or into any waters of this Commonwealth.
MALFUNCTION - the condition which occurs when an on -lot sewage disposal
system discharges sewage onto the surface of the ground, into ground
waters of this Commonwealth, into surface waters of this Commonwealth,
backs up into the building connected to the system or otherwise causes a
nuisance hazard to the public health or pollution of ground or surface
water or contamination of public or private drinking water wells. Systems
shall be considered to be malfunctioning if any of the conditions noted
above occur for any length of time during any period of the year.
MUNICIPALITY - Douglass Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
OFFICIAL SEWAGE FACILITIES PLAN - a comprehensive plan for the provision
of adequate sewage disposal systems, adopted by the Township and
approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources, as
described in and required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act.
ON - LOT SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM - any system for disposal of sewage
involving pretreatment and subsequent disposal of the clarified sewage into
the soil for final treatment and disposal, including both individual sewage
systems and community sewage systems.
PERSON -, any individual, association, public or private corporation
for profit or not for profit, partnership, firm, trust, estate, department,
board, bureau or agency of the Commonwealth, political subdivision,
municipality, district, authority or any other legal entity whatsoever
which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty or imposing a fine or
imprisonment, the term person shall include the members of an association,
partnership or firm and the officers of any local agency or municipal,
public or private corporation for profit or not for profit.
REHABILITATION - work done to modify, alter, repair, enlarge or
replace an existing on -lot sewage disposal system.
SEWAGE - any substance that contains any of the waste products or
excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals and
any noxious or deleterious substances being harmful or inimical to the
public health, or to animal or aquatic life, or to the use of water for
domestic water supply or for recreation or which constitutes pollution
under the Act of June 22, 1937, P. L. 1987, No. 394, known as " The Clean
Streams Law," as amended.
SEWAGE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER ( S. E. O.) - the official of the local agency
or Montgomery County Health Department who issues and reviews permit
applications and conducts such investigations and inspections as are
necessary to implement Act 537 and the rules and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
SEWAGE MANAGEMENT DISTRICT - any area or areas of the Township in
which the Board of Supervisors of Douglass Township finds a sewage management
program necessary. The Board of Supervisors shall consider the
150. 2. 2 - Page Corrected 6/ 17/ 1996
0
18, § 202, cont' d) ( 18,,§ 202, cont' d)
Official Sewage Facility Plan in making any determination whether ornot a
sewage management program is necessary. Also, all lots which have been the
subject of two ( 2) or more citations for sewage treatment violations within
a period of five ( 5) years shall be a part of the Sewage Management
District.
SEWAGE MANAGEMENT PROGRAM - a comprehensive set of legal and administrative
requirements encompassing the requirements of this Part and other
administrative requirements adopted by the Township to effectively enforce
and administer this Part.
SUBDIVISION - the division or redivision of a lot, tract or other
parcel of land into two ( 2) or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in exiting lot lines. The enumerating of
lots shall include as a lot that portion of the original tract or tracts
remaining after other lots have been subdivided therefrom.
Ord. 92- 5, 10/ 5/ 1992, § 2)
203. Applicability. From the effective date of this Part, its.
provisions shall apply in the Sewage Management District to all persons
owning and/ or occupying any property serviced by an on -lot sewage disposal
system and to all persons installing or rehabilitating an on -lot sewage
disposal system. At the date of the enactment of this Part, the Board
finds that a sewage management program is necessary in Green Ridge II,
Green Ridge III and Crestview Subdivisions. Therefore, Green Ridge II,
Green Ridge III and Crestview Subdivision are designated as part of the
Sewage Management District. Other areas may be included from time to time
as found necessary by the Board. ( Ord. 92- 5, 10/ 5/ 1992, § 3)
204. Permit Requirements.
I. No person shall install, construct or request bid proposals for
construction or alter an individual sewage system or community sewage
system or construct or request bid proposals for construction or install or
occupy any building or structure for which an individual sewage system or
community sewage system is to be installed without first obtaining a permit
indicating that the site and the plans and specifications of such system
are in compliance with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act and the standards adopted pursuant to that Act.
2. No system or structure designed to provide individual or community
sewage disposal shall be covered from view until approval to cover the same
has been given by the Sewage Enforcement Officer. If seventy- two ( 72)
hours have elapsed, excepting Sundays and holidays, since the Sewage
Enforcement officer issuing the permit received notification of completion
of construction, the applicant may cover said system or structure unless
permission has been specifically refused by the Sewage Enforcement Officer.
3. The Township may require applicants for sewage permits to notify
the Sewage Enforcement Officer of the schedule for construction of the
permitted on -lot sewage disposal system so that inspection( s) in addition
to the final inspection required by Act 537 may be scheduled and performed
by the Sewage Enforcement Officer.
Page Added 4/ 7/ 1993 - 150. 3 -
18, § 204( 4)) 18, § 204( 4))
4. No building or occupancy permit shall be issued by the Township or
its Code Enforcement Officer for a new building which will contain sewage
generating facilities until a valid sewage permit has been obtained from
the Sewage Enforcement Officer.
5. No building or occupancy permit shall be issued and no work shall
begin on any alteration or conversion of any existing structure, if said
alteration or conversion will result in the increase or potential increase
in sewage flows from the structure, until the Township' s Code Enforcement
Officer and the structure' s owner receive from the Sewage Enforcement
Officer either a permit for alteration or replacement of the existing
sewage disposal system or written notification that such a permit will not
be required. The Sewage Enforcement Officer shall determine the proposed
alteration or conversion of the structure will result in increased sewage
flows.
6. Sewage permits may be issued only by a Sewage Enforcement Officer
employed by Department of Health for the express purpose.
Ord. 92- 5, 10/ 5/ 1992, § 4)
205. Inspections.
1. Any on - lot sewage disposal system may be inspected by the
Township' s authorized agent at any reasonable time as of the effective date
of this Part.
2. The inspection may include a physical tour of the property, the
taking of samples from surface water, wells, other ground water sources,
the sampling of the contents of the sewage disposal system itself and/ or
the introduction of a traceable substance into the interior plumbing of the
structure served to ascertain the path and ultimate destination of wastewater
generated in the structure.
3. The Township' s authorized agent shall have the right to enter upon
land for the purposes of inspections described above.
4. A written report shall be furnished to the owner of each property
inspected and a copy of said report shall be maintained in the Township
records.
5. A schedule of routine inspections may be established by the
Township, if necessary, to assure the proper function of the systems in the
Sewage Management District.
6. The Township, by its authorized agent, shall inspect systems known
to be, or alleged to be malfunctioning. Should said inspections reveal
that the system is indeed malfunctioning, the Township or its authorized
agent shall request action by the Montgomery County Health Department to
require the correction of the malfunction. If total correction is not
technically or financially feasible, in the opinion of Montgomery County
Health Department, then action by the property owner to mitigate the
malfunction shall be required.
7. There may arise geographic areas within the Township where
numerous on -lot sewage disposal systems are malfunctioning. A resolution
of these area wide problems may necessitate detailed planning and a
150. 4 - Page Added 4/ 7/ 1993
18, § 205( 7), cont' d) ( 18, § 205( 7), cont' d)
Township sponsored revision of that area' s Act 537 Official Sewage
Facilities Plan. When a DER authorized Official Sewage Facilities Plan
Revision has been undertaken by the Township, mandatory repair or
replacement of individual malfunctioning sewage disposal systems within the
study area may be delayed at the discretion of the Township, pending the
outcome of the plan revision process. However, the Montgomery County
Health Department may compel immediate corrective action whenever a
malfunction, as determined by Montgomery County Health Department and the
Pennsylvania DER, represents a serious public health or environmental
threat.
Ord. 92- 5, 10/ 5/ 1992, § 5)
206. Operation. Only normal domestic wastes shall be discharged
into any on -lot sewage disposal system. The following shall not be discharged
into the system:
A. Industrial waste.
B. Automobile oil and other nondomestic oil.
C. Toxic or hazardous substances or chemicals including, but not
limited to, pesticides, disinfectants, acids, paints, paint thinners,
herbicides, gasoline and other solvents.
D. Clean surface or ground water, including water from roof or
cellar drains, springs, basements sump pumps and french drains.
Ord. 92- 5, 10/ 5/ 1992, § 6)
207. Maintenance.
1. Any person owning a building served by an on -lot sewage disposal
system which contains a septic tank shall have the septic tank pumped by a
qualified pumper/ hauler within one ( 1) year of the effective date of this
Part. Thereafter, such person, and all other persons installing such
systems after the effective date of this Part, shall have the tank pumped
at least once every five ( 5) years. Septic tanks shall be pumped through
an opening in the top of the tank rather than through a connection to the
tank which would not permit a complete and thorough removal of the contents
of the tank. Receipts from the pumper/ hauler shall be submitted to the
Township within the prescribed one ( 1) year and five ( 5) year . required
pumping periods.
2. The required pumping frequency may be increased at the discretion
of the authorized agent if the septic tank is undersized, if solid build up
in the tank is above average, if a garbage grinder is used in the building,
if the system malfunctions or for other good cause shown. If any person
can prove that their system tank has been pumped within five ( 5) years of
the one ( 1) year anniversary of the effective date of this Part, then the
Township may delay that person' s initial required pumping to conform to the
general five ( 5) year frequency requirement.
3. Any person owning a property served by a septic tank shall submit,
with each required pumping receipt, a written statement from the
pumper/ hauler or from any other qualified individual acceptable to the
Township that the baffles in the septic tank have been inspected and found
Page Added 4/ 7/ 1993 - 150. 5 -
18, § 207( 3), cont' d) ( 18, § 207( 3), cont' d)
to be in good working order. Any person whose septic tank baffles are
determined to require repair or replacement shall first contact the Sewage
Enforcement Officer for approval of the necessary repair.
4. Any person owning a building serviced by an on -lot sewage disposal
system which contains an aerobic treatment tank shall follow the operation
and maintenance recommendations of the equipment manufacturer. A copy of
the manufacturer' s recommendations and a copy of the service agreement
shall be submitted to the Township within one ( 1) year of the effective
date of this Part. Thereafter, service receipts shall be submitted to the
Township at the intervals specified by the manufacturer' s recommendations.
In no case may the service or pumping intervals for aerobic treatment tanks
exceed those required for septic tanks.
5. Any person owning a building served by a cesspool or dry well
shall have that system pumped according to the schedule prescribed for
septic tanks. As an alternative to this scheduled pumping of the cesspool
or dry well, the owner may secure a sewage permit from the Sewage Enforcement
Officer for a septic tank to be installed preceding the cesspool or
dry well. For a system consisting of a cesspool or dry well preceded by an
approved septic tank, only the septic tank must be pumped at the prescribed
interval.
6. The Township may require additional maintenance activity as needed
including, but not necessarily limited to, cleaning and unclogging of
piping, servicing and the repair of mechanical equipment, leveling of
distribution boxes, tanks and lines, removal of obstructing roots or trees,
the diversion of surface water away from the disposal area, etc.
Ord. 92- 5, 10/ 5/ 1992, § 7)
208. System Rehabilitation.
I. No person shall operate and maintain an on -lot sewage disposal
system in such a manner that it malfunctions. All liquid wastes, including
kitchen and laundry wastes and water softener backwash, shall be discharged
to a treatment tank. No sewage system shall discharge untreated or
partially treated sewage to the surface of the ground or into the waters of
the Commonwealth unless a permit to discharge has been obtained from the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources.
2. The Township shall issue a written notice of violation to any
person who is the owner of a property in the Township which is found to be
served by a malfunctioning on -lot sewage disposal system or which is
discharging raw or partially treated sewage without a permit.
3. Within seven ( 7) days of notification by the Township that a
malfunction has been identified, the property owner shall have the septic
tank or cesspool or privy pumped and shall make application to the Sewage
Enforcement Officer for a permit to repair or replace the malfunctioning
system. Within sixty ( 60) days of initial notification by the Township,
construction of the permitted repair or replacement shall commence. Within
ninety ( 90) days of the original notification by the Township, the construction
shall be completed unless seasonal or unique conditions mandate a
longer period, in which case the Township shall set an extended completion
date.
150. 6 - Page Added 4/ 7/ 1993
18, § 208( 4)) ( 18, § 208( 4))
4. The Sewage Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to require
the repair of any malfunction by the following methods: cleaning, repair
or replacement of components of the existing system, adding or expanding
the existing disposal area, replacing a gravity distribution system with a
pressurized system, replacing the system with a holding tank, other alternatives
as appropriate for the specific site.
5. In lieu of, or in combination with, the remedies described in
subsection ( 4), above, the Sewage Enforcement Officer may require the
installation of water conservation equipment and the institution of water
conservation practices in structures served. Water using devices and
appliances in the structure may be required to be retrofitted with water
saving appurtenances or they may be required to be replaced by water
conserving devices and appliances. Wastewater generation in the structure
may also be reduced by requiring changes in water usage patterns in the
structure served. The use of laundry facilities may be limited to one ( 1)
load per day or discontinued altogether, etc.
6. In the event that the rehabilitation measures in subsections ( 1)
through ( 5), above, are not feasible or do not prove effective, the
Township may require the owner to apply to the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources for a permit to install an individual spray irrigation
treatment system or a single residence treatment and discharge system.
Upon receipt of said permit, the owner shall complete construction of the
system within ninety ( 90) days.
7. Should none of the remedies described above prove totally effective
in eliminating the malfunction of an existing on -lot sewage disposal
system, the property owner is not absolved of responsibility for that
malfunction. The Township may require whatever action is necessary to
lessen or mitigate the malfunction to the extent that it finds necessary.
Ord. 92- 5, 10/ 5/ 1992, § 8)
209. Liens. The Township, upon written notice from the Sewage
Enforcement Officer that an imminent health hazard exists due to failure of
a property owner to maintain, repair or replace an on -lot sewage disposal
system as provided under the terms of this Part shall have the authority to
perform or contract to have performed the work required by the Sewage
Enforcement Officer. The owner shall be charged for the work performed
and, if necessary, a lien shall be entered therefor in accordance with law.
Ord. 92- 5, 10/ 5/ 1992, § 9)
210. Disposal of Septage.
1. All septage originating within the Township Sewage Management
District shall be disposed of at sites or facilities approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources. Approved sites or
facilities shall include the following: septage treatment facilities,
wastewater treatment plants, composting sites and approved farm lands.
2. Septage of pumper/ haulers operating within the Township Sewage
Management District shall operate in a manner consistent with the provisions
of the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act, Act 97 of 1980, 35
P. S. §§ 6018. 101- 6018. 1003.
Ord. 92- 5, 10/ 5/ 1992, § 10)
Page Added 4/ 7/ 1993 - 150. 7 -
18, § 211) ( 18, § 211)
211. Administration.
1. The Township shall fully utilize those powers it possesses through is
enabling statutes and ordinances to effect the purposes of this Part.
2. The Township may employ a Code Enforcement Officer, Secretary
Administrator or other persons as required. The Township may also contract
with private qualified persons or firms as necessary to carry out the
provisions of this Part.
3. All permits, records, reports, files and other written material
relating to the installation, operation and maintenance and malfunction of
on -lot sewage disposal systems in the Sewage Management District shall
become the property of the Township. Existing and future records shall be
available for public inspection during required business houses at the
official Township Office. All records pertaining to sewage permits,
building permits, occupancy permits and all other aspects of the Township' s
sewage management program shall be made available, upon request, for
inspection by representatives of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources and Montgomery County Health Department.
4. The Board shall establish all administrative procedures necessary
to properly carry out the provisions of this Part.
5. The Board may establish a fee schedule, and subsequently collect
fees to cover the cost to the Township of administering this program.
Ord. 92- 5, 10/ 5/ 1992, § 11)
212. Appeals.
1. Appeals from decisions of the Township or its authorized agents
under this Part shall be made to the Board of Supervisors in writing within
thirty ( 30) days from the date of the decision in question.
2. The appellant shall be entitled to a hearing before the Board of
Supervisors at its next regularly scheduled meeting, if the appeal is
received at least fourteen ( 14) days prior to that meeting. If the appeal
is received within fourteen ( 14) days of the next regularly scheduled
meeting, the appeal shall be heard at the subsequent meeting. The Township
shall thereafter affirm, modify or reverse the aforesaid decision. The
hearing may be postponed for a good cause shown by the appellant or the
Township. Additional evidence may be introduced at the hearing provided
that it is submitted with the written notice of appeal.
3. A decision shall be rendered in writing within thirty ( 30) days of
the date of the hearing and sent by regular mail to appellant within seven
7) days thereafter. If a decision is not rendered within thirty ( 30)
days, the relief sought by the appellant shall be deemed granted.
Ord. 92- 5, 10/ 5/ 1992, § 12)
213. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate
any provision of this Part, upon conviction thereof in an action brought
before a district justice -in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($ 1, 000. 00)
plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed ninety ( 90) days. Each day that a violation of
150. 8 - Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997
18, § 213, cont' d) 18, § 213, cont' d)
this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall be found to
have been violated shall constitute a separate offense. ( Ord. 92- 5,
10/ 5/ 1992, § 13; as amended by Ord. 96- 5, 11/ 4/ 1996; and by Ord. 97- 2;
7/ 7/ 1997)
Page Added 7/ 7/ 1997 - 150. 9 -
a
a
CHAPTER 19
SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS
Reserved to accommodate future ordinances)
151 -
CHAPTER 20
SOLID WASTE
Part 1
Solid Waste Management
101. Definitions
102. Operation by Licensed Collectors and Transporters
103. Disposal of Municipal Waste
104. Regulations
105. Annual Survey
106. Certain Prohibitions and Requirements
107. Creation of Authority
108. Unlawful Activities; Nuisance
109. Penalties
110. Revocation of License
Ill. Injunctions; Concurrent Remedies
112. Inter -Municipal Agreement
113. Construction
114. Effective Date
115. Compliance With IMA
Part 2
Recyclable Materials Collection
201. Title
202. Legislative Intent
203. Definitions
204. Effective Date
205. Waste and Recyclable Materials Collection Contractor
206. Schedule
207. Containers
208. Disposal
209. Township Obligations
210. Contractor' s Obligations
211. Customer Practices
212. Reports
213. Nonresidential Collections
214. Separation of Recyclable Materials at Multi -Family Housing Properties
and Storage and Collection
215. Separation of Recyclable Materials at Nonresidential Properties
216. Public Awareness Program
217. Promulgation of Regulations
218. Penalties
Page Revised 4/ 7/ 1993 - 153 -
20, § 101) ( 20, §. 101)
IsPart1
Solid Waste Management
101. Definitions. The following terms shall have the following
meanings in this Part:
ACCEPTABLE WASTE - municipal waste which is not unacceptable waste or
nonprocessible waste.
COUNTY - County of Montgomery, Pennsylvania.
COUNTY ORDINANCE or COUNTY WASTE FLOW ORDINANCE - enacted by the
County creating the Western County System in the Western District,
providing for the licensure of various persons, regulating waste flow and
setting forth certain related provisions.
DATE OF WESTERN COUNTY SYSTEM OPERATION - that date on which the
Western County System shall be declared by the County to be ready to
commence the disposal of acceptable waste on a sustained basis.
HAZARDOUS WASTE - ( a) any material or substance which, by reason of
its composition or characteristics, is ( i) toxic or hazardous waste ( A) as
defined in the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, 42 U. S. C.
6901 et seq. , ( B) as defined in section 6( e) of the Toxic Substances
Control Act, 15 U. S. C. § 2605( e), ( C) under Act 97, or ( D) under any other
applicable laws of similar purpose or *effect, including, but not limited
to, with respect to each of such items in ( A) through ( D), any replacement,
amendment, expansion or supplement thereto and any rules, regulations, or
policies thereunder; or ( ii) special nuclear or by- product materials within
the meaning of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, 42 U. S. C. 52011 et seq., and
any replacement, amendment, expansion or supplement thereto and any rules,
regulations or policies thereunder; and ( b) any other material that any
governmental agency or unit having appropriate jurisdiction shall determine
from time to time is harmful, toxic, or dangerous, or otherwise ineligible
for disposal in the landfill.
LANDFILL - a landfill with which the Waste Authority has contracted to
dispose of acceptable waste.
MUNICIPALITY - the Township of Douglass, a Township of the Second
Class, located within the County of Montgomery, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
MUNICIPAL WASTE - municipal waste as defined in § 103 of Act 97 and
103 of Act 101, and any rules, regulations or policies promulgated
thereunder.
NONPROCESSIBLE WASTE - ( a) white goods ( b) automobile tires in quantity,
( c) noncombustible items, stumps, logs, brush and other waste -which
either ( i) weighs in a ccess of twenty- five ( 25) pounds or ( ii) exceeds one
1) of the following dimensions: four ( 4') feet in length, four ( 4")
inches in diameter or four ( 4") inches in thickness, ( d) sludges, ( e)
construction and demolition debris, or ( f) leaf waste beyond that permitted
by Act 101.
isPERSON - any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, trust, municipal authority, Federal
institution or agency, State institution or agency, Township, other
Page Revised 10/ 22/ 1991 - 155 -
20, § 101, cont' d) 20, § 101, cont' d)
governmental agency or any other legal entity or any group of such persons
whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
In any provisions of this Part prescribing a fine, penalty, imprisonment or
denial or grant of any license, or any combination of the foregoing, the
term " person" shall include the officers and directors of any corporation
or other legal entity having officers and directors.
PLAN the County -wide municipal waste management plan developed by
the County and approved by DER, as such has been and may hereafter be
amended or revised, in compliance with law.
PLAN REVISION - the revision dated June, 1990, to the County Municipal
Waste Management Plan developed by the County, to be submitted to DER and
approved by a majority of the affected municipalities within the County
representing a majority of the County' s population.
POINT OF ENTRY INTO THE WESTERN COUNTY SYSTEM - any delivery point
within the Western County System designated by the Waste Authority for
delivery of acceptable waste.
PROCESSIBLE WASTE - that portion of acceptable waste which is not
nonprocessible waste.
RECYCLING or RECYCLED - the collection, separation, recovery and sale
or reuse of metals, glass, paper, leaf waste, plastics and other materials
which would otherwise be disposed or processed as municipal waste or the
mechanized separation and treatment of municipal waste ( other than through
combustion) and creation and recovery of reusable materials otherthan a
fuel for the operation of energy.
SOURCE SEPARATION - the segregation and collection, prior to the point
of entry into the Western County System for the purpose of recycling of
individual components of acceptable waste, such as ( without limitation)
bottles, cans, and other materials in accordance with Act 101.
UNACCEPTABLE WASTE ( a) any material that by reason of its composition,
characteristics or quantity is ineligible for disposal at the landfill
pursuant to the provisions of ( i) the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act of 1976, 42 U. S. C. § 6901 et seq., and the regulations thereunder,
or ( ii) except for trace amounts normally found in household or
commercial solid waste, any other similarly applicable law ( including, but
not limited to, the following laws and the regulations, if any, promulgated
under each: the Toxic Substance Control Act, 15 U. S. C. § 2601 et sec.; the
Federal Insecticide, Fungicide and Rodenticide Act, 7 U. S. C. § 136 et seq.;
the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 33 U. S. C. § 1251; et 2E; the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act, 42
U. S. C. § 9601 et seq.; Act 97; the Hazardous Sites Cleanup Act, Act 108,
enacted October 18, 1988; and any similar or substituted legislation or
regulations or amendments to the foregoing, as well as any other laws
co -extensive with the foregoing); ( b) any other materials that any governmental
body or unit having or claiming appropriate jurisdiction shall
determine from time to time to be harmful, toxic, dangerous, or otherwise
ineligible for disposal at the landfill; ( c) any waste that a landfill or
other applicable facility is precluded from accepting pursuant to any
permit or governmental plan governing such landfill or other applicable
facility; ( d) hazardous waste; ( e) residual waste as defined in Act 101
except as otherwise provided in any landfill agreement to which the Waste
156 - Page Revised 10/ 22/ 1991
20, § 101, cont' d) . ( 20, § 101, cont' d)
Authority is a party); ( f) special nuclear or by- product materials within
the meaning of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, 42 U. S. C. § 2011 et seg., and
any similar or substituted legislation or regulation or amendments to the
foregoing, including, but not limited to, any other laws coextensive with
the foregoing; ( g) asbestos, sludge, infectious waste, chemotherapeutic
waste, and incinerator ash ( except as otherwise provided in any landfill
agreement to which the Waste Authority is a party); ( h) white goods in
quantity and/ or automobile tires in quantity; and ( i) any other material
that the Waste Authority reasonably concludes would require special handling
or present an endangerment to a disposal facility, the public health or
safety, or the environment.
WASTE AUTHORITY - the Waste System Authority of Western Montgomery
County created by the County for purposes relating to municipal waste
disposal and/ or the IMA and the County Waste Flow Ordinance.
WESTERN COUNTY SYSTEM or SYSTEM - the solid waste management and
disposal system created by the County for the Western District and every
aspect thereof including, but not limited to, equipment, transfer stations
and resource recovery facilities, residue disposal sites, contractual
arrangements or other rights, owned, acquired, leased, placed under contract,
constructed, or assumed, operated, or to be owned, acquired, leased,
placed under contract, constructed, operated, or assumed by the Waste
Authority, the County or any agent, designee or contractor of either in
connection with the plan or the plan revision.
WHITE GOODS - refrigerators, washing machines, dryers, window air
conditioners, hot water heaters and other major home appliances.
All other capitalized words and phrases shall have the same meaning as set
forth in Act 97 or Act 101 as they may hereinafter be amended or supplemented
by legislation regarding municipal waste management or planning, or
as set forth in the IMA. To the extent that any definition herein varies
from the definition in the IMA, the definition in the IMA shall control.
Ord. 90- 5, 9/ 17/ 1990, § 0
102. Operation by Licensed Collectors and Transporters.
1. Licensing. No person who is not duly licensed or deemed to be
licensed by the Waste Authority may collect or transport municipal waste
located or generated within the Township. This waste collection or transportation
license shall be a County license issued by the Waste Authority.
2. Compliance with Rules, Regulations and Ordinances. In carrying on
activities related to solid waste collection or transportation within this
Township, all municipal waste collectors and all municipal waste transporters
shall comply with the County ordinance, this Part and the other
municipal waste flow ordinances and all rules and reg. lations pertaining to
the collection, transportation, processing, and disposal of solid waste as
may be hereafter promulgated by the Waste Authority. Delivery by such
collectors or transporters to the Western County System of unacceptable,
waste, nonprocessible waste ( except for white goods) and waste from unapproved
sources is prohibited.
3. Administration. License hereunder shall be issued and revoked by
the Waste Authority, and administered by it. Any collectors or transpor-
Page Revised 10/ 22/ 1991 - 157 -
20, § 102{ 3), cont' d) ( 20, § 102( 3), cont' d)
ters who fail to comply with the provisions of this Part shall be sgbject
to any practicable sanctions in addition to the revocation of their
licenses.
Ord. 90- 5, 9/ 17/ 1990, § 2)
103. Disposal of Municipal Waste.
1, Delivery to Western County System. Except as provided in
subsections ( 2) and ( 3), below, all acceptable waste generated within this
Township shall be delivered to the Western County System and, all acceptable
waste collectors and transporters shall deliver to and dispose of all
acceptable waste collected or generated within the Township to solid waste
facilities designated in the Plan or Plan revision at one ( 1) or more
points of entry into the Western County System as designated from time to
time by the Waste Authority.
2. Disposal at Other Sites. Disposal of municipal waste collected or
generated within the Township may occur at other sites only as permitted by
rule, regulation, ordinance or order duly issued by the Waste Authority or
by the written agreement of the Waste Authority.
3. Recycling. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit source ,
separation or recycling or to affect any sites at which source separation
or recycling may take place.
Ord. 90- 5, 9/ 17/ 1990, § 3)
104. Regulations.
1. Compliance with Waste Authority Regulations. The collection,
transportation, processing, and disposal of municipal waste present or
generated within the Township shall be subject to such further reasonable
rules and regulations as may from time to time be promulgated by the Waste
Authority, including, without limitation, regulations related to the
operation, management, and administration of the Western County System,
applications and standards for licensing requirements for payment bonds or
other payment security, including, but not limited to meeting liability
insurance requirements, fees to be charged for such licensing, the terms of
licenses, procedures, record keeping, transportation routes, payment for
services, billing for shortfalls, sanctions for nonpayment, and other
matters.
2. Adoption of Regulations. Rules and regulations adopted by the
Waste Authority for the Western County System shall be deemed rules and
regulations adopted under this Part.
3. Consistency of Regulations with This Pert and Other Laws. No
rules and regulations adopted by the Township pursuant to this Part shall
be in violation of or inconsistent with the provisions of this Part, the
other municipal waste flow ordinances, the County Waste Flow Ordinance, the
Plan, the Plan Revision, the provisions and purposes of Act 97, Act 101, or
regulations adopted thereunder, or such other laws, regulations or requirements
as may be enacted by the United States of America, the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources or
the Pennsylvania Environmental Quality Board governing municipal waste Ir
planning, collection, storage, transportation, processing or disposal.
158 - Page Revised 10/ 22/ 1991
20, § 104( 4)) ( 20, § 104( 4))
4 Enforcement of Waste Flow Control. Enforcement of waste flow
control and the terms of and any duties established pursuant to the County
Waste Flow Ordinance, the other municipal waste flow ordinances and this
Part will be the responsibility of the County or the Waste Authority and,
if requested by the County or the Waste Authority, with the cooperation of
the municipalities.
Ord. 90- 5, 9/ 17/ 1990, § 4)
105. Annual Survey. All generators of municipal waste, and all
municipal waste collectors and municipal waste transporters, any landfill
operators, any transfer station operators, or any other parties involved in
the collection, transportation, processing or disposal of municipal waste
of the Township, shall cooperate in the taking and preparation of an annual
survey to be conducted by an engineering consultant designated by the Waste
Authority. ( Ord. 90- 5, 9/ 17/ 1990, § 5)
106. Certain Prohibitions and Requirements.
1. No person shall enter into any contract or conduct any other
activity concerning the collection, transportation, processing or disposal
of municipal waste in the Township in contravention of the terms of the
County Waste Flow Ordinance, this Part, or any rules and regulations issued
thereunder.
2. Recycling. Nothing contained in this Part shall interfere with
the operation of any program for recycling.
3. This Part shall be construed consistently with Act 97 and Act 101.
Ord. 90- 5, 9/ 17/ 1990, § 6)
107. Creation of Authority. The County has created the Waste
Authority to administer the terms of the County Waste Flow Ordinance and to
operate and administer the Western County System. ( Ord. 90- 5, 9/ 17/ 1990,
7)
108. Unlawful Activities; Nuisance.
1. Unlawful Conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
A. Violate, cause or assist in the violation of any provision of
this Part, any rule, regulation or order promulgated hereunder, or any
rule, regulation or order promulgated by the Waste Authority or the
County consistent with this Part.
B. Transport, process, treat, transferor dispose of or cause to
be processed, treated, transferred or disposed municipal waste generated
within the Township except as provided for in this Part.
C. Collect or transport municipal waste present or generated
within the Township without a valid license for collection or transportation
issued by the Waste Authority.
D. Hinder, obstruct, prevent or interfere with the Township, the
Waste Authority or the County or their personnel in the performance of
any duty under this Part or in the enforcement of this Part.
E. Act in a manner that in contrary to Act 97 or Act 101,
regulations promulgated thereunder, the Plan, the Plan Revision, this
Page Added 10/ 22/ 1991 - 158. 1 -
20, § 108( 1), cont' d) ( 20, § 108( 1), cont' d)
Part, the County ordinance, rules or regulations promulgated under this
Part, the County ordinance, or the terms of licenses issued thereunder.
2. Public Nuisance. Any unlawful conduct set forth in § 108( 1) hereof
shall constitute a public nuisance.
Ord. 90- 5, 9/ 17/ 1990, § 8)
109. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate
any provision of this Part, upon conviction thereof in an action brought
before a district justice in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($ 1, 000. 00)
plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed ninety ( 90) days. Each day that a violation of
this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall be found to
have been violated shall constitute a separate offense. ( Ord. 90- 5,
9/ 17/ 1990, § 9; as amended by Ord. 96- 5, 11/ 4/ 1996; and by Ord. 97- 2,
7/ 7/ 1997)
110. Revocation of License. Upon finding that any person has
engaged in unlawful conduct as defined in this Part, ( a) the Waste Authority
may revoke any license issued to that Person in accordance with §102 of
this Part and ( b) the Waste Authority may deny any subsequent application
by that person for a license pursuant to § 102 hereof. ( Ord. 90- 5,
9/ 17/ 1990, § 10)
111. Injunctions; Concurrent Remedies.
1. Restraining Violations. In addition to any other remedy provided
in this Part, the Waste Authority or the County may institute a suit in
equity where unlawful conduct or public nuisance exists as defined in this
Part for an injunction to restrain a violation of this Part or rules,
regulations, orders or the terms of a license promulgated or issued pursuant
to this Part. In addition to an injunction, the court may impose
penalties as authorized by § 109 hereof.
2. Concurrent Remedies. The penalties and remedies prescribed by
this Part shall be deemed concurrent. The existence or exercise of any
remedy shall not prevent the Waste Authority or the County from exercising
any other remedy provided by this Part or otherwise provided at law or
equity.
Ord. 90- 5, 9/ 17/ 1990, § 11)
112. Inter -Municipal A reement.
1. Entry into IMA. In order to implement the intent and terms of
this Part, the Township, pursuant to the Authority of the Intergovernmental
Cooperation Act, Act of July 12, 1972, No. 180, codified at 53 P. S.
481- 490, and Article IX, § 5, of the Constitution of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, has determined to enter into the IMA between the Township,
the County, the Waste Authority and other municipalities within the Western
District, together with such changes consistent with this Part, if any, as
may be approved by the officials of the parties executing the same, such
execution to be conclusive evidence of such approval.
2. Terms and Implementation of IMA. As more fully set forth in the
IMA and this Part:
158. 2 - Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997
20, 5112( 2)( A)) ( 20, § 112( 2)( A))
A. Terms of IMA. In the IMA:
1) The- Waste Authority agrees to arrange through the
Western County System for the provision of municipal waste
disposal facilities for the economical and environmentally sound
disposal of acceptable waste generated within the Township.
2) The municipalities state that they have enacted a
municipal waste flow ordinance in a form substantially similar to
this Part which requires that all acceptable waste be delivered
to the Western County System.
3) The County and the Waste Authority agree ( a) to enact
or cause to be enacted rules and regulations and ( b) to enforce
or cause to be enforced this Part and the County Waste Flow
Ordinance and the parallel municipal waste flow ordinances.
4) The municipalities agree to cooperated with the Waste
Authority in the enforcement of the IMA and all ordinances
enacted pursuant to the IMA ( provided, however, that to the
extent the enforcement of such ordinances can properly be delegated
to it, the Waste Authority shall undertake the primary
responsibility for such" enforcement) and the municipalities
thereby agree cooperatively to exercise their powers to accomplish
the objectives of the IMA.
B. Duration of Term of the IMA. The term of the IMA shall
commence on the date thereof and shall terminate on the tenth anniversary
of the date the Western County System becomes operational.
C. Purpose and Objectives of IMA. The purpose of the IMA is to
provide a mechanism to implement and operate the Western County
System.
D. Financial Obligations Under the IMA. During the term of the
IMA, municipalities ( to the extent that they engage in the collection
or transportation of municipal waste or contract with other persons
for the collection or disposal of municipal waste) and other persons
using the Western County System shall pay to the Waste Authority on a
monthly basis the appropriate per ton tipping fee plus any other
charges payable, as specified by the Waste Authority, for all tonnage
delivered or caused to be delivered to the Western County System, in
accordance with Article III of the IMA. Municipalities shall provide
certain monies for operating expenses of the Authority to the extent
not paid for through tipping fees on the basis of adjusted population
data.
E. Execution. Appropriate officers of this Township are authorized
and directed to execute the IMA on behalf of this Township.
F. Findings Under Intergovernmental Cooperation Act. As
required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act of July 12, 1972,
P. L. 762, No. 180, as amended, the following matters are specifically
found and determined: ( 1) the conditions of agreement are set forth
in the IMA; ( 2) the duration of the term of this agreement is set
forth in § 801 of the IMA; ( 3) the purpose of the IMA is to cooperate
with the County or Waste Authority and other municipalities in implementing
the Plan and the Plan Revision; ( 4) the agreement will be .
Page Added 10/ 22/ 1991 - 158. 3 -
20, § 112, cont' d) ( 20, § 112, cont' d)
financed through tipping fees imposed on users of the Western County
System and through the budgeting and appropriation of funds by the
Township as necessary to meet the expenses of the Waste Authority; ( 5)
the organizational structure necessary to implement the agreement is
set forth in the IMA with which the current officers of the Township
shall cooperate; ( 6) the manner in which property, real or personal,
shall be acquired, managed, licensed or disposed of is as set forth in
the IMA; and, ( 7) the agreement contemplates cooperation with the
County or Waste Authority, which entities are empowered to enter into
contracts ' for policies of group insurance and employee benefits,
including social security, for their employees.
Ord. 90- 5, 9/ 17/ 1990, § 12)
113. Construction. The terms and provisions of this Part are to be
liberally construed, so as best to achieve and to effectuate the goals and
purposes hereof. This Part shall be construed in pari materia with Act 97
and Act 101. ( Ord. 90- 5, 9/ 17/ 1990, § 13)
114. Effective Date. This Part shall become effective immediately.
Ord. 950-5, 9/ 17/ 1990, § 15)
115. ComEiance With IMA. The ' Township will take such actions as
are necessary to comply with the terms of the IMA and to fulfill its
obligations thereunder. ( Ord. 90- 5, 9/ 17/ 1990, § 16)
158. 4 - Page Added 10/ 22/ 1991
20, § 201) ( 20, § 201)
Part 2
Recyclable Materials Collection
201. Title. This Part shall be known and may be cited as " Douglass
Township Waste and Recyclable Materials Collection Ordinance." ( Ord. 91- 7,
9/ 16/ 1991, § 1)
202. Legislative Intent. This Part is intended to establish a waste
and recyclable materials collection system, and to comply with Act 101 of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania ( 53 P. S. § 4000. 101). This Part is intended
to require and encourage recycling. ( Ord. 91- 7, 9/ 16/ 1991, § 2)
203. Definitions.
ALUMINUM - all food and beverage cans made of the light -in -weight,
ductile and malleable metallic substance or element commonly known as
aluminum. This description excludes aluminum foil, trays, plates, and
miscellaneous aluminum products.
COLLECTION SITE - the curbside location for each customer at which
collection services are to be performed. Each residential unit and eligible
commercial establishment shall be a separate collection site.
COMMINGLED - recyclable materials ( a) which have been segregated from
regulated municipal waste but which have not been separated into different
types of recyclable materials and ( b) which have been placed in a special
recycling container for the purpose of collection.
CONTRACT WASTE - those portions of regulated municipal waste which are
to be collected and disposed of under the waste and recyclable materials
collection contract.
CONTRACTOR - the person providing contract waste and recyclable
materials collection under this Part.
COUNTY - the County of Montgomery, Pennsylvania.
CURBSIDE - the correct location for the placement of refuse containers
and recycling containers for the purpose of collection by the contractor.
The curbside location for each customer shall be ( a) adjacent to the
residential unit or eligible commercial establishment and ( b) no more than
five ( 5') feet from the public street used by collection vehicles.
CUSTOMER - each residential unit and eligible commercial establishment
within the Township, each of which shall be a collection site.
ELIGIBLE COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT - any person, other than a residential
unit, who ( a) generates municipal waste and ( b) requests and receives
approval by the Township to use the collection services provided under the
waste and recyclable ma* er: sls collection contract.
FACILITY - any specific site or person designated by WSAWMC as the
specific place or site or person to which solid waste or source separated
recyclable materials, or any portion of solid waste or source separated
recyclable materials, must or may be delivered; or in the absence of a
specific site or person being designated by WSAWMC, any approved site for
the delivery of any category of solid waste or source separated recyclable
materials. A site will be deemed an approved site for the purposes of this
Page Added 10/ 22/ 1991 -. 158. 5 -
20, § 203, cont' d) 20, § 203, cont' d)
definition so long as that site ( a) is in possession of all applicable
local, State and Federal permits, ( b) is operating in accordance with all
applicable local, State and Federal laws and regulations, and ( c) provides
WSAWMC with such data and information as WSAWMC requests, including,
without limitation, ( i) the quantity,, type, source and date of receipt of
solid waste and source separated recyclable materials that were generated
in Montgomery County and delivered to the site, ( ii) proof that the site is
in compliance with ( a) and ( b) above, and ( iii) in the case of source separated
recyclable materials, proof that all such materials received at the
site are, in fact, recycled.
GLASS, CLEAR - clear glass consists only of clear food and beverage
containers made of glass, of one ( 1) gallon or less capacity, and comprised
of the hard; brittle and transparent or partially transparent substance
produced by fusion of silica and silicates or sand containing soda and lime
and/ or other chemicals and substances usually included in the manufacture
of glass.
CLASS, COLORED - colored glass consists only of green or brown food
and beverage containers made of glass, of one ( 1) gallon or less capacity,
and comprised of the hard, brittle and transparent or partially transparent
substance produced by fusion of silica and silicates or sand containing
soda and lime and/ or other chemicals and substances usually including the
manufacture of glass.
MUNICIPAL WASTE - all solid waste which is within the definition
municipal waste" set forth in § 103 of the Municipal Waste Planning,
Recycling and Waste Reduction Act, Act of July 28, 1988, P. L. 528, No. 101.
MUNICIPALITY - the Township of Douglass.
NEWSPRINT - paper which has been used for the production of daily,
weekend, and special edition publications commonly known as newspapers.
OVERSIZED REFUSE ITEMS - refuse which will not fit into refuse containers,
including small furniture, carpet, portable televisions and the
like, but excluding tires and white goods.
PERSON any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipality, municipal authority,
governmental entity or agency, or any other legal entity whatsoever which
is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
PUBLIC AWARENESS PROGRAM the program developed and provided by the
Township to inform and encourage residents to use properly the recyclable
materials collection services provided under this contract.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS - all designated source separated recyclable
materials.
RECYCLING the separation, collection, recovery and sale or reuse of
metals, glass, paper, leaf waste, plastics and other materials which would
otherwise be disposed of or processed as waste or the mechanized separation
and treatment of solid waste and creation and recovery of reusable materials
or energy.
RECYCLING CONTAINERS - a container provided by the Township, made of
rigid plastic construction, with a capacity of not more than fourteen ( 14)
gallons.
158. 6 - Page Added 10/ 22/ 1991
20, § 203, cont' d) ( 20, § 203, cont' d)
REFUSE - all regulated municipal waste except the following categories
of solid waste:
A. Construction/ demolition waste.
B. Bulky waste.
C. Putrescible waste.
D. Uncompactible waste.
E. Special handling waste.
F. Household hazardous waste.
G. Recyclable materials selected by the Township.
H. Unacceptable waste.
I. Oversized refuse items.
J. Leaves.
REFUSE BAG - a bag for refuse collection approved and distributed by
the Township, bearing an identification mark established by the Township.
This shall be the exclusive means by which residents can dispose of refuse.
REFUSE CONTAINER - a receptacle with a capacity gf not more than forty
40) gallons which is ( a) constructed of plastic, metal, or fiberglass,
having handles of adequate strength for lifting and having a tight fitting
lid capable of preventing entrance into the container by vectors or ( b) a
polyethylene by which ( i) is specifically designed for storage and collection,
( ii) is protected against animal damage and overloading so as " to
prevent littering or attraction of insects or rodents and ( iii) has a
holding strength capable of withstanding normal stresses until it is
collected. The weight of a refuse container and its contents shall not
exceed forty ( 40) pounds.
REGULATED MUNICIPAL WASTE - any solid waste generated or collected
within Montgomery County which is garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or
office waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or
contained gaseous material, resulting from operation of residential,
municipal, commercial or institutional establishments and from community
activities, and any sludge which is not residual waste or hazardous waste
from a municipal, commercial or institutional water supply treatment plant,
wastewater treatment plant or air pollution control facility. The term
does not include recyclable materials.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT - any single family detached, semi- detached or
townhouse dwelling, or a dwelling unit within a multi -family building
containing three ( 3) or fewer dwelling units.
SEGREGATED - recyclable materials which have boen separated from
regulated municipal waste.
SOLID WASTE - any waste including, but not limited to, municipal,
residual or hazardous waste, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous materials.
SOURCE SEPARATED or SOURCE SEPARATION - the process of separating, or
the separation of, recyclable materials from other solid waste at the
location where generated for the purpose or recycling.
Page Added 10/ 22/ 1991 - 158. 7 -
20, § 203, cont' d) 20, § 203, cont' d)
STEEL AND BIMETALLIC CANS - the ferrous metal food or beverage containers
commonly known as tin cans.
UNACCEPTABLE WASTE - unacceptable waste consists of the following
categories of solid waste;
A. Chemotherapeutic waste.
B. Drums, barrels and buckets unless lids have been removed and
interiors cleaned and free of any residue.
C. Explosives and ordnance materials.
D. Gas cylinders, unless empty and delivered separate from other
waste.
E. Hazardous waste.
F. Liquid waste ( i. e. containing less than twenty ( 20%) percent
solids by weight or flowable).
G. Radioactive materials.
H. Residual waste.
I. Unsterilized or unprocessed infectious or pathological waste.
J. Any solid waste generated either ( i) outside of the Township
or ( ii) within the Township by a person other than a customer.
UNIT FEE - the annual fee for collection services bid by the contractor
in response to the solicitation which resulted in contract for waste
and recyclable materials collection.
WSAWMC - Waste System Authority of Western Montgomery County.
WHITE GOODS - large appliances weighing more than fifty ( 50) pounds,
including clothes washers, clothes dryers, dishwashers, freezers, refrigerators,
stoves, ovens, hot water heaters, air conditioners, furnaces and
electrical heaters.
YARD WASTE - all garden residues, grass clippings, shrubbery and tree
pruning less than one- quarter ( 4) inch in diameter and similar material,
but excluding leaves.
Ord. 91- 7, 9/ 16/ 1991, § 3)
204. Effective Date. The effective date of this Part shall be
October 1, 1991. ( Ord. 91- 7, 9/ 16/ 1991, § 4)
205. Waste and Recvclable Materials Collection Contractor. The
Board of Supervisors of Douglass Township, Montg- mery County, Pennsylvania,
shall engage a waste and recyclable materials collection contractor to
collect and remove by vehicle contract waste and recyclable materials
selected by the Township which customers have placed at curbside in the
Township, subject to the following conditions:
A. Contract waste shall include refuse, excluding oversized
refuse items, white goods and unacceptable waste, placed in refuse
bags for collection once a week. 10
B. Recyclable materials selected by the Township shall be
collected once every two ( 2) weeks.
158. 8 - Page Added 10/ 22/ 1991
20, § 205( C)) 20, § 205( C))
C. Collection services for oversized refuse items, tires, white
goods, yard waste, leaves, unacceptable waste, household hazardous
waste, special handling waste, construction/ demolition waste, bulky
waste, putrescible waste, or uncompactible waste shall be provided as
part of waste and recyclable materials collection system only in the
discretion of the Township in accordance with regulations promulgated
by it.
D. The waste and recyclable materials collection contractor may,
by contract or other special arrangement with a customer, agree to
provide services not included in the contract. Such contracts or
special arrangements shall be provided to customers on a uniform basis
and at a reasonable cost. The Township shall have no responsibility
or obligation with respect to any such contract or special
arrangement.
Ord. 91- 7, 9/ 16/ 1991, § 5)
206. Schedule.
1. General. The collection of contract waste and recyclable materials
shall be conducted in accordance with a schedule approved by the
Township. Collection shall be commenced between the hours of 5: 00 a. m. and
6: 00 p. m., except for a rescheduled Saturday collection when collection
shall be commenced and completed between 2: 00 a. m. and 6: 00 p. m.
2. Holidays. Collections will not be made on the following holidays:
New Year' s Day, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day
and Christmas Day. Collection which would normally occur on such holidays
shall be rescheduled for the following Saturday.
3. Detailed Scheduling. The contractor shall establish specific
scheduling, routes and traffic patterns of vehicles for the performance of
the work. At least thirty ( 30) days prior to the commencement date, the
contractor shall submit to the Township the contractor' s specific
schedules. Prior to such submission the contractor shall meet to discuss
alternatives with the Township.
4. Schedule Deviations. In the event that as a result of mechanical
breakdown, extraordinary weather or other cause there is a likelihood of
any delay or nonconformity to the collection schedule, the contractor shall
give immediate notice to the Township. Such notice shall not relieve the
contractor of liability for, nor impair the Township' s rights under contract
with respect to, such missed schedule.
Ord. 91- 7, 9/ 16/ 1991, § 6)
207. Containers.
1. Recycling Containers. The Township will supply each customer with
recycling containers. Title to the recycling containers shall remain in
the Township. The Township will promptly replace recycling containers when
notified by a customer or the contractor that a recycling container is
damaged or missing.
2. Refuse . Containers. Reusable refuse containers shall be returned
to curbside.
Ord. 91- 7, 9/ 16/ 1991, § 6)
Page Added 10/ 22/ 1991 - 158. 9 -
20, § 208) ( 20, § 208)
208. Disposal.
1. Contract Waste. All contract waste shall be hauled directly to a
WSAWMC facility for disposal.
2. Recyclable Materials. The contractor shall transport all recyclable
materials to the facility designated by the Township.
3. Direct Delivery. All contract waste and recyclable materials
collected shall be transported directly to a facility in accordance with
the Township rules and regulations without any intervening transfer,
unloading, processing, sorting, salvaging, scavenging, or reuse of any
portion of any load of such contract waste or recyclable materials from the
time of its collection until the time of its delivery to the facility.
Ord. 91- 7, 9/ 16/ 1991, § 8)
209. Township Obligations. In addition to the other obligations
imposed by this Part, the Township shall:
I. Pay all tipping fees.
2. Use reasonable efforts to inform customers of the benefits which
may be obtained from recycling recyclable materials and the schedule for
collection of recyclable materials.
3. Use reasonable efforts to enforce such ordinances, rules and
regulations as may from time to time be enacted governing municipal waste
collection, and particularly those relating to ( 1) containers for recyclable
materials and ( 2) the proper preparation of recyclable materials for
collection by the contractor.
4. Use reasonable efforts to identify and include in the base figures
those commercial enterprises in the Township that choose to become eligible
commercial establishments.
5. Pay any amounts required to dispose of recyclable materials and
receive any amounts collected therefor.
6. Approve and distribute refuse bags at a price fixed by the
Township,
Ord 91-7, 9/ 16/ 1991, § 9)
210. Contractor' s Obligations. In addition to the other obligations
imposed by this Part, the contractor shall:
1. Comply with all WSAWMC rules and regulations, including obtaining
and maintaining the requisite licenses.
2. Transport all contract waste directly to a WSAWMC facility without
any interceding transfer of storage.
3. Not commingle recyclable materials with contract waste
4. Not commingle any solid waste not collected under the waste and
recyclable materials collection contract with any contract waste or recyclable
materials collected under such contract.
Ord. 91- 7, 9/ 16/ 1991, § 10) 0
158. 10 - Page Added 10/ 22/ 1991
20, § 211) 20, § 211)
211. Customer Practices.
1. Refuse. Customers shall place refuse in refuse bags at curbside.
2. Recyclable Materials. Recyclable materials selected by the
Township shall be segregated. Such recyclable materials shall be
thoroughly rinsed and placed in marked recycling containers which shall be
provided by the Township.
Ord. 91- 7, 9/ 16/ 1991, § 11)
212. Reports. On or before the tenth ( 10th) day of each month, the
contractor shall submit an original to the Township, and a separate copy to
WSAWMC, of the monthly municipal report, together with weight receipts, for
all contract waste and recyclable materials collected in the Township. The
monthly municipal report shall include complete information with respect to
the preceding month, including the amounts of contract waste and of each
recyclable material collected under this Part. The weight receipts shall
reflect the total weight of all contract waste and recyclable materials
collected and disposed of during the preceding month. ( Ord. 91- 7,
9/ 16/ 1991, § 12)
213. Nonresidential Collections. Contract waste and recyclable
materials shall be collected under this Part only from residential units,
eligible commercial establishments and those additional sites, if any,
established for municipal facilities. The contractor may enter into
agreements to collect contract waste and recyclable materials from apartment
complexes with more than three ( 3) dwelling units, commercial establishments
that are not eligible commercial establishments, and the establishments
which are not customers. The contractor may also enter into
agreements to collect from customers solid waste which is not included
within the scope of the work. However, such collections shall not occur at
the same time as collections under this Part, nor shall the same vehicles
be used. No solid waste collected under any such other agreements shall be
a) added to the contract waste or recyclable materials collected under
this Part or, ( b) reflected on any documents submitted under this Part,
including without limitation, weight receipts, monthly reports, or the
like. ( Ord. 91- 7, 9/ 16/ 1991, § 13)
214 Separation of Recyclable Materials at Multi -Family Housing
Properties and Storage and Collection. All multi -family housing properties
containing four ( 4) or more dwelling units shall have a waste collection
system established by the owner, landlord or agent of the owner or landlord
to comply with Act 101, aforementioned. Such collection system must
include suitable containers for collecting and sorting materials, easily
accessible locations for the containers and written instructions to the
occupants concerning use and availability of the collection system. Such
collection system shall provide for and require separation of recyclable
materials selected by the Township and collection thereof for recycling at
least one ( 1) day each month. The owner or landlord shall submit an annual
report to the Township on or before January 31 of the following year
indicating the total weight of recyclable materials collected during the
prior year. ( Ord. 91- 7, 9/ 16/ 1991, § 14; as amended by Ord. 92- 4, 9/ 8/ 1992;
and by Ord. 93- 2, 3/ 1571993)
Page Revised 4/ 7/ 1993 - 158. 11 -
20, § 215) ( 20, § 215)
215. Separation of Recyclable Materials at Nonresidential
Properties. All nonresidential properties other than eligible commercial
establishments shall have a waste collection system established by the
owner or agent of owner to comply with Act 101, aforementioned. Such
collection system must include suitable containers for collecting and
sorting materials, easily accessible locations for the containers and
written instructions to the occupants concerning use and availability of
the collection system. Such collection system shall provide for and
require separation of high grade office paper, aluminum, corrugated paper
and leaf waste and recyclable materials selected by the Township and except
for leaf waste, collection thereof for recycling at least one ( 1) day each
month. The owner shall submit an annual report to the Township on or
before January 31 of the following year indicating the - total weight of
recyclable materials collected during the prior year. ( Ord. 91- 7,
9/ 16/ 1991, § 15; as amended by Ord. 92- 4, 9/ 8/ 1992; and by Ord. 93- 2,
3/ 15/ 1992)
216. Public Awareness Program. The Township shall develop and
implement a public awareness program to provide information on local
recycling efforts. Such program will include preparation and distribution
of at least two ( 2) notices to all customers prior to the commencement of
the collection schedule, as well as preparation of occasional press
releases, presentations at local schools and community organizations, and
distribution of flyers or brochures. The contractor shall cooperate with
all such public awareness activities including, without limitation, employing
the use of stickers, notices and the like, as requested by the
Township. ( Ord. 91- 7, 9/ 16/ 1991, § 16)
217. Promulgation of Regulations. The Board of Supervisors of
Douglass Township reserve the right to promulgate regulations and to
implement the contract waste and recyclable materials collection system
established by this Part. All such regulations shall have the same force
and effect as if incorporated herein. ( Ord. 91- 7, 9/ 16/ 1991, § 17)
218. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate
any provision of this Part, upon conviction thereof in an action brought
before a district justice in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($ 1, 000. 00)
plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed ninety ( 90) days. Each day that a violation of
this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall be found to
have been violated shall constitute a separate offense. ( Ord. 91- 7,
9/ 16/ 1991, § 18; as amended by Ord. 96- 5, 11/ 4/ 1996, and by Ord. 97- 2,
7/ 7/ 1997)
158. 12 Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997
CHAPTER 21
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Part 1
Street Excavations
101. Permits Required
102. Application for Permit
103. Issuance of Permit
104. Notice of Completion
105. Inspection by Township
106. Penalties
Part 2
Drain and Driveway Permits
201. Permit Required
202. Application for Permit
203. Cost of Filing
204. Modifications to Requirements
205. Powers of Township; Enforcement and Remedies
Part 3
Snow and Ice Removal
301. Responsibility for Removal
302. Township May Remove and Collect Costs
303. Penalties
Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997 - 159 -
21, § 101) ( 21, § 101)
Part 1
Street Excavations
101. Permits Required. In accordance with the provisions of Section
1156 of Article XI of the Second Class Township Code, as amended, no
railroad or street railway shall hereafter be constructed upon any Township
road, nor shall any railroad or street railway crossings, nor any gas pipe,
water pipe, electric conduits, or other piping, be laid upon or in, nor
shall any telephone, telegraph, or electric light or power poles, or any
coal tipples or any other obstructions be erected upon or in, any portion
of a Township road except under such conditions, restrictions and regulations
relating to the installation and maintenance thereof, as may be
prescribed in permits granted by the Township for such purpose. ( Ord.
74- 2, 7/ 1/ 1974, § 1)
102. Application for Permit. The application for a permit shall be
on a form prescribed by the Township and submitted to the Township in
triplicate. The application shall be accompanied by a fee in accordance
with the Schedule of Fees set forth by the Department of Transportation,
for Highway Occupancy Permits and Restoration Charges. In addition, the
applicant shall submit three ( 3) copies of a sketch showing such dimensions
as the location of the intended facility, width of the traveled roadway,
right- of- way lines and a dimension to the nearest intersecting street.
Ord. 74- 2, 7/ 1/ 1974, § 2)
103. Issuance of Permit. A permit shall be issued to the applicant
after all the aforementioned requirements have been filed. ( Ord. 74- 2,
7/ 1/ 1974, § 3)
104. Notice of Completion. Upon completion of the work, the applicant
shall give written notice thereof to the Township. ( Ord. 74- 2,
7/ 1/ 1974, § 4)
105. Inspection by Township. Upon completion of the work authorized
by the permit, the Township shall inspect the work and, when necessary,
enforce compliance with the conditions, restrictions and regulations
prescribed by the permit. Where any settlement or defect in the work
occurs, if the applicant shall fail to rectify any such settlement or other
defect, within sixty ( 60) days after written notice from the Township to do
so, the Township may do the work and shall impose upon the applicant the
cost thereof, together with an additional twenty percent ( 20%) of such
cost. ( Ord. 74- 2, 7/ 1/ 1974, § 5)
106. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate
any provision of this Part, upon conviction thereof in an action brought
before a district justice in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($ 1, 000. 00)
plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed ninety ( 90) days. Each day that a violation of
this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall be found to
have been violated shall constitute a separate offense. ( Ord. 74- 2,
7/ 1/ 1974, § 6; as amended by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986; by Ord. 96- 5, 11/ 4/ 1996;
and by Ord. 97- 2, 7/ 7/ 1997)
Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997 - 161 -
21, § 201)
Part 2
Drain and Driveway Permits
21, § 201)
201. Permit Required. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership,
or corporation to construct, erect or change any drain, culvert,
footwalk, drive or other means of ingress or egress to or from a property
in said Township, the entrance or exit of which connects with any Township
road or drainage area thereof, unless application has first been made to
said Township Supervisors for a permit for such construction, erection or
change and said Township Supervisors have evidenced their approval of such
construction, erection or change by granting a permit therefor. ( Ord.
74- 4, 10/ 7/ 1974, § 1)
202. Application for Permit. The application for such permit shall
be made by the owner, occupier, or by his agent in writing on forms provided
by the said Township Supervisors and in accordance with such rules
and regulations as may be prescribed by the Township Supervisors. There
shall be appended to each application a plan showing the outlines of the
property affected, with existing buildings thereon, existing drains,
culverts, footwalks and drives, with the proposed drains, culverts, foot -
walks or drives to be constructed, erected or changed and their relationship
to any Township road and to the drainage of said road. ( Ord. 74- 4,
10/ 7/ 1974, § 2)
203. Cost of Filing. The cost of filing such application, the cost
of any permit issued, and the cost of any inspection deemed necessary by
the Township Supervisors shall be determined according to the general fee
schedule to be adopted by a resolution of the Township Supervisors and all
such fees and costs shall be paid into the Township treasury. ( Ord. 74- 4,
10/ 7/ 1974, § 3)
204. Modifications to Requirements. The Township Supervisors may
specify any changes or modifications which they deem necessary and may make
their permit subject to any such changes or modifications. ( Ord. 74- 4,
10/ 7/ 1974, § 4)
205. Power of Township; Enforcement and Remedies.
1. Upon the construction, erection or change of any such drain,
culvert, drive or footwalk which does not comply with any conditions
imposed by the Township Supervisors as aforesaid or the construction,
erection or change of any such drain, culvert, drive or footwalk without
the prior approval of the Township Supervisors, the Township Supervisors,
with or without notice, may make corrections deemed necessary by them and
recover the cost of such corrections.
2. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of
this Part, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a district
justice in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($ 1, 000. 00) plus costs
and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed ninety ( 90) days. Each day that a violation of
Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997 - 163 -
21, § 205( 2), cont' d) 21, § 205( 2), cont' d)
this Part
have been
continues or each
violated shall
Section of
constitute
this Part which shall be found to
a separate offense. ( Ord. 74- 4,
10/ 7/ 1974, 5; as amended by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986; by Ord. 96- 5,
11/ 4/ 1996; and by Ord. 97- 2, 7/ 7/ 1997)
164 Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997
21, § 301) ( 21, § 301)
Part 3
Snow and Ice Removal
301. Responsibility for Removal. The owner and/ or the occupant
and/ or the tenant of any property within Douglass Township, Montgomery
County, Pennsylvania, shall remove snow and/ or ice from sidewalks of such
properties abutting upon roads, streets or alleys within twelve ( 12) hours
of daylight after any snow has ceased to fall or ice to form. The snow or
ice shall be removed so that a path shall be cleared for the full width of
the sidewalk, in case of any sidewalk of three feet ( 3') or less in width,
and so that a path of at least three feet ( 3') in width shall be cleared on
all sidewalks wider than three feet ( 3'). The snow and ice removed shall
not be placed in the gutter or in the roadway of any road, street or alley.
Ord. 76- 1, 2/ 2/ 1976, § 1)
302. Township May Remove and Collect Costs. In case of neglect or
refusal of any owner, occupant, or tenant to comply with the requirements
of this Part, such snow and/ or ice may be removed by agents or employees of
the Township designated for that purpose, and the cost of such removal with
an additional penalty of ten percent ( 10%) shall be collected from the
defaulting owner, occupant or tenant as a municipal claim by due process of
law. ( Ord. 76- 1, 2/ 2/ 1976, § 2)
303. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate
any provision of this Part, upon conviction thereof in an action brought
before a district justice in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than one thousand dollars
1, 000. 00) plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs,
to a term of imprisonment not to exceed ninety ( 90) days. Each day that a
violation of this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall
be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
Ord. 76- 1, 2/ 2/ 1976, § 3; as amended by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986; and by Ord.
96- 5, 11/ 4/ 1996; and by Ord. 97- 2, 7/ 7/ 1997)
Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997 - 165 -
0 CHAPTER 22
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
Part 1
General Provisions
100. Title r,
1101: Contents
Purposes
104. Interpretation
105. Subdivision and Land Development Control
Part 2
Definitions
200. Language Interpretation
201. Definition of Terms
Part 3
Plan Submission Requirements
and Processing Procedures
300. Applicability
301. General
302. Tentative Sketch Plan Requirements
303. Preliminary Plan Requirements
304. Minor Preliminary Plans
305. Major Preliminary Plans
306. Final Plan Requirements
307. Land Development Plans
308. Tentative Sketch Plan Procedure
309. Preliminary Plan Submission and Review Procedure
310. Effective Period of Approval
311. Concurrent Preliminary/ Final Plan Approval
312. Final Plan Procedure
Part 4
Design Standards
400. General
401. Recommendation by Planning Agency
402. Modification of Requirements
403. Requirements for New Street and Extensions of Existing Streets
404. Street Classifications and Requirements
405. Street Design Standards
406. Single -Access Streets
407. Street Alignment
Page Corrected 4/ 7/ 1993 - 167 -
408. Street Intersections
409. Interse in ` spacing
410. Clear Sig t Triangles
411. Storm Drainage
412. Proposals with Existing Buildings
413. Driveways
414. Additipnal Driveway Standards
415. Parking Areas and Related Internal Driveways
416. Rear Lotting
417. Blocks`
418. Lots
419 Grading
420. General Planting Requirements
421. List of Plant Materials
422. Street Construction
423. Additional Regulations for Floodplain Areas
424. Sidewalk Location, Design, and Construction
425. Curbs
426. Rights -of -Way and Easements
427. Utilities
428. Sanitary Sewers and On - Lot Disposal
429. Water Supply
430. Erosion and Sediment Control
431. Bridges and Culverts
432. Survey Monuments
433. Signs
434. Street Lighting
435. Wetlands
Part 5
Improvement Construction Requirements
500. Applicability
501. Required Improvements
502. Financial Security
503. Release from Liability
504. Inspection of Work and Materials
505. Off -Site Improvements
Part 6
Fees, Conditions of Acceptance and Penalties
600. Applicability
601. Fees and Costs
602. Conditions of Acceptance
603. Penalties
604. Jurisdiction
0
168 - Page Corrected 4/ 7/ 1993
7
Par t 7
Amendments; Validity; Repealer
700. Amendment Procedure
701. Referral to Planning Commission
702. Validity
703. Repealer
Par t 8
Floodplain Areas
801. General Provisions
802. Waivers
803. Pre -Application Procedures for Subdivision and Land Developments
804. Preliminary Plan Requirements for Subdivision and Land Developments
805. Final Plan Requirements
806. Design Standards and Improvements
807. Performance Bond
808. Conflict
809. Validity
810. Municipal Liability
811. Definitions
Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990 MENmmm
22, § 100)
Part 1
General Provisions
22, § 100)
100. Title. This Chapter shall be know and may be cited as the
Douglass Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 1985."
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 100)
101. Enactment. This Chapter has been enacted in conformance with
the provisions of Act 247 of 1968, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, as amended. ( Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 101)
102. Contents. This Chapter contains regulations which include, but
are not limited to, the following:
1. Provisions for the submittal and processing of plats for subdivisions
and land developments, and specifications for such plats, including
provisions for tentative sketch, preliminary, and final plan processing and
approvals, and for processing of final approval by stages or sections of
development.
2. Provisions governing the standards by which streets shall be
graded and improved, and walkways, curbs, gutters, street lights, fire
hydrants, water, sewage and storm drainage facilities, and other improvements
shall be installed as conditions precedent to formal approval of
plats.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 102)
103. Purposes. The following are the purposes of this Chapter:
1. To insure that development within the Township will be orderly,
efficient, integrated, and harmonious.
2. To insure that the layout and arrangement of subdivisions or land
developments shall conform to the Douglass Township Comprehensive Plan and
to any regulations, maps, studies, and reports adopted in furtherance
thereof.
3. To insure that streets in and boarding a subdivision or land
development shall be coordinated, and be of such widths, grades, and in
such locations as deemed necessary to accommodate prospective traffic and
parking, and to facilitate fire protection.
4. To require adequate, appropriately located easements or rightsof-
way for utilities and storm drainage facilities.
5. To insure that any lands offered for dedication or otherwise
reserved for use as public or common grounds shall be of suitable size,
configuration, and topographical character for their designated uses.
6. To insure conformance of subdivision and land development proposals
with the availability of municipal services and public facilities, and
the coordination of intermunicipal programs.
7. To preserve lands subject to inundation or flooding from subdivision
or land development which would endanger life or property or further
aggravate or increase the existing flooding of inundation conditions.
Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990 - 171 -
22, § 103( 8)) ( 22, § 103( 8))
8. To encourage and promote flexibilitys economy, and ingenuity
in the layout and design of subdivisions and land developments, including
provisions authorizing the Township to modify the requirements of
this Chapter in accordance with concepts and practices consistent with
the modern and evolving generally accepted principles of site planning
and land development.
9. To encourage alternative routes of travel for pedestrian and
bicycle use, in open space areas, away from the vehicular routes, and to
provide standards for development of these routes.
10. To provide equitable handling of all subdivisions and land
development proposals by providing uniform procedures and standards.
11. To encourage subdivision and land development in accordance
with principles and practices which conserve energy, both during and
after construction, and which encourage the use of alternative energy
sources by the layout of the proposal and the siting of buildings.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 103)
104. Interpretation. The provisions of this Chapter shall be the
minimum requirements to meet the above -stated purposes. Where the
provisions of this Chapter impose greater restrictions than those of any
other statute, ordinance, or regulations, then the provisions of this
Chapter shall prevail. Where the provisions of any other statute,
ordinance or regulations impose greater restrictions than those of this
Chapter, the provisions of such statute, ordinance or regulations shall
take precedent. ( Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 104) •
105. Subdivision and Land Development Control.
1. Subdivision of a Lot or Construction, Opening or Dedication of
a Street. No subdivision or land development of any lot, tract, or
parcel of land shall be made, and no street, alley, sanitary sewer,
storm drain, water main, gas, oil or electric transmission line, or
other improvements in connection therewith, shall be laid out, constructed,
or dedicated for public use, or travel, or for the common use of
occupants of a building abutting thereon, except in strict accordance
with this Chapter.
2. Sale of Lots, Issuance of Building Permits, or Erection of
Buildings. No lot in a subdivision or land development may be sold, and
no permit to erect or alter any building upon land in a subdivision or
land development will be issued unless and until a subdivision and/ or
land development plan has been approved, and where required, recorded,
and until the required improvements in connection therewith have either
been constructed or guaranteed for construction in the form of a bond,
escrow, or other means suitable to the Township Supervisors and approved
by the Township Engineer and Solicitor, in accordance with the laws of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
3. Condominiums. No provisions of this Chapter shall be construed
to prohibit condominium ownership as permitted by the applicable enabling
legislation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 105)
172 - Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990
22, § 200)
Part 2
Definitions
22, § 200)
200. Language Interpretation. For purposes of this Chapter, certain
words shall be interpreted as follows:
1. Words use in the present tense include the future.
2. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes
the singular.
3. The phrase " used for" includes " arranged for," " designed for,"
intended for," " maintained for," and " occupied for."
4. The word " person" includes an individual, corporation, partnership,
incorporated association, and/ or any other similar entity.
5. The words " include" or " including" shall not limit the term to the
specified examples, but are intended to extend the meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
6. The word " building" shall always be construed as if followed by
the words " or part thereof."
7. The word " may" is permissive, the words " shall" and " will" are
always mandatory, and the word " should" is recommended but not mandatory.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 200)
201. Definition of Terms. Words and terms used in this Chapter
shall have the meaning given in this Section. Unless expressly stated
otherwise, any pertinent word or term not a part of this listing, but vital
to the interpretation of this Chapter, shall be construed to have its legal
definition, or in absence of a legal definition, it meaning as commonly
accepted by practitioners including civil engineers, surveyors, architects,
landscape architects, and planners.
ACCEPTED ENGINEERING PRACTICE - that which conforms to accepted
principles, tests or standards of nationally recognized technical, scientific,
and/ or engineering authorities.
ALLEY - a public or privately owned right- of- way, on which no new
dwellings, stores, or other principal buildings are intended to front,
serving as the secondary means of access to two ( 2) or more properties.
APPLICANT - a person who has filed an application for approval of
subdivision or land development plans, including his/ her heirs, successors,
agents, and assigns. This term also includes landowner, developer,
builder, and/ or other persons responsible for the plans and construction of
buildings, and/ or other improvements on a parcel of land.
BASE FLOOD - see definition under " floodplain."
BLOCK - an area bounded by streets or streets and natural or manmade
features.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS - the elected governing body of the Township;
also referred to as the Supervisors.
BUFFER - an area designed to separate the uses of land which abut it
and which functions to ease the transition between them. Unless otherwise
Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990 - 173 -
22, § 201, cont' d) 22, § 201, cont' d)
specified, buffers may be included as part of the required setbacks and
yard areas. Buffers may be divided into two ( 2) or more types as
explained in the " Design Standards" of this Chapter. 9
BUILDER - see " applicant."
BUILDING - any structure, whether built conventionally or in a
manner generally referred to as " mobile," " modular," or " manufactured,"
and having enclosed walls and roof, permanently located on the land, the
ordinary use of which requires people to enter the structure.
CARTWAY - the portion of a street, alley or driveway intended for
vehicular use.
COMMON OPEN SPACE - a parcel or parcels of land, or a combination
of land and water within a development site designed and intended for
the use or enjoyment of residents of a development, not including
streets, off- street parking areas and areas set aside for public facilities.
Also referred to as " open space."
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN - the current, officially adopted comprehensive
plan for the Township, including all other amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION - the construction, reconstruction, renovation,
repair, extension, expansion, alteration, or relocation of a building or
structure, including the placement of mobile homes.
CUL- DE- SAC - a street with access at one ( 1) end from a through
street; terminated at the other end with a paved turnaround.
CURBLINE - the outermost edge of a cartway.
CUT - an excavation; the difference between a point of the original
ground and a designated point of lower elevation on the final grade.
Also, the material removed in an excavation. ,
DEVELOPER - see " applicant."
DEVELOPABLE ACREAGE for the purpose of calculating density per
developable acre, the developable acreage shall equal the gross land area
of the proposal, minus the following acreage:
A. All land within existing and/ or proposed rights- of- way for
all public and/ or private roads.
B. All overhead and underground utility easements and/ or
rights- of- way.
C. Soils with slopes of fifteen ( 15) percent or greater as
defined by the Soil Survey of Montgomery County, 1967.
D. All alluvial -soil floodplain or the extent of the one hundred
100) year floodplain delineated in the Flood Insurance Study for
Douglass Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, dated November 15,
1983, as prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Federal
Insurance Administration.
Ord. 94- 2]
DEVELOPMENT - any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, the placement
of mobile homes, streets, and other paving, utilities, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, excavation, or drilling operations.
I &
174 - Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994
22, § 201, cont' d) ( 22, § 201, cont' d)
DEVELOPMENT PLAN - the provisions for guiding development, including
a plan of subdivision, all covenants relating to use, location and
is bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity of use or density of
development, streets, parking facilities, ways, common open space, and
public facilities. The phrase " provisions of the development plan"
shall mean the written and graphic materials referred to in this
definition.
DRAINAGE - the natural or manmade features of the land that are
specifically designed to store or carry surface water runoff.
DRIVEWAY - a private way providing for vehicular and pedestrian
access between a public street and a parking area within a lot or
property.
EASEMENT - a right- of- way or other right granted by a property
owner for the use of a designated part of his/ her property for public,
quasi -public, or private purposes, including utilities, drainageways,
and access.
ENGINEER - a professional engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
EXCAVATION - any act by which natural materials are dug into, cut
quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated or bulldozed, as well
as, the conditions resulting therefrom.
FILL - any act by which natural materials are placed, pushed, dumped,
pulled, transported or moved to a new location above the natural surface of
the ground or on top of the stripped surface, as well as the conditions
resulting therefrom.
FLOODPLAIN RELATED TERMS -
A. BASE FLOOD - the flood which has been selected to serve as
the basis upon which the floodplain management provisions of this and
other ordinances have been prepared. For the purposes of this Chapter,
it shall be the one hundred year ( 100) flood as referred in the
current Flood Insurance Study and delineated on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map of the Federal Insurance Administration.
B. BASE FLOOD ELEVATION - the one hundred year ( 100) flood
elevation as referenced in the Flood Insurance Study. Within the
approximated floodplain, alluvial soil floodplain, or other similar
documented areas, the one hundred year ( 100) flood elevation shall be
established as a point on the boundary of the floodplain nearest to
the construction site in question.
C. FEMA and FIA - the Federal Emergency Management Agency and
the Federal Insurance Administration who have jurisdiction over the
National Flood Insurance Program and its related studies and regulations.
FEMA is the parent agency of FIA.
D. FLOOD - a temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas.
E. FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP - the official FIA map which shows
special hazard zones and risk areas for insurance rating purposes.
For the purpose of this Chapter, it also delineates floodplain areas.
F. FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY - the examination and determination of
flood hazards by the FIA. The flood elevations contained in this
study are used for floodplain management purposes as related to this
and other ordinances.
Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994 - 175 -
22, § 201, cont' d) 22, § 201, cont' d)
G. FLOODPLAIN - a relatively flat or low land area adjoining a
stream, river, or watercourse which is subject to partial or complete
inundation during a one hundred year ( 100) flood as delineated in the
Flood Insurance Study for Douglass Township, dated November 15, 1983,
as prepared by FEMA and FIA; areas shown as alluvial soils in the Soil
Survey of Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, by the United Stated Department
of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service; or any area subject
to the unusual and rapid accumulation of surface water from any
source; also referred to as " flood -prone area."
H. FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT - the application of a program or
activities which may consist of both corrective and preventive measures
for reducing flood damages.
I. FLOOD PROOFING - any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which
reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real
property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their
contents. Such measures are set forth in Flood Proofing Regulations
published by the Office of the Chief Engineers, U. S. Army, publication
number EP 1165 2 314 ( June, 1972 and as subsequently amended).
Flood proofing measures for all new construction and substantial
improvements of structures shall satisfy the requirements of the
Completely Dry Spaces ( W1)" and " Essentially Dry Spaces ( W2)"
classes referenced in these regulations. In said publication where
reference is made to " below" ( or above) the " BFD" ( Base Flood
Datum) it shall be interpreted as meaning below ( or above) the base
flood elevation.
J. ONE HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD - a flood that has one ( 1) chance
in one hundred or one ( 1%) percent of being equaled or exceeded in
any one ( 1) year. For the purposes of this Chapter, the one
hundred year ( 100) flood ( base flood) as defined by the Federal
Insurance Administration in the Flood Insurance Study.
K. REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION - the one hundred ( 100) year
flood elevation plus a freeboard safety factor of one and one- half
1h') feet.
L. SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT - any repair, reconstruction, or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceed
fifty ( 50%) percent of the market value of the structure either:
1) Before the improvement or repair is started or,
2) If the structure has been damaged, and is being restored,
before the damage occurred.
For the purposes of this definition " substantial improvement"
is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences,
whether or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of
the structure. The term does not, however, include either:
1) Any projects for improvement of a structure to
comply with existing State or local health, sanitary, or
safety code specifications which are solely necessary to
assure safe living conditions or,
2) Any alteration of a structure listed on a National
Register of Historical places or a State Inventory of Historic
Places.
176 - Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994
22, § 201, cont' d) 22, § 201, cont' d)
FRONTAGE - the length of the lot line abutting a street right- ofway.
GRADE - the slope of a street, parcel of land, utility lines,
drainageways, etc., specified in percent (%) and shown on plans as
required herein.
GROUND COVER - low growing plant materials planted in a manner to
provide continuous plant cover of the ground surface; lawn, ivy and
other low plant materials are included. Non -plant ground cover may also
include bark or wood chips, gravel, and stone provided they are maintained
as a continuous previous cover.
HEIGHT OF BUILDING - the vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the existing grade at the location of a building to the
highest point of the roof as further defined below.
A. Flat; highest point measurable.
B. Mansard: deck line.
C. Gable, hip, gambrel: mean height between the eaves and
ridge.
D. For a building with two ( 2) or more roof heights, to the
higher roof.
E. Chimneys, spires, towers, mechanical penthouses, tanks, and
similar projections not intended for human occupancy shall be
excluded.
IMPROVEMENT - the physical additions, installations and changes required
to render land suitable for the use proposed, including streets,
curbs, sidewalks, utilities, and drainage facilities.
LAND DEVELOPMENT - land development shall mean:
A. The improvement of one ( 1) lot or two ( 2) or more contiguous
lots, tracts, or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
1) A group of two ( 2) or more residential or non- residential
buildings, whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a
single non- residential building on a lot or lots regardless of
the number of occupants or tenure, or
2) The division or allocation of land or space, whether
initially or cumulatively, between or among two ( 2) or more
existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose
of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features.
B. A subdivision of land.
C. The following developments are excluded from the land development
definition:
1) The conversion of an existing single- family detached
dwelling or single- family semi- detached dwelling into not more
than three ( 3) residential units, unless such units are intended
to be a condominium; and
2) The addition of an accessory building on a lot, including
farm buildings, subordinate to an existing principal
building.
Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994 - 177 -
22, § 201, cont' d) ( 22, § 201, cont' d)
LANDOWNER - the legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, or a
building thereon, or a portion of either, including the holder of an option
or contract to purchase ( whether or not such option or contract is subject
to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under the lease to exercise
the rights of the landowner, or other person having proprietary interest in
land, shall be deemed to be a landowner for the purposes of this Chapter.
LOT - a contiguous tract, parcel, or unit of land held by a landowner
and/ or intended for use, development, lease, or transfer of ownership, and
for which a deed description is recorded or is intended to be recorded
at the Office of Recorder of Deeds for Montgomery County.
LOT AREA - the horizontal land area of a lot, further defined as.
follows:
A. GROSS LOT AREA - The total horizontal land area lying
within the lot or tract boundaries.
B. NET LOT AREA - Gross lot area minus:
1) The area lying between the street centerline and the
ultimate right- of- way line or equivalent right- of- way line.
2) The land area of the access strip to rear, flag or
interior lots.
LOT, REAR - a lot which conforms in all respects to the dimensional
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located, except that
the only road frontage and access is limited to an access strip. This
definition does not include the commonly used wedge- shaped lots located
on a cul- de- sac turnaround. Also known as flag or interior lot.
MOBILE HOME - a factory -built, single- family detached dwelling
intended for permanent occupancy, which may not meet local building
codes but bears a label certifying that it is built in compliance with
the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards,
under the authority of the 42 U. S. C. § 5401. It shall be contained in
one ( 1) unit or in two ( 2) or more units designed to joined into one ( 1)
integral unit capable of again being separated for repeated towing,
which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for
minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations and constructed
so that it may be used with or without a permanent foundation.
MOBILE HOME LOT - a parcel of land in a mobile home park provided
with the necessary utility connections, partions and other appurtenances
necessary for the erection thereon of a single mobile home for the
exclusive use of its occupants, though it may instead be designed and
used for a modular or conventional single- family detached home rather
than a mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PARK - a development of a tract of land which has been
planned and improved in compliance with the requirements of the Mobile
Home Park Development Regulations for the placement of mobile homes,
modular homes, or conventional single- family detached homes, or combinations
thereof, for non -transient use, consisting of two ( 2) or more
mobile home lots and ten ( 10) acres or greater in size.
OFFICIAL MAP - a map adopted by the Board of Supervisors showing
all or part of the Township. This map may show the following public
facilities: existing and proposed streets, watercourses, public
178 - Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994
22, § 201, cont' d) 22, § 201, cont' d)
grounds, parks, playgrounds, open space, pedestrian ways, railroad and
transit rights- of- way, flood control basins, floodways and floodplains,
and stormwater management areas.
PLAN - a graphic representation of a proposal for subdivision
and/ or land development, including necessary written notes.
PLAT - see " plan."
RESERVE STRIP - a parcel of land separating a street from adjacent
properties.
REVERSE FRONTAGE LOTTING - lotting which extends between two ( 2)
streets of differing classifications, with vehicular access provided . from
the lesser street, in order to promote traffic flow and safety on the
greater street.
REVIEW - the action of an agency or individual authorized to examine a
proposed subdivision plan such as the County Planning Commission and
Township Planning Agency.
RIGHT- OF- WAY - a strip of land over which are provided rights for
various purposes including vehicular access and travel, storm drainage, and
utilities. Also see " street rights -of -ways."
SEWAGE DISPOSAL - sewage disposal shall be defined as:
A. ON- SITE - A structure or device for disposal of sewage on the
same lot as a house, generally consisting of septic tank and tile
field or seepage pit.
B. COMMUNITY - A sanitary sewage collection system serving more
than one ( 1) lot with common treatment facilities, generally serving a
neighborhood area and complying with State regulations.
C. PUBLIC - A sanitary sewage collection and disposal system
owned and operated by an authorized municipal body.
SIGHT DISTANCE - the distance of unobstructed view along the centerline
of a street from the driver' s eye -height of three and a three quarter
3 3/ 4') feet to the furthest visible point six ( 6") inches above the
street surface.
SOIL PERCOLATION TEST - a field test as prescribed by the Pennsylvania
Department of Health.
SOIL SURVEY - the Montgomery County Soil Survey of 1967, prepared by
the Soil Conservation Service of the United States Department of
Agriculture.
STREET OR ROAD - a public or private right- of- way serving primarily as
a means of vehicular and pedestrian travel, furnishing access to abutting
properties, and which may also be used for utilities, shade trees, and
stormwater control.
STREET LINE - the dividing line between a lot and a street, identical
to the ultimate right- of- way line.
STREET RIGHTS- OF- WAY - rights- of- way for street purposes are defined
as follows:
Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994 - 179 -
22, § 201, cont' d) 22, § 201, cont' d)
A. LEGAL RIGHT- OF- WAY - The street right- of- way legally in the
public domain at the time a plan is submitted.
B. ULTIMATE RIGHT- OF- WAY - The street right- of- way projected as
necessary for adequate handling of anticipated maximum traffic
volumes.
C. EQUIVALENT RIGHT- OF- WAY - A street right- of- way required to
be reserved where private streets are permitted. The width shall be
determined by the street' s function, in accordance with the street
classifications contained in this Chapter.
STRUCTURE any form or arrangement of building material involving
the necessity of providing proper support, bracing, tying, anchoring, or
other protection against the forces of the elements. Also see
building."
SUBDIVISION - the division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel
of land by any means into two ( 2) or more lots, tracts, parcels, or
other divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the
purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by a Court for
distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or
lot development. The subdivision by lease of land for agricultural
purposes into parcels of more than ten ( 10) acres, not involving any new
street or easement of access or any residential dwelling, is not
required.
SURVEYOR - a land surveyor, licensed as such in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, and competent in the skills needed to conduct the surveys,
layout the subdivision plans and install all markers as required by the
terms of this Chapter. 10
ULTIMATE RIGHT- OF- WAY LINE - the dividing line between a lot and
the outside limit of a street ultimate right- of- way.
VISUAL SCREEN - a barrier whose purpose is to obscure the view;
generally comprised of plant materials suitable for the purpose.
WATERCOURSE - a place intended or used for the directed surface
flow of water, including permanent and intermittent streams, brooks,
creeks, channels, ditches, swales, and rivers.
WATER SURVEY - an inventory of the source, quantity, yield, and use
of groundwater and surface water resources within a municipality.
YARD - an open, generally unoccupied area of a lot which must
remain free of buildings but which may contain lawn or planted areas,
parking and/ or driveways, walks, walls, fences, and similar
appurtenances.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 201; as amended by Ord. 94- 2, 3/ 7/ 1994, § 1)
180 - Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994
22, § 300) ( 22, § 300)
Part 3
Plan Submission Requirements
and Processing Procedures
300. Applicability. The standards, requirements, and procedures
contained in this Part shall govern the submission and processing of all
applications for subdivisions and/ or land developments in the Township.
Applications must also meet the requirements of the Douglass Township
Zoning Ordinance [ Chapter 27] and Comprehensive Plan, if any, and any other
applicable Township ordinance or regulation. ( Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 300)
301. General.
1. Plans shall be submitted in the following order:
A. Tentative sketch plan, in accordance with the provisions of
302 and 308 of this Part.
B. Preliminary plan, in accordance with the provisions of §§303,
304, 305, 307, 309, 310 and 311 of this Part.
C. Final plan in accordance with the provisions of §§ 306, 307,
311 and 312 of this Part.
2. Only one ( 1) type of plan may be submitted at a time. No subsequent
plans will be considered until and decision has been made on the
previous plan submittal.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 301)
302. Tentative Sketch Plan Requirements. A tentative sketch plan
should be drawn legibly and to scale, although it need not be a carefully
engineered drawing, and should show the following information:
1. The entire tract boundary and total acreage drawn to a scale of
not less than one ( 1") inch equals two hundred ( 200') feet ( 1" = 200').
2. Existing and proposed streets, lots, and buildings, with all lots
numbered in a logical numerical system.
3. Significant physical features such as floodplains, steep slopes,
woodlands, and existing structures.
4. Contour lines at five ( 5') to ten ( 10') foot intervals.
5. Approximate locations for stormwater control basins, if
necessary.
6. Location plan showing the relationship of the subject tract to
the surrounding road network and major physical features.
7. North point and graphic scale.
8. Name and address of the owner.
9. Name and address of the engineer, surveyor or architect, as
applicable.
10. When applicable, the proposed density, building coverage, impervious
coverage, green space, and other design information needed to determine
compliance with the Zoning Ordinance [ Chapter 27].
11. Any additional information which the applicant believes will
help explain the proposal.
Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994 - 181 -
22, § 302( 11)) 22, § 302( 11))
It is to the applicant' s advantage to show as much of the above -
listed information as possible. Although the Planning Commission will
discuss any plan presented, a lack of significant information may result
in little useful guidance to the applicant.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 302)
303. Preliminary Plan Requirements. All preliminary subdivision
and/ or land development plans shall comply with the following
requirements:
1. Drafting Standards.
A. The scale of the plan shall one of the following: one
0") inch equals ten ( 10'), twenty ( 20'), thirty ( 301), forty
40'), fifty ( 50'), sixty ( 60') or one hundred ( 100') feet. In
determining the scale of the plan, the legibility of lines and
lettering on the plan should be considered.
B. Accuracy shall be to within one ( 1) part in three hundred
300).
C. Bearings shall be shown in degrees, minutes and seconds;
distances shall be shown to one one hundredth ( 1/ 100) of a foot.
D. Sheet size shall be either eighteen by thirty inches ( 18" X
30") or twenty four by thirty six inches ( 24" X 36") with a two ( 2)
inch wide margin on the left edge of the plan for the purpose of
binding in a record volume. [ Ord. 94- 21
E. All sheets shall be the same size, and be numbered relative
to the total number of sheets. ( i. e., 1 of 5, etc.).
F. Where two ( 2) or more sheets are needed to show the entire
tract, a reduced scale key plan shall be provided sufficient to
show their relationship.
G. An applicant may use the metric system of measurement if
agreed to in advance by the Board of Supervisors in cooperation
with the Township Engineer. If the metric system is used:
1) A conversion table to English equivalents shall be
placed on the plan.
2) Major dimensions shall be noted in both systems,
with the English numbers shown in parentheses.
2. Basic Information. Each preliminary plan shall provide:
A. Name of the subdivision or land development.
B. Name and address of the property owner, subdivider,
developer, or builder.
C. Name, address, and professional seal of the individual or
firm which prepared the plan.
D. Date of preparation of the plan and a descriptive list of
revisions to the plan, and the revision dates.
E. North point and graphic scale.
F. The entire tract boundary with bearings and distances and
total tract acreage.
182 - Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994
22, § 303( 2)( G)) ( 22, § 303( 2)( G))
G. A list of the basic dimensional requirements and the name of
the applicable zoning district.
H. The total number of lots in the subdivision and the total
acreage. When applicable, the density and number of proposed units
shall be shown.
I. Parcel number and block and unit number as assigned to the
property by Montgomery County Board of Assessment. [ Ord. 94- 2]
J. After the first submission,' the file number assigned to
review file by Montgomery County Planning Commission. This will be a
six ( 6) digit number such as 92- 135- 1, and can be found referenced in
the Montgomery County Planning Commission review letters. [ Ord. 94- 21
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 303; as amended by Ord. 94- 2, 3/ 7/ 1994, §§ 2, 3, 4)
304. Minor Preliminary Plans. This Section allows simplified plan
submission and processing requirements for subdivisions and/ or land developments
which are minor in nature, in accordance with the following criteria
and requirements:
1. Subdivision Qualification. Proposed subdivisions shall conform to
the following criteria:
A. Total number of building lots is five ( 5) or less.
B. Parent tract has frontage on an existing, improved public
street.
C. No new road construction or widening of existing streets is
required.
D. No subdivision of contiguous land under the same ownership
has occurred during the five ( 5) year period prior to the current
application.
E. Where a minor subdivision plan covers only a part of the
owner' s entire holding, a tentative sketch plan, as regulated by § 302,
herein, shall be submitted showing a proposed street and lot layout
for the remaining area of the tract.
2. Land Development Qualification. Proposed land developments shall
conform to the following criteria:
A. Total land area of the tract is less than five ( 5) acres.
B. The tract has frontage on an existing, improved public
street.
C. No new road construction is required.
D. Less than five ( 5) dwelling units are proposed if residential,
or less than two thousand five hundred ( 2, 50012) square feet of
gross leasable area is proposed if non- residential.
E. No land development of the same tract, under the same ownership,
has occurred during the five ( 5) year period prior to the
current application; nor has a subdivision occurred during the same
five ( 5) year period which has the effect of creating a qualifying
parcel or parcels from a larger, non -qualifying tract.
3. Disqualification. The Board of Supervisors may require a major
preliminary plan submission in place of a minor plan when conditions
warrant it, at the advice of the Township Planning Commission or Engineer.
Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994 - 183 -
22, § 304( 4)) ( 22., § 304( 4))
4. Existing Features. In addition to complying with the requirements
of § 303 of this Part, minor preliminary plans shall provide the following
information:
A. Streets bordering or crossing the tract, showing names,
right- of- way and cartway widths, and surface conditions.
B. Locations of other streets within two hundred ( 200') feet
of the tract.
C. Approximate locations of sanitary and/ or storm sewer
lines.
D. Location of all watercourses and limits of any flood prone
areas ( data from Soil Survey and/ or FEMA studies).
E. Contours obtained from U. S. G. S. maps for subdivision;
minimum five ( 5') foot intervals for land developments.
F. Location and description of existing buildings and other
structures, labeled " To Remain" or " To be Removed" as applicable,
and location and description of existing buildings and other
structures less than fifty ( 50') feet beyond the tract boundaries.
G. Outer limits of tree masses.
H. Locations of any natural or man- made features which may
affect the developability of the land, such as quarries, marshlands,
etc., within the property and up to fifty ( 50') feet beyond
the tract boundaries.
I. Locations and description of major utilities, such as
pipelines and electric transmission lines, both above and below
ground, with a note describing additional setback or development
restrictions required in their regard.
J. Areas subject to deed restrictions or easements.
5. Proposed Layout. The following information must be provided on
a minor preliminary plan:
A. Layout and dimensions of all lots, including the net lot
area and number of lots.
B. All building setback lines.
C. Location of areas reserved for future access, noted on the
plan.
6. Approval. Approval by the Board of Supervisors of a minor
preliminary plan shall also constitute its approval as a final plan,
provided that the certifications required by § 305( 7), herein, are shown
on the plan.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 304)
305. Major Preliminary Plan. All proposals which do not qualify
for submission as minor preliminary plans shall be submitted as major
preliminary plans under the following regulations:
1. Major preliminary plans shall comply with the requirements of
303 of this Part.
2. All survey work for plan preparation or other required design
work shall be based upon the BMMA sanitary sewer system datum. When
184 - Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994
22, § 305( 6)( A)) 22, § 305( 6)( A))
A. When required by Township, the plan shall indicate existing
and finish grade contours at two ( 2') foot intervals.
B. Finished floor elevations of proposed buildings.
C. Approximate limits of site disturbance, including a clear
delineation of existing vegetation to be removed and to be preserved.
D. Stormwater and erosion and sedimentation control methods and
facilities, including swales or pipes, inlets, catch basins, storm -
water basins, diffusion devices, velocity controls, and supporting
data.
E. Sewage disposal facilities including on -lot systems or sanitary
sewer lines, manholes, pumping stations, location of percolation
tests, etc.
F. Water supply lines, well location, and fire hydrants, where
applicable.
7. Proposed Improvements.
A. The plan shall contain a tentative cross section and centerline
profile for each proposed or widened cartway shown on the preliminary
plan, including the profile for proposed sanitary sewers, water
mains, storm drains, etc., showing manholes, inlets, and catch basins.
When a roadway will eventually be extended onto adjacent property, the
roadway profile shall extend at least two hundred ( 200') feet onto the
adjacent property. These plans may be submitted on separate sheets.
B. The plan shall show preliminary design of any bridges,
culverts or other structures and appurtenances which may be required.
C. A drainage computations report shall be submitted to cover
all drainage facilities.
D. When required by the Township, a Soil Erosion Control Plan
shall be prepared and submitted to the Township and Montgomery County
Soil Conservation District. This may be provided during the final
phases of plan design.
8. Certifications. Upon preliminary plan approval, the preliminary
plan must show:
A. The signature and seal of the registered surveyor verifying
that the plan represents a survey made by him; that the monuments
exist or will be placed as located; and that the dimensional and
geodetic details are correct.
B. The signature of the subdivider, developer or builder certifying
his adoption of the plan and any changes thereto.
C. The signatures of the Township Secretary, Chairman of the
Board of Supervisors, Planning Agency Secretary and Chairman of the
Planning Agency certifying that the Board of Supervisors have approved
the preliminary plan and changes thereto on the date shown.
D. If the preliminary plan will also function as the final plan
and be recorded, then the certifications shown in § 306( 2)( C) shall be
used.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 305)
Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990 - 187 -
22, § 306) ( 22, § 306)
306. Final Plan Requirements. In addition to the applicable
items under §§ 303 and 305, all final subdivision and/ or land development
plans shall comply with the following requirements:
1. Improvements Construction Plan.
A. Drafting Standards. The same standards shall be required
for an improvements construction plan, except that the horizontal
scale of the plan and profile shall not exceed fifty ( 50') feet to
the inch and the vertical scale of the plan shall not exceed five
5') feet to the inch, or comparable metric scales with a conversion
table. The plan and the profile shall be drawn to the same
scale.
B. Information to be Shown. The plan shall contain sufficient
information to provide working plans for the construction of
the proposed streets, or any portion thereof, including all appurtenances,
sewers and utilities, as shown on the preliminary plan
from one existing or approved street to another, or in the case of
a cul- de- sac, to its turnaround. This information shall include:
1) Horizontal Plan. The horizontal plan shall show
details of the horizontal layout as follows:
a) Information shown on the approved preliminary
plan.
b) The beginning and the end of proposed immediate
construction.
c) Stations corresponding to those shown on the
profiles.
d) The curb elevation at tangent points of horizontal
curves, at road or alley intersections, and at the
projected intersections of the curb lines.
e) The location and size of sanitary sewers and
lateral connections and water mains with distances
between manholes, gas, electric and other utility pipes
or conduits and of storm drains, inlets and manholes.
Elevations ( tops and inverts) shall be shown on all storm
drainage and sanitary sewer structures. All utilities
shall be shown together on each utility drawing.
f) The location, type and size of curbs and all
paving widths.
g) The location and species of all proposed shade
trees and the location and type of fire hydrants and
street lights.
2) Profiles. The profiles shall show details as
follows:
a) Profiles and elevations of the ground along the
centerlines of proposed streets and along the curb line
and edge of pavement of existing streets. Finish grades
shall be provided at least every fifty ( 50') feet.
188 - Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990
22, § 305( 2), cont' d) 22, § 304( 2), cont' d)
such is not available, the U. S. G. S. datum shall be used. Local survey
datum may be used only upon the approval of the Township Board of
Supervisors.
3. In addition, the following shall be shown on the plan:
A. Zoning classification( s) of all lands abutting the proposal.
B. Names of all current owners of immediately adjacent lands and
lands on the opposite side of all streets.
C. A statement showing:
1) Number of acres under proposal.
2) Number of lots and/ or dwelling units, or gross leasable
area.
3) Linear feet of new streets.
4) Linear feet of streets to be widened.
D. Description of waivers, variances, or special exceptions and
the date they were granted, if any.
E. Description of any deed restrictions or other covenants
affecting development of the tract.
F. The requirements of any other Township ordinance which may
affect the proposal.
G. Legend sufficient to indicate clearly between existing and
proposed conditions.
4. Existing Features. Within the tract proposed for subdivision or
land development, and within one hundred ( 100') feet of the tract ( or
greater or lesser distance as specified below), the following information
shall be shown on the plan:
A. Streets bordering or crossing the tract, showing names,
rights- of- way and cartway width and surface conditions.
B. Other streets within four hundred ( 400') feet of the tract,
showing names, and right- of- way widths.
C. Location and size of sanitary and storm sewers, including
invert elevations and direction of flow, within four hundred ( 400')
feet of the tract. Location and type of sewage systems.
D. Location and size of all lakes, ponds, watercourses, wetlands,
and flood prone areas ( flood data from Montgomery County Soil
Survey, FEMA studies and/ or supporting hydrologic and hydraulic data
for one hundred ( 100) year flood limits when provided independent of
FEMA data).
E. Contours at two ( 2') foot intervals shall be provided for the
tract and within fifty ( 50') feet of the perimeter. Contours shall be
accurately drawn from filed survey data or photogrammetric data.
Contours from U. S. G. S. maps shall be allowed only upon approval by the
Township.
F. Areas with slopes of fifteen ( 15%) percent or greater, as
delineated in Montgomery County Soil Survey, or determined from the
contours shown on the plan.
Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990 - 185 -
22, § 304( 4)( H)) 22, § 304( 4)( H))
G. Mapped limits of soil types from the Montgomery County
Soil Survey and the limitations of each soil for the type of
development proposed and for on- site sewage disposal if applicable.
H. Location, size, character and configuration of existing
buildings, labeled " To Remain" or " To be Removed" as applicable.
I. Location, size, species, and condition of trees six ( 6")
inches in diameter or greater, when standing alone or in small
groups.
J. Outer limits of tree masses and a general description of
their types, size and condition.
K. Locations and limits of rock outcroppings, quarries,
springs, marshlands, ravines, and other natural or manmade physical
features which may affect the location of proposed streets or
buildings, both within the property and up to fifty ( 50') feet
beyond the tract boundaries.
L. Location, size and ownership of utilities, both above and
below ground, with a note added to describe additional setback or
development restrictions required in their regard.
M. Location of wells.
N. Location of existing stormwater or erosion control facilities,
including basins, pipes, diffusion devices, and velocity
controls.
0. Location and description of existing buildings and other
structures less than fifty ( 50') feet beyond the tract boundaries.
5. Proposed Subdivision and/ or Land Development Layout. The
proposed road and lot layout shall show:
A. The layout of proposed streets, and alleys, including
names, cartway and right- of- way widths, and other dimensional data
consisting of centerline courses, distances, and curve data, curb
lines and radii at intersections and street location tie- ins by
courses and distances; ultimate rights- of- way for existing and
proposed streets.
area.
B. Layout and dimensions of all lots, including the net lot
C. All building setback lines.
D. Location, size and configuration of all land to be used
for common purposes, such as recreation and open space, with
notations in regard to proposed use( s) and dedication if
applicable.
E. Proposed walkway locations.
F. Approximate locations, size and configurations of proposed
buildings, along with the driveway locations.
6. Grading, Drainage and Utilities. The following proposed information
shall be shown on the plans or otherwise submitted in written
form:
186 - Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990
22, § 306( 1)( B)( 2)( b)) 22, § 306( 1) ( B) ( 2) ( b))
b) Profiles of sanitary sewers with a profile over
the sewer of the existing and finished ground surface
showing manhole locations beginning at the lowest manhole.
c) Profiles of storm drains showing catch basins,
inlet, and manhole locations, swales, ditches, etc.
d) Profiles of water mains.
3) Cross Sections. The cross section for each classification
of street shall comply with the Township' s standards and
specifications as minimum requirements. It shall show a typical
cross section across the road with details of grading and construction
as follows:
a) The ultimate right- of- way width and the location
and width of the cartway.
b) The type, depth and crown of paving.
c) The type and size of curb.
d) Grading of the sidewalk area should be carried to
the full width of the ultimate right- of- way and slopes of
cut or fill extended beyond the ultimate right- of- way.
e) The location, width, type and depth of the sidewalks,
when required.
f) The typical locations, size and depths of sewers
and utilities.
4) Additional Information. The following additional
information shall be submitted with the final plan.
a) All required local, State and Federal permits
shall be submitted. These permits may include: Montgomery
County, the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
PennDOT), or Township permits; Department of Environmental
Resources ( DER) permits for drainage, stream alteration,
dams, erosion and sedimentation control, wetlands, air
pollution, or sanitary sewage facilities.
b) The following statement shall be required on the
final plan: " The Approved Improvement Construction Plan, a
copy of which may be inspected at the office of the Township
Secretary, has been made a part of the Approved Final Plan."
c) All final engineering calculations which support
the proposed improvements such as drainage calculations,
sanitary facility design calculations, or structural calculations.
2. Record Plan.
A. Drafting Standards. The same standards shall be required for
a record plan as for a preliminary plan, and in addition, for recording
purposes, the plans shall be placed on sheet sizes of 18" X 30",
or 24" X 36". All lines shall be drawn to be legible if the plan is
reduced to half ( J) size or microfilmed. Lettering shall be no
smaller than one tenth ( 1/ 10") inch.
Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990 - 189 -
22, § 306( 2)( B)) 22, § 306( 2)( B))
B. Information to be Shown. The plan, which shall
include all portions of an approved preliminary plan, shall
show:
1) Courses and distances sufficient for the legal
description of all the lines shown on the plan. The error of
closure shall not be greater than one ( 1) part in thirty thousand
30, 000). [ Ord. 94- 21,
2) The names of abutting owners and their property
lines; names, locations, widths and other dimensions of all
roads, including centerline courses, distances and curve data;
descriptive data of street lines not parallel or concentric to
a centerline, and location tie- ins by courses and distances to
the nearest intersection of all existing, planned and approved
streets, and alleys; easements, recreational areas and other
public improvements, within the land to be subdivided or
developed.
3) All lots deeded to the ultimate right- of- way so
that a single deed may be drawn to the appropriate body having
jurisdiction for the dedication of streets by the subdivider,
developer, or builder.
4) Evidence that the plans are in conformance with the
Zoning Ordinance [ Chapter 27] and other applicable Township
ordinances and regulations. In any instance where such plans
do not conform, evidence shall be presented that an exception,
waiver, or variance has been officially authorized.
5) The location, material and size of all monuments
with reference to them.
6) Building setback lines with distances from the
ultimate right- of- way line.
7) Restrictions in the deed affecting the subdivision
of the property.
8) The location of all floodplains, and steep slopes
as defined in the Zoning Ordinance [ Chapter 27] and herein.
9) Offer of dedication of the ultimate right- of- way
area of existing streets.
a) When the ultimate right- of- way area of existing
streets is offered for dedication, the following note
shall be used:
All that area between the existing legal right- ofway
line and the ultimate right- of- way line of is
hereby offered for dedication to the governmental body
having jurisdiction."
b) When existing buildings are located within the
ultimate right- of- way area, the following note may be
added to the end of the ultimate right- of- way dedication
note:
190 - Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994
E
22, § 306( 2) ( B) ( 9) ( b), cont' d) 22, § 306( 2) ( B) ( 9) ( b), cont' d)
except that all the area under and immediately
abutting existing buildings in the ultimate right- of- way is
not offered for dedication but is hereby reserved for future
road widening purposes."
10) A list of all sheets that are included within the
plan.
C. Certifications. Before approval, the following applicable
certifications shall appear on the record plan. All certifications
shall be properly signed and sealed.
1) Owner' s Certification.
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
County of Montgomery
On the day of , 19 , bef ore me
the subscriber, a notary public of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, residing in , personally
appeared who acknowledges
himself ( themselves) to be the owner( s) of the land shown
hereon. All necessary approvals of this plan have been
obtained and are endorsed thereon and that I ( we) desire
that this plan be duly recorded.
Ord. 90- 2, reads " plant."
Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990 - 191 -
Notary Public My Commission Expires
I ( We) do hereby certify that I am ( we are) the sole
registered owner( s) of the land herein subdivided and that
there are no suits pending affecting the title of the same
and that I ( we) do hereby adopt this plan and desire the
same to be recorded. I ( We) de further save the Township
harmless and indemnify the Township of Douglass against any
liability or loss* resulting from the subdivision or development
of this plan for whatever reason present or future.
Owner Owner
2) Corporate Certification.
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
County of Montgomery
On the day of 19 before
me the subscriber, a notary public of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, residing in 9
personally appeared who acknowledges
himself ( themselves) to be the
of
a corporation, and that as such being authorized to do so,
he executed the foregoing plan by signing the name of the
said corporation by himself as that the said corporation is
the owner of the land shown hereon. All necessary approvals
Ord. 90- 2, reads " plant."
Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990 - 191 -
22, § 306( 2)( C)( 2), cont' d) 22, § 306( 2)( C)( 2), cont' d)
of this plan have been obtained and are endorsed thereon
and that the said corporation desires that this plan be
duly recorded.
Notary Public My Commission Expires
I, , acknowledge myself to be
the of , a
corporation, and that as such being authorized to do so,
certify that the corporation is the sole registered owner
of the land herein subdivided and that there are no suits
pending affecting the title of the same and that I do
hereby adopt this plan and desire the same to be recorded.
I do further save the Township harmless and indemnify
the Township of Douglass against any liability or
loss resulting from the subdivision or development of
this plat for whatever reason present or future.
Corporate Official Office
3) Survevor' s Certification.
I hereby certify that the plan shown and described
hereon, as well as all other drawings which are a part of
the plan set, are true and correct to the accuracy
required by the Douglass Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, and were prepared by me or under
my direction for which I accept full responsibility, and
represents a field survey performed by me or under my
direction. The existing perimeter monuments shown hereon
have been located as part of the survey and all other
proposed perimeter monuments shall be set.
Date Surveyor
4) Township Supervisor' s Certification.
This plan has been approved by the Douglass Township
Board of Supervisors this day of ,
19
Chairman Attested: Secretary
5) Township Planning Agency Certification.
This plan has been approved by the Douglass Township
Planning Agency this day of ,
19
Chairman Attested: Secretary
6) Wetlands Certification.
I do hereby certify that the delineation of the wetlands
shown on this plan are in accordance with the findings
of my field investigation and that I have determined
192 - Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990
22, § 306( 2)( C)( 6), cont' d) ( 22, § 306( 2)( C)( 6), cont' d)
these limits based upon the U. S. Corps of Engineers
guidelines.
Date
7) County Recording Note.
Recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds, in
Norristown, Pennsylvania, the Plan Book , Page ,
on the day of , 19_
8) An empty block or space with minimum dimensions of
three and one- half by two inches ( 3 1/ 2" X 2") shall be placed on
the right side of the record plan for Montgomery County Planning
Commission' s ' Reviewed' stamp. This empty block or space should
replace any statement that is set aside for Montgomery County
Planning Commission use or signature. Montgomery County Planning
Commission does not sign or otherwise use those statements.
Ord. 94- 21
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 306; as amended by Ord. 94- 2, 3/ 7/ 1994, §§ 5, 6)
307. Land Development Plans. Land development plans shall show the
following information, either for a preliminary or final plan, in addition
the the information required by §§ 303, 305 and 306 of this Part:
1. All new covenants relating to use.
2. Man- made features for the use of two ( 2) or more prospective
occupants.
3. The density and/ or intensity of use.
4. The total building coverage and the are of the total tract devoted
to each use or group of uses, if applicable.
5. The location and placement of accessory structures and facilities.
6. All road, driveways, parking facilities and pedestrian ways
including the total number of parking spaces).
7. The locations, areas, and types of common open space and/ or
recreation facilities.
8. A conceptual site utilization layout defining the general location
of all proposed uses and activities.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 307)
308. Tentative Sketch Plan Procedure. Applicants are encouraged to
submit tentative sketch plans for subdivision and/ or land developments,
although this type of plan submission is optional.
1. Tentative sketch plans should be presented to the Township Planning
Agency for informal discussion at a regularly scheduled Planning
Agency meeting, following a request made to the Township Zoning Officer or
Secretary to be placed on the agenda.
2. The purpose of a tentative sketch plan submission is to provide
informal advice and guidance to an applicant prior to preparation of
preliminary plans, and therefore, it does not constitute a formal plan
submission and is not subject to a time limit.
Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994 - 193 -
22, § 308( 3)) ( 22, § 308( 3))
3. The Township Planning Agency may make non- binding suggestions and
recommendations to the applicant during the meeting at which the plan is
discussed. These need not be presented in writing to the applicant;
however, they should be summarized in the minutes of the Township Planning
Agency for reference.
4. If a proposal is large or complex, the Township Planning Agency
may defer completing its comments and recommendations until it has
consulted its technical advisors. However, the Planning Agency will try
to expedite this informal review process.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 308)
309. Preliminary Plan Submission and Review Procedure. Preliminary
plans shall be submitted for all subdivisions and/ or land developments
subject to the following procedure and subject to the requirements
of §§ 303, 304, 305, 310 and 311.
1. Five ( 5) copies of the preliminary plan shall be submitted to
the Township Secretary or Zoning Officer, in person by the applicant or
applicant' s agent, at the Township Building during normal Township
business hours.
2. Plans must be accompanied by:
A. Township filing fee.
B. Montgomery County Planning Commission review fee.
C. Completed Township application and administrative forms.
3. The Plan submission date will be stamped on the plan, following
a cursory review of the plan, only if the plan shows basic compliance
with the requirements of this Part.
4. The Township Secretary or Zoning Officer shall distribute
copies of the plan to the following for review and recommendations:
A. Township Planning Agency
B. Board of Supervisors
C. Township Engineer
D. Montgomery County Planning Commission, along with the required
review fee and request for review.
E. Township Solicitor, other Township boards or officials,
sewer and/ or water authorities, and/ or other technical consultants
as needed.
5. The application for approval of the preliminary plan shall be
placed on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the
Township Planning Agency following the plan submission date.
6. The application for approval of the preliminary plan, which
should include consideration of the timely recommendations of the
Township Engineer, Montgomery County Planning Commission, and other
technical advisors when requested, the Township Planning Commission, and
other technical advisors when requested, the Township Planning Agency
shall communicate its recommendation to the Board of Supervisors.
7. The Board of Supervisors shall have a ninety ( 90) day time
period to act on the plan unless the applicant has agreed in writing to
an extension of the time period.
194 Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994
22, § 309( 7)( A)) 22, § 309( 7)( A))
A. The ninety ( 90) day time period shall be measured from the
date of the next regularly scheduled Township Planning Agency meeting
following the plan submission date.
B. If the next regularly scheduled Township Planning Agency
meeting occurs more than thirty ( 30) days following the plan submission
date, then the ninety ( 90) day time period shall be measured from
the thirtieth ( 30th) day following the plan submission date.
C. If an extension of the ninety ( 90) day time period is applied,
it shall be measured from the expiration of the original ninety
90) day period. A time extension shall postpone the deadline and
effects of the ninety ( 90) day time period for the additional number
of days agreed to in writing.
8. The Board of Supervisors shall consider the preliminary plan
application at one ( 1) or more of its public meetings during the ninety
90) day time period, and/ or extension thereof if applicable, and shall
render a decision on the plan following receipt of the recommendations at
the Township Planning Agency, Township Engineer, Montgomery County Planning
Commission, and/ or other technical advisors as requested.
A. Provided, in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, that the Board of Supervisors shall not approve an
application until the Montgomery County Planning Commission' s report
of its recommendations is received, or until the expiration of thirty
30) days from the date the application was forwarded to the County..
B. In accordance with the policies of the Montgomery County
Planning Commission, the thirty ( 30) day time period shall begin from
the date the application was received at the County.
9. Procedure Following the Board' s Decision. When the Board of
Supervisors makes a decision on a preliminary plan, one of the following
procedures will be followed, depending on the type of decision:
A. Denial. If the Board denies approval of a preliminary plan
in terms as filed by the applicant, then the written notification to
the applicant shall specify the defects found in the application and
describe the requirements which have not been met, and shall cite the
provisions of the statue or ordinance relied upon.
B. Approval. If the Board approves a preliminary plan, in terms
as filed by the applicant, the the Township Secretary will so certify
thereon, and two ( 2) copies of the approved plan will be forwarded to
the applicant. The applicant shall then submit five ( 5) paper copies
and two ( 2) mylar or linen copies of the approved plan for Township
seal and signature.
C. Approval Subject to Conditions.
1) If the Board approves a preliminary plan subject to
specific conditions, then those conditions shall be accepted in
writing by the applicant, otherwise the plan shall be denied
approval. Therefore, the written notification to the applicant
shall:
a) Specify the conditions of approval and request the
applicant' s written agreement to the conditions.
Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990 - 195 -
22, § 309( 9)( C)( 2)) 22, § 309( 9)( C)( 2))
b) State that the application will be denied if
the applicant does not agree to the conditions, and
specify the defects found in the application, describe
the requirements which have not been met, and cite the
provisions of the statute or ordinance relied upon for
denial of the plan.
2) Following submission of written agreement to the
conditions specified by the Board, the applicant shall meet
the requirements of § 312 and shall submit five ( 5) paper copies
and two ( 2) mylar or linen copies of the preliminary plan,
which show compliance. with the conditions, by plan revision or
notation, for Township seal and signature. Two ( 2) signed
copies will be returned to the applicant, along with a paper
copy and mylar which must be recorded at the Recorder of
Deeds.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 309)
310. Effective Period of Approval. Approval will be effective
for a period of five ( 5) years from the date of preliminary plan -approval,
unless extended in writing by the Board of Supervisors.
1. No subsequent change or amendment in the zoning, subdivision,
or other governing ordinance or plan shall be applied to affect adversely
the right of the applicant to commence and to complete any aspect of
the approved development in accordance with the terms of approval within
that five ( 5) year period.
2. In the case where preliminary and final plan approval are concurrent,
the five ( 5) year period shall be measured from the date of
that concurrent approval.
3. In a case of a preliminary plan calling for the installation of
improvements beyond the five ( 5) year period, a schedule shall be filed
by the applicant with the preliminary plan delineating all proposed sections
as well as deadlines within which applications for final plan
approval of each section are intended to be filed.
A. Such schedule shall be updated annually by the applicant
on or before the anniversary of the preliminary plan approval,
until final plan approval has been granted to the final section.
B. Any modification in the aforesaid schedule shall be
subject to approval of the Board of Supervisors in its discretion.
C. Each section in any residential subdivision or land
development, except for the last section, shall contain a minimum
of twenty- five ( 25%) percent of the total number of dwelling units
as shown on the preliminary plan, unless a lesser percentage is
approved by the Board of Supervisors in its discretion.
D. For any section or sections, beyond the initial section,
in which the required improvements have not been substantially
completed within the initial five ( 5) year period, the protections
of § 310( 1), above, shall also apply to each subsequent section for
an additional term of three ( 3) years from the date of final plan
approval of each section.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 310)
196 - Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990
22, § 311) ( 22, § 311)
311. Concurrent Preliminary/ Final Plan Approval.
1. The following may be granted concurrent preliminary and final plan
approval when all required certifications are placed on the plan in accordance
with § 306( 2)( C) of this Part:
A. Minor preliminary plan.
B. Major preliminary plans showing all information required for
a final plan and for which no changes have been required by the Board
of Supervisors, provided that any financial guarantees and/ or development
agreements have been completed to the satisfaction of the Board
of Supervisors, upon recommendation of the Township Engineer and
Solicitor.
2. Following a concurrent approval, plans may be recorded in accordance
with the procedures of § 312( 9) of this Part.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 311)
312. Final Plan Procedure. Following preliminary plan approval, a
final plan shall be submitted in accordance with the following procedure
and subject to the requirements of § 306 of this Part, except for those .
plans exempted in compliance with § 311 of this Part, " Concurrent Preliminary/
Final Plan Approval."
1. The final plan shall conform to the preliminary plan as approved
by the Board of Supervisors, including all required modifications and
conditions agreed to by the applicant.
2. The final plan may be submitted in section in accordance with
310( 3) of this Part.
3. Five ( 5) copies of the final plan shall be submitted to the
Township Secretary or Zoning Officer, accompanied by the Township filing
fee and required administrative forms.
4. The plan submission date will be stamped on the plan and the
application for final plan approval shall be placed on the agenda of the
next regularly scheduled meeting of the Township Planning Agency following
the plan submission date.
5. Copies of the plan will be distributed to the following for review
and comment:
A. Township Engineer, Solicitor, Zoning Officer and Planning
Agency.
B. Other Township boards or officials, sewer and/ or water
authorities, and/ or other technical advisors as needed.
6. The Board of Supervisors shall consider the final plan at one ( 1)
or more of its public meeting during the allotted ninety ( 90) day time
period, in accordance with §§309( 7) and 309( 8) of this Part.
7. A final plan shall not be approved until the Board of Supervisors
are assured that:
A. The plan conforms to the approved preliminary plan.
B. All engineering and other technical details have been -resolved
to the satisfaction of the Township Engineer, and other technical
advisors when needed.
Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990 - 197 -
22, § 312( 7)( C)) 22, § 312( 7)( C))
C. All financial guarantees and legal agreements have been
reviewed and found satisfactory by the Township Solicitor, in
accordance with Parts 5 and 6 of this Chapter. When requested by
the applicant, the Douglass Township Board of Supervisors shall
furnish the developer with a signed copy of a resolution indicating
approval of the final plan contingent upon the applicant obtaining
a satisfactory financial security. The final plan shall not be
signed or recorded until the financial improvements agreement is
executed. The resolution of contingent approval shall expire and
be deemed to be revoked if the financial security agreement is not
executed within ninety ( 90) days unless a written extension is
granted by the Board of Supervisors.
D. The plan complies in all respects with applicable Township
ordinances or that appropriate variances or waivers have been
granted for features that do not comply.
E. All necessary permits have been obtained from the applicable
regulatory agencies, authorities, or departments.
8. When the final plan is approved, the applicant shall present
five ( 5) paper and two ( 2) linen or mylar copies of the plan to be
signed by the Chairman of the Board of Supervisors, the Township Secretary
and the Chairman and Secretary of the Township Planning Agency,
together with the date of the approval and official Township seal.
9. Within ninety ( 90) days following final plan approval, the
applicant shall record the final plan in the office of the Recorder of
Deeds of Montgomery County.
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, whenever final plan approval is required by a municipality,
the Recorder of Deeds shall not accept any plan for recording
unless it contains the official approval of the municipal
governing body and certification of review by the County Planning
Commission.
B. Prior to recording, the applicant should present the
municipally approved plan to the Montgomery County Planning Commission
for its stamp and seal, with one ( 1) paper copy made available
to the County Planning Commission for its files.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, 5312)
198 - Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990
22, § 400)
Part 4
Design Standards
22, § 400)
400. General. The following principles of subdivision and land
development, general requirements, and minimum standards of design shall be
observed by the applicant in all instances:
1. All portions of a tract being subdivided shall be designated as
lots, roads, public lands or other land uses.
2. Whenever possible, applicants shall preserve scenic points, historic
sites and other community assets and landmarks as well as natural
amenities such as mature trees and waterways.
3. Subdivisions and land developments should be laid out so as to
avoid excessive cut or fill.
4. Applicants shall observe the ultimate rights- of- way for continguous
existing roads as prescribed in this Part. Additional portions of
the corridors for such roads shall be offered to the government agency
having jurisdiction at the time the subdivision or land development is
consummated. Applicable building setback lines, as defined by the Township
Zoning Ordinance [ Chapter 271 of current adoption, shall be delineated as
measured from the ultimate right- of- way lines.
5. The standards of design in this Part will be used to judge the
adequacy of subdivision and land development proposals. The standards
included in these regulations are minimum design requirements. The Township
Board of Supervisors reserves the right, in any case, to request that
development features exceed these standards if conditions so warrant.
6. The Township Board of Supervisors may modify or adjust the standards
of this Part to permit reasonable utilization of property while
securing substantial conformance with the objectives of the regulations.
7. Floodplain land shall not be subdivided or developed except in
accordance with the floodplain regulations set forth in the Township Zoning
Ordinance [ Chapter 27].
8. Improvement construction requirements will be completed under
specification of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources, the Montgomery County Soil
and Water Conservation District, and other appropriate agencies. In the
event of conflict, the specification contained in this Part shall govern.
9. The developer* or builder** shall construct and install, at no
expense to the Township, the roads, curbs, sidewalks, water mains, sanitary
and store sewers, street lights, fire hydrants, road and street signs,
shade trees, monuments and other facilities and utilities specified in this
Part. Construction and installation of such facilities and utilities shall
conform to the Douglass Township Engineering Standards, where applicable,
and shall be subject to inspection by appropriate Township officials during
the progress of the work; the subdivider shall pay for these inspections.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, 1400)
Ord. 90- 2, reads " development."
Ord. 90- 2, reads " building."
Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990 - 199 -
11
22, § 401) ( 22, § 401)
401. Recommendation by Planning Agency.
1. The standards of design in this Part shall be used to judge the
adequacy of subdivision proposals. Whenever the literal application of
these standards would cause undue hardship or be plainly unreasonable,
the Township Planning Agency may recommend to the Township Board of
Supervisors such reasonable modifications as will not be contrary to
public interest.
2. The standards included in these regulations are minimum design
requirements.
3. Developers and subdividers shall, if deemed necessary by the
Township Board of Supervisors upon the recommendation of the Township
Planning Agency, provide areas and easements for schools and other
public buildings, parks, playgrounds, playfields, rights- of- way and
easements for storm and sanitary sewer facilities in any area that
cannot immediately be joined to the existing storm and sanitary sewer
systems of the Township.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 401)
402. Modification of Requirements. The Township Board of Supervisors
may grant a modification of the requirements of this Part,
through a waiver, if strict application of these requirements would be
unreasonable, provided that such modification will not be contrary to
the public interest and that the purpose and, intent of this Part is
observed. All requests for a modification shall:
A. Be in writing and part of an application for subdivision
and/ or land development;
B. State the grounds and facts of unreasonableness or hardship
on which the request is based;
C. List the provision( s) of this Chapter involved; and,
D. State the minimum modification necessary.
Ord. 9072, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 402)
403. Requirements for New Streets and Extensions of Existing
Streets. All new streets and extensions and widening of existing
streets:
1. Shall be offered for dedication to the Township; State roads
shall first be offered to the State, County roads shall first be offered
to the County;
2. Shall conform with the circulation element of the Township
Comprehensive Plan, as amended, Township Ultimate Right -of -Way Map, and
County or State highway plans, and be coordinated with existing streets;
3. Shall provide appropriate access between abutting tracts of
land for immediate or future use;
4. Shall create a road hierarchy among interior subdivision and
land development streets and exterior streets to insure proper through -
traffic flow, local access, and internal traffic distribution and flow;
200 - Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990
22, § 403( 5)) 22, § 403( 5))
5. Shall be related closely to existing topography to assure reasonable
grades, alignment and drainage, appropriate access to lots, and to
minimize regrading and removal of vegetation;
6. Shall be designed to continue existing streets at equal or greater
right- of- way and cartway width, as recommended by the Township Engineer and
Planning Agency.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 403)
404. Street Classifications and Requirements_. Every street, road,
or highway within the Township shall be classified by its function as one
1) of the following, and shall be subject to the requirements for its
classification as contained in this Part:
1. Primary Arterials. Are the major highways which carry high
volumes of through traffic on an inter -community, regional, or higher
level. They are further classified into the following subclassification:
limited access highways, controlled access highways, semi -controlled access
highway. Of the primary arterials, the semi -controlled access highway
shall be the only one addressed in this Part.
A. Semi -Controlled Access Highway. Requires lesser restrictions
on access granted to adjacent properties, and provides more frequent
access points at grade level intersections than the other primary
arterials. Access from individual properties, however, will be
restricted as much as is reasonably possible. Route 73 ( East Philadelphia
Avenue and Big Road) and Swamp Pike, within the limits of
Douglass Township are semi -controlled access highways. Semi -controlled
access highways shall be governed by the regulations of § 405 of
this Part.
2. Secondary Arterials. Are those streets, road, highways which
collect, carry, and feed medium volumes of traffic, and connect areas
within and adjacent to the Township. They are further classified into the
following subclassifications: collectors and feeders. In this Part,
collectors and feeders are combined into one ( 1) subclassification,
collectors.
A. Collectors. Serve to connect primary arterials with lesser
classified streets, and distribute traffic throughout the Township and
adjacent areas. Collectors shall be governed by the regulations of
405 of this Part.
3. Local Access Streets. Are the minor streets which carry the
lowest volumes of traffic and serve primarily to provide vehicular access
to adjacent land uses. They are further classified into the following
subclassifications, and are regulated as referenced therein:
A. Residential Streets. Shall function primarily to provide
vehicular access and street frontage for lots and/ or buildings within
a residential subdivision and/ or land development in areas of the
Township which are zoned R- 1, R - 1A, R- 2, R- 3 and R- 4. Residential
streets shall comply with the regulations of § 405 of this Part.
B. Industrial Streets. Shall function primarily to provide
vehicular access and street frontage for industrial lots and land
uses.
Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990 - 201 -
22, § 404( 3)( B), cont' d) 22, § 404( 3)( B), cont' d)
Industrial streets shall function primarily to serve industrial and
office development in areas of the Township that are zoned M- 1 and M- 2. 40 Industrial streets shall comply with the regulations of § 405.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 404)
405. Street Design Standards. ( accordinE to zoning district).
All streets shall conform with the followins: standards:
202 - Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994
Right -of -Way Cartaay Curbs Permitted Shoulder Width Additional
Width Width Re uired Parkino_ If no curbs) Lane Width
Semi - Controlled Access
In R- 1 and R - 1A Districts 100 feet 28 feet No None 10 feet 12 feet
In All Other Districts 100 feet 52 feet Yes None 12 feet
Collectors
In R- 1 and R - 1A Districts 60 feet 24 feet No None 6 feet 11 feet
In All Other Districts 60 feet 40 feet Yes Both Sides 11 feet
Residential
In R- 1 and R - 1A Districts 50 feet 22 feet No None 4 feet 11 feet.
In R- 2, R- 3, and R- 4 50 feet 30 feet Yes 1 Side Only 11 feet
Industrial
In 11- 1 and M- 2 Districts 60 feet 34 feet Yes 1 Side Only 12 feet
202 - Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994
MOM LK !
V U4! . a, •
MdLLbew +•Prna+ S • • !
ftr 4nAV
4
8 {
mom 0= * Lae
i
t
f
COLEBROOKDALE
TOWNSHIP 7 . • .
6.....•
oaurm! s+.crImw r
y ^
rr ; "
siw ); •
KL L M.4R'm 8iLICt/4 AMC * L' 9. rM4 Sf+4'i'S
d
t
3 ' t K"
0 "
Who
6 4 m" rM.
4+. o j rn+Or •o.
Ott
1/ 4'i• M" Sb1M N+4. e }
r Ala
s
ROADWAY CLASSIFICATION MAP
Woo SOU THERN POR TION
m..,. LfcMOO DOUGLASS TOWNS=IIP
F" D .
a. a
p; TGOMERY COU,v TY H ew
cvcc . wv R eao L, rN 1
a= nt.... PENNSYLVANIA
Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996 IMISM
L -
kO, VAM.
4WA o meat Am
ro .- T ROAD
M. WA= P. P V V
ROADWAY CLASSIFICATION MAP "- s '.:!
NORTHERN PORTION
DOUGLASS TOWNSHIP
MONTGOMERY COUNTY
PENNSYLVANIA
r Na.} Mc e t ieu
204 - Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996
l
22, § 405( 1)) ( 22, § 405( 1)
1. When streets follow a zoning district boundary, the street
shall conform to the design standards of the more intense zoning
district.
2. The street classifications for all existing streets and all
proposed collector streets within the Township are shown in Figure 1,
the Township Street Classification Map.
3. All new roads in commercial zoning districts shall meet the
collector street design standards.
4. Collector streets in residential subdivisions shall be provided
in the following cases and meet the following requirements:
A. When the subdivision has fifty ( 50) or more dwelling
units, a collector street shall be provided and designed to carry
traffic from residential streets in the subdivision to existing
streets, especially existing collector or higher classification
streets.
B. When a collector street proposed in the Township' s 1988
Comprehensive Plan crosses the property, as shown in Figure 1, a
collector street shall be provided that follows the alignment in
Figure 1.
C. When the subdivision is between two ( 2) or more existing
collector or higher classification streets, a collector street,
that directly connects these streets, shall be provided.
D. Whenever possible, residential collector streets shall be
designed to have no residential lots directly fronting on them.
When this is not possible, the lots fronting on the collector
street shall have at least one hundred ( 100') feet of frontage and
shall contain an off- street turnaround area designed so that
vehicles will not have to back out onto the collector street.
E. The Supervisors may waive the requirements outlined above
where collectors will not serve the public safety or convenience.
5. All new roads in residential zoning districts that are not required
to meet collector or higher classification street design standards
shall meet the residential street design standards.
6. For semi -controlled access highways, the right- of- way width may
be reduced to eighty ( 80') feet by the Board of Supervisors.
7. For semi -controlled access highways, two ( 2) lanes may be
provided when approved by the Board of Supervisors and PennDOT.
8. For all street classifications, the Supervisors may require additional
right- of- way and paving width when:
A. Turning lanes are necessary for safety or convenience; and
B. The amount of projected traffic warrants additional paving
width.
9. For no - curb streets, shoulder material treatment shall be provided
to control storm drainage erosion.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 405; as amended by Ord. 94- 2, 3/ 7/ 1994, § 7; and by
Ord. 96- 1, 1/ 15/ 1996)
Page Added 6/ 17/ 1996 - 204. 1 -
22, § 406) 22, § 406)
406. Single -Access Streets.
1. Any street which is served by only one ( 1) intersection with a
through -street shall be considered a single -access street, regardless of
the street' s configuration within the proposed subdivision or land development.
Included in this classification of streets are:
A. Cul- de- sac streets ( temporary and permanent).
B. Multiple cul- de- sac streets.
C. Streets which loop back to themselves.
D. Stub streets.
2. Single -access streets shall be subject to the requirements for
their classification of street, notwithstanding their single -access status.
3. Permanent Cul -de -Sac Street.
A. Shall be permanently closed at one ( 1) end.
B. Shall be provided with a vehicular turnaround at the closed
end with a right- of- way radius of at least fifty ( 501) feet, and a
paving radius of at least forty ( 40') feet.
C. Shall not exceed five hundred ( 500') feet in length, nor [ be]
less that two hundred fifty ( 250') feet, unless approved by the
Supervisors when warranted by special conditions.
1) Measurement of the length shall be made from the
right- of- way line of the through street to the most distant point
on the right- of- way of the turnaround, measured along the cul- desac
centerline.
2) Special conditions may include, but not be limited to:
a) Extreme topographical restrictions ( slopes,
floodplains, etc.).
b) Oddly shaped tract configuration.
c) Lack of alternative outlets because of surrounding
developed conditions.
d) Shall be served by an appropriately located
emergency accessway when required by the Supervisors.
4. Temporary Cul -de -Sac Streets.
A. May be temporarily closed at one ( 1) end, with the intent to
extend the street onto the abutting tract upon its development.
B. Shall be built to the tract boundary line at a location and
grade that are logical for extension onto the abutting tract, but
shall not exceed seven hundred fifty ( 750') feet, nor be less than two
hundred fifty ( 250') feet in length, unless approved by the Supervisors
when warranted by special conditions, as in § 406( 3)( C)( 1) and ( 2)
herein.
C. Shall not be extended as a cul- de- sac street, but shall be
connected to another through street, unless approved by the Supervisors
when warranted by special conditions as in 6406( 3)( C) herein.
Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990 - 205 -
22, § 406( 4)( D)) 22, § 406( 4)( D))
D. The developer shall show proof satisfactory to the Township
that a temporary dead- end road may feasibly and economically
be extended and forms a logical step in the circulation pattern of
the area in which it is located.
E. Shall be provided with a vehicular turnaround at the
closed end, abutting the tract boundary, with a paving radius of at
least forty ( 40') feet.
1) Construction shall meet the same requirements as for
a permanent cul- de- sac turnaround.
2) Those portions of the turnaround extending beyond
the street right- of- way shall be located on temporary access
easements, valid only until the road is extended.
3) Upon extension of the street, the full rights and
responsibilities for the area of the temporary easements shall
revert to the owners of the lots on which they were located.
F. The developer responsible for extension of the . street
shall also be responsible for the following:
1) Removal of all curbing and paving of the temporary
turnaround beyond the width of the street' s cartway.
2) Installation of new sidewalk, curbing, and cartway
paving to complete the street connection.
3) Extension of utilities as necessary.
4) Repair of any improvements damaged in this process.
5) Grading, installation, and/ or restoration of lawn
areas where affected by this removal and construction process.
5. Multiple Cul -de -Sac Streets.
A. Are single -access street which terminate in more than one
1) vehicular turnaround.
B. Shall be avoided in favor of more desirable street
layouts.
C. May be permitted where the length of the cul- de- sac is
less than five hundred ( 500') feet, but more than two hundred
250') feet, measured from the through street intersection to each
turnaround.
D. May be permitted to exceed the five hundred ( 5001) feet.
limit when approved by the Supervisors when warranted by special
conditions, as in § 406( 3)( C)( 2), herein, or when qualified as a
temporary cul- de- sac as regulated in § 406( 4) herein.
E. Shall be served by an appropriately located emergency
accessway when required by the Supervisors.
6. Streets Which Loop Back to Themselves.
A. Are single -access streets which do not terminate in a
vehicular turnaround, but instead loop back to intersect with
themselves.
206 - Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990
22, § 406( 6)( B)) ( 22, § 406( 4)( B))
407. Street Alignment. Sight distance, horizontal and vertical
curvature, maximum and minimum street grades shall be provided on all
streets in compliance with the standards contained in this Section.
1. Horizontal Curvature. Horizontal curves shall be used at all
changes in direction in excess of one ( 1) degree, and shall consider
distance, change in grade, and alignment. The following standards shall be
used:
A. Minimum Curve Radius.
1) Semi - controlled Access: three hundred ( 300') feet.
2) Collectors: two hundred ( 200') feet.
3) Residential and Industrial: one hundred fifty ( 150')
feet.
4) Radius measured at centerline.
B. Curves and Tangents.
1) Long radius curves shall be used rather than a series
of shorter radius curves connected by tangents.
2) Reverse curves shall be separated and connected by a
tangent of a minimum of one hundred ( 100') foot length.
Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990 - 207 -
B. Shall be discouraged but may be permitted when no alternatives
are determined to be feasible and preferable by the Supervisors,
upon advice of the Township Planning Agency and Engineer.
C. When permitted, shall meet the following requirements:
1) Shall not under any circumstances exceed two thousand
2, 000') feet in length, measured from the intersection with the
through street, along the entire centerline around to its intersection
with itself.
2) Shall not contain more than forty- five ( 45) residential
lots or dwelling units.
3) Shall be served by an appropriately located emergency
accessway.
7. Stub Streets.
A. Shall be provided in appropriate locations for vehicular
access to abutting undeveloped lands when required by the Supervisors,
upon advice of the Township Planning Agency and Engineer.
B. Shall not be longer than the width of two ( 2) building lots
abutting the street,
C. Shall not be provided with a vehicular turnaround.
D. Shall be constructed to the property line in accordance with
the standards of this Part applicable to the classification of street
it will be upon extension.
E. Shall not provide access to more than two ( 2) lots, one ( 1)
on each side of the stub street.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 406)
407. Street Alignment. Sight distance, horizontal and vertical
curvature, maximum and minimum street grades shall be provided on all
streets in compliance with the standards contained in this Section.
1. Horizontal Curvature. Horizontal curves shall be used at all
changes in direction in excess of one ( 1) degree, and shall consider
distance, change in grade, and alignment. The following standards shall be
used:
A. Minimum Curve Radius.
1) Semi - controlled Access: three hundred ( 300') feet.
2) Collectors: two hundred ( 200') feet.
3) Residential and Industrial: one hundred fifty ( 150')
feet.
4) Radius measured at centerline.
B. Curves and Tangents.
1) Long radius curves shall be used rather than a series
of shorter radius curves connected by tangents.
2) Reverse curves shall be separated and connected by a
tangent of a minimum of one hundred ( 100') foot length.
Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990 - 207 -
22, § 407( 1)( B)( 3)) 22, § 407( 1)( B)( 3))
3) Curve. Tangent relationship shall follow accepted
engineering guidelines for safety and efficiency. For
example, minimum radius curves shall not be used at the ends
of long tangents.
C. Super -Elevation. Semi -controlled access streets shall be
super -elevated in compliance with accepted engineering standards
when a curve radius of less than six hundred ( 600`) feet is used.
D. Approaches to Intersection. Approaches to intersections
shall follow a straight course for a minimum of one hundred ( 100`)
feet from the intersecting centerlines.
2. Vertical Curvature. Vertical curves shall be used at changes
in grade of more than one ( 1%) percent, in compliance with the following
requirements:
A. The following length of vertical curve shall be provided
for each percent of grade change:
Semi -controlled 100 feet
Collectors 50 feet
Residential and Industrial 25 feet
Within one hundred fifty
150') feet of intersection
stop condition) 10 feet
B. The high point or low point on a vertical curve shall be
clearly identified on plans and profiles, as appropriate.
C. Over summits or in sumps vertical curves shall not produce
excessive flatness in grade.
3. Street Grades. All streets shall be graded as shown on the
street profile and cross section plans submitted and approved as a part
of the preliminary plan approval process for subdivision and/ or land
development. Street grades shall comply with the following:
A. Minimum grade for all streets shall be one ( ll) percent.
B. Maximum grades for streets shall be:
1) Semi -controlled access and collector streets, seven
7%) percent.
2) Residential and industrial streets, ten ( 10%)
percent for distances less than one thousand five hundred
1, 500') feet.
C. Street grades in excess of five ( 5%) percent should be
avoided wherever possible.
D. Street grades shall be measured along the centerline.
E. Curve -grade combinations shall follow accepted engineering
guidelines for safety and efficiency, for example, minimum radius
horizontal curves will not be permitted in combination with maximum
grades.
208 - Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990
22, § 407( 1)( F)) 22, § 407( 2) ( F))
F. At all approaches to intersections, street grades shall not
exceed four ( 4%) percent for a minimum distance of fifty ( 50') feet.
G. The grade of the outer perimeter of cul- de- sac turnarounds
shall not exceed four ( 4%) percent, measured along the curbline.
H. All street grading shall be checked for accuracy under
inspection by the Township Engineer.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 407)
408. Street Intersections. All street intersections under the
jurisdiction of this Part shall be subject to the requirement of this
Section.
1. Number of Streets. Not more than two ( 2) streets shall intersect
at the same point.
2. Three- Way/ Four- Way Intersections. Three- way or " T" intersections
shall be used instead of four- way intersections unless the four- way intersection
can be justified in terms of necessary and desirable through
traffic movements.
3. Cul -de - Sac Intersections.
A. Intersections with permanent cul- de- sac streets shall be
designed with the cul- de- sac street extending as a side street from
the through street, rather than have a through street extend through
an intersection to terminate as a cul- de- sac.
B. Four- way intersections may be created using two ( 2) permanent
cul- de- sac streets intersecting directly opposite one another along a
through street, when the through street is a residential or industrial
street.
4. Corrective Changes to Existing Intersections. When existing streets
intersect at odd angles or have more than four ( 4) approaches, the applicant
shall make corrective changes to bring the intersection into compliance
with this Part, as required by the Supervisors, who shall first
seek the advice of the Township Engineer and Planning Agency and other
technical advisors or agencies, as appropriate. For State and County
highways, corrective changes shall comply with the requirements of the
appropriate agency.
5. Waiver of Corrective Changes. The Supervisors may waive the above
requirements for corrective changes under one ( 1) or more of the following
conditions:
A. When changes made on the applicant' s land will not improve
the intersection' s deficiencies.
B. When other road improvements are already planned which would
correct the problem without changes required of the applicant.
6. Angle of Intersections.
A. All intersection approaches shall be designed at right angles
unless sufficient reason exists to justify a lesser angle. However,
no angle shall be less than seventy- five ( 75°) degrees for all inter -
Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990 - 209 -
22, § 408( 6), cont' d) 22, § 408( 4), cont' d)
sections with semi -controlled access highways or sixty ( 600) degrees
for collector, residential, or industrial streets, measured
at the centerline intersections.
B. Where angled intersections are used it is preferable to
design them so that the heavier traffic flow will make the
obliquely angled turn rather than the acutely angled turn.
7. Pavement and Right -of -Way Intersection Radii. Street intersections
shall be rounded with tangental arcs at the pavement edge ( crub
line) and right- of- way lines as listed below. Where two ( 2) streets of
different right- of- way widths intersect, the radii of curvature for the
widest street shall apply. The curves shall be concentric with each
other, when possible.
Minimum Radius Minimum Radius at
Type of Street at Pavement Edge Right -of -Way Line
Semi -controlled 60 feet 25 feet
Collector 40 feet 20 feet
Residential 25 feet 15 feet
Industrial 40 feet 20 feet
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 408)
409. Intersection Spacing. Spacing of intersections under the
jurisdiction of this Part shall be done in compliance with the regulations
contained in this Section, measured from centerline to centerline.
1. Semi -Controlled Access Highways/ Without Curbs.
A. Street intersections with semi -controlled access highways,
without curbs, shall be spaced a minimum of eight hundred ( 800')
feet apart when located on the same side of the street.
B. When located on opposite sides of the street, street
intersections with semi -controlled access highways, without curbs,
shall be located a minimum of eight hundred ( 8001) feet apart where
practicable, but may be spaced as close as four hundred ( 400') feet
apart if necessary and/ or preferable in terms of sight distance and
other safety- related factors.
C. For intersection that would have to be less than four
hundred ( 400') feet apart, first preference should be given to
locating the streets opposite one another as a four-way intersection,
otherwise the best solution should be sought in terms of
accepted traffic safety standards.
2. Semi -Controlled Access Highways with Curbs.
A. Street intersections with semi -controlled access highways
with curbs shall be located a minimum of four hundred ( 400') feet
apart wherever practicable whether on the same or opposite sides of
the street.
B. For intersections that would have to be less than four
hundred ( 400') feet apart, first preference should be given to
locating the streets opposite one another as a four-way intersec
210 - Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990
22, § 409( 2), cont' d) ( 22, § 409( 2), cont' d)
tion, otherwise the best solution should be sought in terms of accepted
traffic safety standards.
3. All Other Streets. Street intersections with all other streets
shall be spaced the minimum distance apart as specified for the classifications
listed below, whether on the same or opposite side of the street.
A. Collectors without curb: six hundred ( 600') feet.
B. Collectors with curb: four hundred ( 400') feet.
C. Residential and industrial streets: two hundred ( 200') feet.
4. Offset Intersections. In any case where centerlines of street
intersections are or would be within one hundred fifty ( 150') feet of each
other, they shall be made to coincide by relocating the street within the
applicant' s land, unless additional problems of sight distances or other
safety- related problems would be created. As an alternative, relocation
further away from the offset intersection may be done in compliance with
the intersection spacing requirements contained herein, when approved by
the Board of Supervisors.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 409)
410. Clear Sight Triangles. In order to provide adequate sight
lines, clear sight triangles shall be required to be maintained along all
approaches to all intersections in compliance with the standards herein.
1. Clear sight triangles shall be measured along street centerlines,
from their point of intersection.
2. Where differing classifications of street intersect, the higher
classification of street shall determine the dimensions used.
3. For semi -controlled access highways, the clear sight triangle legs
shall each measure one hundred twenty- five ( 125') feet.
4. For collectors, the clear sight triangle legs shall each measure
one hundred ( 100') feet.
5. For residential and industrial streets, the clear sight triangle
legs shall each measure seventy- five ( 75') feet.
6. Driveway Intersections. Driveways shall be located so as to
provide a clear sight triangle, measured from the intersection street
centerline and the driveway centerline, of not less than thirty ( 30) feet.
Ord. 96- 11
7. Within the area of clear sight triangles, obstructions to visibility
shall not be permitted within the following ranges of height.
A. For semi -controlled access highways, collectors, and industrial
streets from curb height to a minimum height of twelve ( 12')
feet.
B. For residential streets, from curb height to a minimum height
of eight ( 8') feet.
C. Ground cover plants within the clear sight triangle area
shall not exceed one ( 1') foot in height.
D. Grading within the clear sight triangle shall not exceed a
six ( 6%) percent difference measured from the elevation at any point
Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996 - 211 -
22, § 410( 7)( D), cont' d) 22, § 410( 7)( D), cont' d)
along the top of the curb. Existing grades in excess of six ( 6%)
percent shall be regraded into compliance. 0
E. Exceptions may be made by the Supervisors to allow location
of the following items in the clear sight triangle:
1) One ( 1) private sign post, provided that the post
does not exceed one ( 1') foot square or diameter, and that the
sign itself is above the minimum height limit.
2) One ( 1) shade tree, provided that, as the tree matures,
the lower branches will be kept pruned to the minimum
height limit.
3) Existing shade trees, provided that lower branches
are kept pruned to the minimum height limit, and that the
size, number, and arrangement of trees does not impede adequate
visibility. The Supervisors may required removal of one
1) or more trees if necessary to provide adequate visibility.
8. In addition to providing the specified clear sight triangles for
driveways, adequate sight distances shall be provided as set forth in
413( 1). [ Ord. 96- 11
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 410; as amended by Ord. 96- 1, 1/ 15/ 1996)
411. Storm Drainage.
1. General.
A. Lots. All lots shall be graded to secure proper drainage
away from all buildings and to allow the collection of stormwater
in water detention basins or other approved locations. A minimum
slope of two ( 2%) percent shall be used for directing water away
from structures.
B. The peak rate of stormwater discharge shall not be increased
above the pre -development condition. This discharge shall
also take into consideration point discharge from the tract.
Stormwater detention must be provided unless waived by the Township
Supervisors upon recommendation by the Township Planning Agency and
the Township Engineer.
C. When drainage swales are used as a means to control storm
drainage, they shall not be placed on a slope less than one and
one- half ( 1J%) percent. Drainage design computations shall he
submitted to determine Swale linings.
D. Unnatural Drainage. Whenever construction stops or concentrates
the natural flow of storm drainage in such a way as to
affect adjoining properties, approval of the adjacent property
owners should be obtained in writing and a copy filed with the
Township. Approval of plans by the Township does not authorize or
sanction drainage adversely affecting adjoining properties.
E. Drainage from Non -Natural Sources. Water originating from
other than natural sources, such as air conditioners, sump pumps,
or other dry weather sources, wherever practicable, shall be dis-
212 - Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996
22, § 411( 1)( E), cont' d) ( 22, § 411( 1)( E), cont' d)
charged into natural watercourses on the property. These types of
facilities shall not discharge water under the sidewalk and to the
curb line.
F. Storm Drainage System. The storm drainage system shall be
designed and constructed to adequately control the drainage on and
from the subdivision or land development. The use of pipes, under -
drains, inlets, headwalls, swales, natural drainage channels or
ditches and water detention basins shall be used for such improve -
Text continued on following page.]
Page Added 6/ 17/ 1996 - 212. 1 -
22, § 411( 1)( F), cont' d) 22, § 411( 1)( F), cont' d)
ments. Such design and construction shall be approved by the
Township.
G. Any development which creates a significant change in the
characteristics of the watershed, thus increasing volume and velocity
of surface water runoff, shall not be permitted until methods have
been proposed which will reduce the likelihood of erosion and sedimentation
and will properly control stbrmwater drainage. Such improvements
must satisfy the requirements and regulations of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources.
H. The following note shall appear on the record plan whenever
permanent water detention basins are required:
The property owner shall be responsible for the perpetual
maintenance of the permanent water detention basin, basin outlet
structures, and pipes which are located on his property. No
changes shall be made to the structures, pipes, or finish grading
without prior written approval from the Township."
2. Storm Drainage Calculations.
A. The hydrologic portion of the storm drainage pipe design
shall be completed using the Rational Formula. The hydraulic design
of the pipes shall make use of the Mannings Equation, and an inlet/ -
outlet control evaluation shall be utilized to determine all pipe
sizes. Inlet control for concrete pipe shall be considered as a
square edge.
B. The Mannings Equation shall also be used for the design of
all swales and ditches. When required, all drainage inlets shall .be
checked to determine if they will function properly. The following
maximum flows will be allowed for inlets:
Roadway Profile Grade
Less than 7% More than 7%
Type C, M, and S Inlets 4. 0 CFS 3 CFS
Type 6 Foot Inlets 5. 5 CFS 4 CFS
Other capacities may be allowed only upon approval by the Township
Engineer.
C. Water detention basins may be designed by any accepted
engineering method which obtains design results acceptable to the
Township. This would include both the hydrologic and hydraulic
aspects of the design.
D. Runoff Coefficients.
Woods 18 Gravel Paving 85
Meadows 22 Lawns 26
Pasture 30 1 Acre Lots 34
Cultivated Ground 35 1/ 2 Acre Lots 38
Roofs, Pavings 95 1/ 3 Acre Lots 43
Steep Grass Slopes 35
Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990 - 213 -
22, § 411( 2)( D), cont' d) 22, § 411( 2)( D), cont' d)
These values should be weighted for actual design conditions
by combining the various land use components when approved by the
Township.
E. Time of Concentration, Rainfall Frequency, and Intensity.
The time of concentration may be determined by any method which
provides results satisfactory to the Township. The rainfall frequency
for the storm drainage system design shall be a minimum of
twenty- five ( 25) years, with fifty ( 50) and one hundred ( 100) years
required in floodplains and other critical areas. The rainfall
intensity curve shall be obtained from PennDOT Design Manual for
Region 4. [ Ord. 91- 121
F. Permanent stormwater detention basins shall be designed
for post -development conditions with a frequency of one -hundred
100) year storm for any basin within the one -hundred ( 100) year
floodplain, as defined by the Township Zoning Ordinance ( Chapter
271, and fifty ( 50) year storm for all basins which are located
outside of this area. The basin outlet and basin capacity shall be
designed to control post -development run- off from a site to the
pre -development rate for two ( 2), ten ( 10), twenty- five ( 25), fifty
50) and one hundred ( 100) year storms. The outlet structure shall
utilize multiple outlets, as necessary, to conform to the above
requirements. In addition, an emergency overflow shall be provided
with a capacity to convey the total run- off from the fifty (50) or
one -hundred ( 100) year post -development design storm without
considering the capacity for the outlet structure. When approved
by the Township, upon recommendation of the Township Engineer,
other design parameters may be used to permit reasonable utilization
of property while securing substantial conformance with the
objectives of the regulations of this Section. [ Ord. 91- 121
3. Construction Requirements.
A. Drainage Pipes.
1) Within the right- of- way of all roads and easements,
storm drainage pipes shall be reinforced concrete pipe, Class
III, or better. Outside of this area, the type of stormwater
drainage pipe may be chosen by the designer. The minimum pipe
slope shall be one- half ( J%) percent and pipe placed on steep
slopes shall be secured in accordance with accepted engineering
practices.
2) The minimum pipe size shall be fifteen ( 15') in
diameter. Diagonal road crossing by storm drainage pipes
shall be minimized. Pipes shall run parallel to the curb line
unless the radius is less than the minimum allowed by the pipe
manufacturer.
3) When changing pipe sizes through a manhole or inlet,
the tops of the pipes shall be the same.
214 - Page Revised 10/ 22/ 1991
22, § 411( 3)( B)) 22, § 411( 3)( B))
B. Inlets. Inlets shall be spaced in accordance with the
drainage design computations. The type of structure shall be as shown
in the PennDOT Standards for Highway Design. Six ( 6') foot length
inlets and other types of inlets may be used when approved by the
Township. Inlets to street intersections shall be placed on the
tangent and not on the curved portion. Inlet grates shall be placed
one to one and one- half ( 1 - Ili") inches below the finish pavement
surface.
C. Manholes. All manholes shall be constructed of precast
concrete. Manholes shall be used for any sharp change in horizontal
alignment of the drainage pipe and at all connections of three ( 3) or
more pipes. Manholes shall be spaced no more than three hundred
300') feet apart for all pipes under twenty- seven ( 27") inches in
diameter and four hundred ( 400') feet for pipes which are twenty- seven
27") inches in diameter and larger. Inlets may be installed in
place of manholes, when they may serve a useful purpose.
D. Endwalls and End Sections. Endwalls and end sections shall
conform to the PennDOT Standards for Roadway Construction. End
sections shall be used unless the endwall would serve a better purpose,
such as tying two ( 2) pipes at one ( 1) outlet ditch location.
E. Stormwater Roof Drains. Stormwater roof drain pipes shall
pass under the sidewall and discharge to the Grub line when required
by the Township. Where storm drains are accessible, the roof drains
shall be connected thereto.
F. Water Detention Basins. The outlet structure shall be a
pre -cast Type M ( 4 or 6 foot) inlet modified to control outlet flow
from the basin. Bar grates placed on a forty- five ( 450) degree slope
shall be used at the invert outlet and on the top of the inlet. The
inlet base shall be placed below the frost line. Other control
structures may be used when approved by the Township.
G. Construction Standards. All portion of the storm drainage
system shall be constructed in accordance with PennDOT Standards of
Roadway Construction, Form 408 Specification, Montgomery County
Conservation District Handbook and Township specifications. Where
conflict may exist between any of these courses, the Township shall
determine the final specifications.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 411; as amended by Ord. 91- 12, 10/ 22/ 1991, §§ 1- 4)
412. Proposals with Existing Buildings.
1. No . proposals will be approved with a property line extending
through any portion of an existing building, except where that property
line follows a party wall separating semi- detached or attached units, in
accordance with the Touaship Zoning Ordinance [ Chapter 271.
2. When existing buildings are retained:
A. Minimum building setbacks shall be met or exceeded, in
respect to all new lot lines created for the districts in which the
buildings are located, even if this results in a lot area or dimensions
in excess of the otherwise applicable minimums.
Page Revised 10/ 22/ 1991 - 214. 1 -
22, § 412( 2)( B))
B. Buildings set back
encouraged, in respect to
height and/ or bulk of the
that of proposed, abutting
setback equal
22, § 412( 2) ( B))
in excess of the applicable minimum are
all new lot lines created, when the
existing building significantly exceeds
development. For tall buildings, a
to the height of the building is required.
C. Run- down buildings shall be rehabilitated to conform in
quality with proposed new development.
D. Structurally deficient buildings shall be rehabilitated in
conformance with the Township' s Building, Code [ Chapter 5, Part 11
and BOCA Property Maintenance. Code.
E. Additions to retained buildings shall conform in all
respects to the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance [ Chapter 271
applicable to the district in which the building is located.
F. Historical or culturally significant buildings shall
retain their respective characters, to the greatest extent
practical.
G. In non- residential districts, retained buildings shall be
provided with adequate parking, service, and landscaped areas in
accordance with the Zoning Ordinance [ Chapter 271 provisions for
the intended use. If the applicant cannot specify the intended
use, then the most land consumptive provisions shall be applied, to
ensure sufficient land areas for uses permitted in that district.
H. The building setback lines, existing and proposed buildings,
driveways, parking areas, walks, and other similar information
shall be shown on the plan, with a note added describing the
buildings, and their intended purposes.
I. No plan approval will be granted to a subdivision or a
land development unless and until the above requirements are
complied with to the satisfaction of the Township Supervisors, upon
recommendation of the Township Planning Agency and Engineer.
3. When existing buildings will be removed:
A. The plan must show the location and include a brief description
of the building( s) to be removed.
B. Plan approval will be granted upon written agreement to
the expeditious removal of buildings intended for removal, in
conformance with applicable Township requirements and procedures
regarding demolition of buildings and disposition of the re -useable
parts and/ or disposal of the rubble. T.f the building will not be
removed immediately, a financial guarantee must be post - ed for its
removal, in compliance with Part 5 and 6, herein.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 412)
413. Driveways.
1. The requirements for driveways shall be the standards of the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation regarding access to and
occupancy of highways by driveways and local roads ( Pennsylvania Code,
Title 67, Chapter 441, as amended). Driveway access to State highways
214. 2 - Page Revised 10/ 22/ 1991
22, § 413( 1), cont' d) ( 22, § 412( 1), cont' d)
shall be subject to the permit process of that Department. Driveway access
to Township roads shall be subject to the standards, requirements, and
processing of this Section and the requirements of the Township Driveway
Regulations.
2. Proposals whose anticipated traffic volumes will require low,
medium, or high volume driveways shall be submitted to the Township Planning
Agency in tentative sketch form, for their evaluation of the general
suitability of the location' s classifications and design of driveways
proposed.
3. Proposals with five ( 5) or more minimum use driveways along any
one ( 1) street or road shall also be submitted as in § 413( 1) above.
4. Following evaluation by the Township Planning Agency, the applicant
may submit plans to the State or Township for formal approval and
issuance of permits.
5. No driveway location, classification, or design shall be considered
finally approved until permits have been granted by the State and/ or
Township and preliminary plan approval has been granted by the Board of
Supervisors for the subdivision and/ or land development which the driveway(
s) will serve.
6. Driveway crossings shall be designed in compliance with the
Douglass Township Engineering Standards. [ Ord. 91- 12]
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 413; as amended by Ord. 91- 12, 10/ 22/ 1991, § 4)
414. Additional Driveway Standards. The following standards shall
apply to driveways which intersect public or private streets, in order to
facilitate safe and efficient access between streets and driveways.
1. Location.
A. Driveways shall be so located as to provide adequate sight
distance at intersections with streets in accordance with the criteria
set forth in § 413( 1), above. [ Ord. 96- 1]
B. Driveways shall be located in a manner which will not cause
the following:
1) Interference to the traveling public;
2) A hazard to the free movement of normal highway traffic
or;
3) Areas of traffic congestion on the highway.
C. Driveways shall be located, designed and constructed in such
a manner as not to interfere with or be inconsistent with the design,
maintenance and drainage of the highway. Driveway culverts shall be
utilized, as necessary, to convey highway ditch drainage under
driveways. [ Ord. 96- 1]
2. Distance from Street Intersections. Driveways shall be located as
far from street intersections as is reasonably possible, but not less than
the following distances from center line to center line:
A. Individual residential lots: fifty ( 50) feet.
B. Multifamily residential and nonresidential: one hundred
100) feet.
Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996 - 214. 3 -
22, § 414( 2), cont' d) ( 22, § 414( 2), cont' d)
Ord. 96- 11 1*
3. Choice of Streets. When streets of different classes are
involved, the driveway shall provide access to the street of lesser
classification unless this requirement is waived by the Supervisors for
reasons of sight distance, incompatibility of traffic, grading, drainage,
or other major reasons.
4 Number of Driveways.
A. Properties with frontages of one hundred ( 100') feet or
less shall be limited to one ( 1) curb cut.
B. Not more than two ( 2) curb cuts may be permitted for any
single property, tract, or lot, for each street frontage.
C. More than two ( 2) curb cuts per street frontage may be
permitted only if anticipated traffic volumes warrant more than two
2), and when supported by a traffic study prepared by a qualified
traffic engineer.
5. Drainage. Provisions for drainage and stormwater runoff shall
comply with the Douglass Township Engineering Standards.
6. Stopping Areas. Regardless of the driveway classification, all
driveways shall be provided with a stopping area within which the grade
shall not exceed five ( 5%) percent. The stopping area shall be measured
as follows:
A. The length of stopping area shall be a minimum of twenty
20') feet, or the length of the longest vehicles anticipated to
use the driveway, which ever is greater. 0
B. Stopping areas shall be measured from the edge of paving
or curb line for all roads.
7. Clear Sight Triangles. Clear sight triangles shall be provided
where driveways intersect streets, in compliance with the standards of
410, " Clear Sight Triangles." The dimensional standards shall be
determined by the classification of street which the driveway
intersects.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 414; as amended by Ord. 96- 1, 1/ 15/ 1996)
415. Parking Areas and Related Internal Driveways. Parking areas
and related internal driveways shall be governed by the following:
1. Off- street parking facilities shall be provided in compliance
with the parking requirements of the Township' s Zoning Ordinance
Chapter 271 and the regulations contained herein.
2. Angled or perpendicular parking shall not be permitted along
public or private streets, except where specifically permitted by this
or other ordinances.
3. A maximum of fifteen ( 15) parking spaces shall be permitted in
a row without a landscape island of ten ( 10') feet in width; this island
shall contain not less than two hundred ( 200) square feet of planting
area. a 4. Parking shall not be permitted along driveways which serve as
the main entrance( s) or exit( s) to parking areas with a capacity of one
hundred fifty ( 150) cars or more.
214. 4 - Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996
22, § 415( 5)) ( 22, § 415( 5))
5. Parking areas shall not be located closer than twenty ( 20') feet
from any tract boundary line, nor less than twenty ( 20') feet from any
ultimate right- of- way line. These areas shall be landscaped in accordance
with the requirements of § 420( 5), " Softening Buffer Requirements."
6. Where the edge of a parking area is located closest to a street,
driveway, or other parking area, and the provisions of § 415( 5), above, do
not apply, a minimum separation of ten ( 10') feet shall be provided between
these features. This spacing shall consist of a raised landscaped area,
preferably curbed with planting in conformance with § 415( 11)( E) and ( F).
7. In any residential parking area where rows of parking spaces are
parallel to one another, and not separated by a driveway, a raised and/ or
curbed planting strip shall be provided between the rows. Said strip shall
have a minimum width of at least ten ( 10') feet, planted in accordance with
415( 11)( E) and ( F).
8. In any residential parking area where a single row of parking
spaces is located between two ( 2) driveways, a raised and/ or curbed planting
strip shall be provided between the row of parking spaces and one ( 1)
driveway. Said strip shall have a minimum width of five ( 5') feet, planted
in accordance with § 415( 11)( E) and ( F).
9. Dead -ended parking areas shall be discouraged when the required
parking capacity can be accommodated in a layout that permits more convenient
vehicular movements. However, extraneous through -traffic flow should
be avoided.
A. Up to fifty ( 50) parking spaces may also be located in a
dead -ended parking area if there is no more desirable feasible alternative,
and sufficient back- up area is provided for the end stalls.
B. More than fifty ( 50) parking spaces may be located on a
dead -ended parking area only if a turnaround area is provided at the
closed end, suitable for passenger car turning. The turnaround area
may be circular, " T" or " Y" shaped, or other configuration acceptable
to the Board of Supervisors.
10. Residential parking areas shall be divided into sections of not
more than thirty- six ( 36) cars each, with sections separated as required. by
415( 6) above. The total number of parking spaces permitted in a parking
area comprised of such section shall be two hundred ( 200).
11. Parking areas for one hundred fifty ( 150) cars or more, for
non- residential purposes, shall be divided into sections by landscaped
planting strips a minimum of ten ( 10') feet wide, in compliance with the
following:
A. These planting strips shall be located as follows:
1) To separate main access ( entrance -exit) driveways from
rows of parking spaces.
2) To separate other major driveways from rows of parking
spaces ( service drives, general internal circulation).
3) To
intervals of
capacity not
separate large parking areas into smaller units at
four ( 4) rows or parking stalls with each unit
greater than one hundred ( 100) cars.
Page Revised 10/ 22/ 1991 - 214. 5 -
22, § 415( 11)( A)( 4)) 22, § 41501)( A)( 4))
4) Refer to Figure 2 for an illustration of proper
locations.
B. These planting strips shall be raised islands, preferably
curbed, in order to provide a more suitable planting environment.
C. The ends of rows of parking shall be marked as islands by
means of painted lines or the use of different paving materials
such as paving blocks, bricks, or round stones.
1) Marked, end islands shall be equal in size to one
1) parking space for each row of spaces.
2) Parking shall be prohibited on these islands.
3) The first parking space abutting each end island
shall be reserved and marked for handicapped parking, at the
end of the row closest to the building. Ramps shall be
provided at convenient intervals for access between parking
surface and sidewalks.
D. For parking areas with an ultimate capacity greater than
five hundred ( 500) cars, the requirements of § 415( 11)( A)( 3), above,
may be modified to provide separation into units at intervals of
six ( 6) rows of .parking stalls, with each unit capacity not greater
than one hundred fifty ( 150) cars.
E. The primary plant materials used shall be shade or canopy
trees, chosen for their ability to tolerate the adverse environment
of parking lots, their appearance and shade providing qualities,
and low maintenance characteristics. ( See list of plant materials,
421) These trees shall be planted in the planting strips at a
spacing equal to the minimum spacing recommended for the type of
tree.
F. Additional planting is encouraged and may include a
variety of ornamental trees, shrubs, and ground covers, provided
that:
1) At the ends of planting strips at driveway intersections,
drivers' visibility shall be maintained by limited
planting for the end thirty- five ( 35') feet.
2) At the ends of planting strips between rows of
parking spaces, visibility shall be maintained by limited
planting for the end twenty ( 20') feet.
3) Limited planting shall mean:
a) Not more than one ( 1) shade or canopy tree
within the area;
See Chart on Following Page)
214. 6 - Page Revised 10/ 22/ 1991
mal
JAIN.
3D'
G U RL'
Page Added 7/ 16/ 1990 - 214. 7 -
22, § 415( 11) ( F) ( 3) ( b))
are:
22, § 415( 11) ( F) ( 3) ( b))
b) No shrubs or ground cover plants exceeding two
2') feet in height;
c) No evergreen trees.
4) See list of plant materials, § 421.
G. The specific purposes to be served by these requirements
1) To add visual character and improve the appearance
of large parking areas by reducing their massiveness into
smaller units.
2) To provide shade for parked cars.
3) To reduce random vehicular flow access parking
areas.
4) To permit a high level of visibility for those uses
stores, offices) for which visibility is an important factor.
5) To facilitate snow removal and storm drainage, and
to conserve energy in construction and resurfacing operations,
by permitting relatively large units of paving surface, not
obstructed by numerous, small, barrier island areas.
12. The following requirements apply to driveways within sites
proposed for developments:
A. A smooth transition shall be provided between the driveway
section required for access to a public street and the driveway( s)
required for internal site circulation.
B. Main access driveways ( entrance -exit), and service drives
handling large trucks shall be a minimum paved width of thirty
30') feet with one ( 1) land in each direction.
C. Access driveways which are clearly secondary in importance
may be reduced to twenty- six ( 26') feet in paved width.
13. Parking spaces shall be a minimum of ten ( 10') feet by twenty
20') feet, except that where vehicles may overhang a planting strip, a
two ( 2') foot widening of the planting strip shall permit a two ( 2')
foot reduction of parking space to eighteen ( 181) feet.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, 5415)
5416. Rear Lotting. Rear lots, as defined herein, may be permitted
by the Supervisors, in accordance with the following standards and
criteria:
1. Purpose of Rear Lottin
A. To preserve existing farmland and/ or rural appearance and
character by locating new development remote from existing road
frontage, especially when new development can be screened from view
by intervening topographic features such as hills and/ or wooded
areas.
B. To permit reasonable subdivision of land which is physically
constrained by unusual configuration of the tract or limited
road frontage, and which could not be subdivided in a desirable
manner using conventional streets and lotting patterns.
214. 8 - Page Added 7/ 16/ 1990
22, § 416( 1) ( C) ) 22, § 416( 1) ( C))
C. To permit an alternative to the use of local access streets
where such streets cannot be justified in terms of the number of lots
served, volumes of traffic generated, and/ or the need to extend,
supplement, or otherwise support or reinforce an established road
pattern or traffic circulation plan for the area surrounding the
proposed subdivision.
1) As an interim alternative where future subdivision will
result in appropriate street construction.
2) As a permanent alternative.
2. Parts of a Rear Lot. Rear lots shall be comprised of two ( 2)
parts, the access strip and the body of the lot, in compliance with the
following standards:
A. The access strip shall be a minimum of fifty ( 50') feet wide
for its entire length, including that portion which abuts a public
street right- of- way for access.
B. When necessary or desirable for grading, drainage, or preservation
of natural features, such s trees, the access strip shall be
widened beyond the fifty ( 501) foot minimum as necessary.
C. The access strip shall be a fee simple part of the rear lot,
and shall not be a separate parcel of easement.
D. The body of a rear lot shall comply with all the minimum
dimensional requirements of the zoning district in which it is
located. The area of the access strip shall not be counted toward the
minimum lot area requirement.
3. Review Factors. In reviewing applications for rear lots, the
following factors will be considered by the Supervisors, Township Planning
Agency and Engineer:
A. The amount of road frontage and configuration of the property
being subdivided.
B. The sizes and number of lots proposed, including both the
total number of lots and the number of rear lots.
C. The type and character of road which the tract abuts.
D. The topography of the parcel of being subdivided, with an
emphasis on trees and slopes.
E. The character of the surrounding area in two ( 2) respects:
1) Its physical characteristics, and whether or not the
subdivision site is distinguishable from it.
2) Its planned future character; that is whether it is in
or abutting a growth area, or in an area planned for agricultural
or other rural uses.
F. The development status of the surrounding sites.
G. The visual character preferred for the tract; that is,
whether it is better to see a lot of houses abutting the road, or to
hide" some in rear areas to reduce the perceivable density of
development.
Page Added 7/ 16/ 1990 - 214. 9 -
22, § 416( 3)( H)) 22, § 416( 3)( H))
H. Whether rear lots would set an undesirable precedent for
nearby sites.
I. The economic impact of required road construction as compared
to using rear lots.
J. The visual and physical impacts of road construction as
compared to the use of access strips.
4. Design Standards for Rear Lots.
A. The length of the access strip shall be kept to a minimum.
1) As a guide, the preferred length is approximately equal
to the depth of one ( 1) lot which complies with the minimum lot
width and area requirements of the district in which it is
located.
2) No access strip should exceed three ( 3) times the lot
depth described in 416( 4)( A)( 1) above, unless the primary purpose
of the additional length is to preserve farmland or other land
for preservation of agriculture or rural character, by locating
new development remote from road frontage.
B. The location of the access strip should be logically relative
to the body of the rear lot, surrounding property configurations,
and natural features of the land, and it shall intersect the
public street at a safe, visible location.
C. Turns greater than sixty ( 60°) degrees should be avoided
in access strips.
1) It may be necessary to widen the access strip at
such sharp turns to accommodate grading, drainage, or tree
preservation.
2) For access strips that may become roads, the Supervisors
may require turns to be designed to accommodate horizontal
curves required for roads.
D. Driveways serving access strips shall comply with the
Township' s Engineering Standards for drainage and cartway, from the
edge of road pavement to a distance of fifty ( 50') feet beyond the
ultimate right- of- way line of the road.
E. When two ( 2) access strips abut, they should share a
common access point and driveway from the edge of pavement to a
distance of fifty ( 50') feet beyond the ultimate right- of- way line
of the road, from which point either one ( 1) common driveway or two
2) individual driveways may continue. The shared portion shall be
a minimum of eighteen ( 1$') feet wide.
F. When more than two ( 2) access strips would abut one
another, one ( 1) common driveway shall be required, with appropriate
cross -easements, to serve the multiple access strips. Such
a common driveway shall be constructed in compliance with the
Township' s Engineering Standards.
5. Provisions for Future Roads. The Supervisor may permit the use
of rear lots where one ( 1) or more access strips are intended to serve
as a rights- of- way for a road which will serve future lotting. The fol-
214. 10 - Page Added 7/ 16/ 1990
22, § 416( 5), cont' d) ( 22, § 416( 5), cont' d)
rights- of- way for a road which will serve future lotting. The following
regulations shall apply;
A. Legal guarantees shall be provided to assure future use of
any access strip proposed for future use as a road, subject to
approval of the Township Solicitor.
B. The road shall be constructed or financially guaranteed at
the applicant' s expense.
C. Access strips legally and financially guaranteed for
future use as roads may comprise the legal and physical access to
otherwise landlocked residual parcels only if the access is irrevocably
guaranteed.
D. An overall tentative sketch plan shall be submitted as part
of the proposed subdivision, to show how the rear lotting and reservation
of access strips for future roads forms a logical and appropriate
first phase in subdivision of the entire tract, and/ or how it will
allow interconnection with adjacent tracts.
E. When the road is constructed, any access strips which are
no longer needed shall revert to the owners of the abutting lots,
in accordance with the terms agreed to as part of the original preliminary
plan approval which created the access strips.
Ord. 90-- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 416)
417. Blocks. The length, width and shape of blocks shall be
guided by the following.
1. Minimum dimensional requirements of the Zoning Ordinance [ Chapter
27].
2. Respect for existing natural features which may constrain
subdivision or land development.
3. Need to provide efficient, convenient and safe pedestrian and
vehicular circulation.
4. Suitability of lotting pattern and building sites created by
the blocks.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 417)
418. Lots.
1. Lots shall meet or exceed the minimum area and width requirements
of the Zoning Ordinance [ Chapter 271.
2. Deep, narrow lots are to be avoided, except that lots for
attached dwelling units may receive special consideration.
3. Wide, shallow lots are to be avoided.
4. Every lot shall contain a building envelope suitable for the
type( s) of development proposed.
5. Every lot shall have frontage of at least fifty ( 50') feet
along the ultimate right- of- way line of a street.
Page Added 7/ 16/ 1990 - 214. 11 -
22, § 418( 6)) ( 22, § 418( 6))
6. Lot lines shall be drawn parallel, concentric, at right angles,
or radial to the right- of- way line whenever feasible and not otherwise
justifiable by existing, permanent, natural or man- made features.
7. The width of a lot at the building line shall be that width in
feet specified for the applicable zoning district as provided for in the
Zoning Ordinance [ Chapter 27] and any other applicable Township ordinance
or resolution.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 418)
419. Grading. All permanent and temporary cutting, filling,
grading, regrading, and/ or other forms of earth -moving activities shall
be known as " grading" and shall be conducted only in compliance with the
Township' s Engineering Standards and the following requirements:
1. All grading shall be set back from property lines a sufficient
distance to prevent any adverse effect on adjacent properties.
2. Wherever grading will increase the volume or velocity of
stormwater flow toward. a property line, the applicant shall install and
maintain drainage facilities sufficient to prevent adverse effects on
the adjoining property, in compliance with the Township' s Engineering
Standards. The construction and operation of these drainage facilities
shall not cause any adverse effect on abutting properties.
3. Along property lines, where grading creates an abrupt drop- off
from the abutting property in contrast to a previously existing gradual
change, the applicant shall be required to install a fence or other
suitable protective barrier.
4. A permit shall be required for grading operations. Permits
shall be issued by the Zoning Officer upon recommendation of the Township
Engineer for each tract, lot, parcel, or site which comprises a
separate operation, unrelated to or not contiguous with nearby grading
proposed or performed by the applicant. A permit shall not be required
in the following situations, however:
A. For an excavation which does not exceed twenty ( 20) cubic
yards total material removed.
B. For a fill which does not exceed twenty ( 20) cubic yards
of material deposited.
C. For an excavation below finished grade for basements and
footings for a single- family detached or two- family dwelling,
swimming pool, or underground structure authorized by building
permits, excavation for a driveway for a single- family detached or
two- family dwelling, or the regrading of such excavated materials
into the site from which they were excavated.
5. A site grading plan shall be required for all major subdivision
and/ or land development plans as part of the preliminary plan
application. The Township Engineer may require a site grading plan for
other proposals where the effects of grading may be a concern.
6. Final grading slopes shall not exceed three ( 3) horizontal to
1) vertical unless special bank protection and/ or walls are provided
and approved by the Township. . 0
214. 12 - Page Added 7/ 16/ 1990
22, § 419( 7)) ( 22, § 419( 7))
7. During grading operations, necessary measures for dust control
shall be implemented.
8. Construction equipment shall not be allowed to cross flowing
streams unless a permit to do so has been obtained from DER or a waiver has
been granted.
9. Approval of a soil erosion control plan shall be obtained from
the Montgomery County Conservation District for all land disturbance areas
unless such approval is not required by the Township.
10. Topsoil Preservation. Topsoil must be removed from areas of
construction and stored separately. There shall be no release of excess
top soil from the site until the entire site, other than that portion where
there are buildings, other impervious surface coverage, or undisturbed
natural areas, has been graded with a minimum of eight ( 8") inches of top
soil. All areas of the subdivision shall be stabilized by sodding, or
other materials as required by the Township Engineer, on slopes in excess
of three ( 3) horizontal to one ( 1) vertical as shown on the final grading
plan.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 419)
420. General Planting Requirements.
1. Subdividers, developers, and builders shall preserve as much
existing woodland, trees, and shrubs as possible, Preservation of existing
desirable woodland, trees, and/ or shrubs may be counted in lieu of the
requirements in this Part. Upon review of sufficient evidence provided by
the applicant, the Board of Supervisors may waive a part of this Part' s
planting requirements.
2. Street Trees. All proposals shall provide street trees selected
from the lists of shade trees in §§412( 1) and ( 2), herein, in compliance
with the following:
A. Where street trees exist along the street on abutting properties,
new street trees shall be planted in line with the existing
ones; compatible species are encouraged.
B. Where few or no street trees exist along the street, new
street trees shall be located a minimum of five ( 5') feet from the
sidewalk, toward the proposed development. Applicant' s are encouraged
to use a variety of trees to protect against insects, disease, or
physical damage in any one ( 1) species, as well as for visual
interest.
C. Street tree spacing shall be not less than the minimums
listed, nor more than twice the minimum or fifty ( 50') feet, whichever
is lower.
D. Tentative tree species will be indicated on the preliminary
plan.
E. Trees shall not be less than two ( 2") inches to two and
one- half ( 212") inches in caliper measured four ( 4') feet above ground
level at the time of planting.
Ord. 90- 2, read " buildings."
Page Added 7/ 16/ 1990 - 214. 13 -
22, § 420( 2)( F)) 22, § 420( 2) ( F))
F. Trees shall be adequately supported by guy wires until
firmly rooted.
3. Parking Lot Planting. All proposals with parking lots shall
provide planting in compliance with the standards of § 415( 11)( E) and ( F)
of this Part.
4. Screening Buffer Requirements. Screening buffers shall be
landscaped and shall follow one ( 1) of the three ( 3) alternatives outlined
below, subject to approval by the Board of Supervisors.
A. Alternative One. The screening buffer shall be a double
row of evergreen trees spaced fifteen ( 15') feet apart on center,
with the trees in one ( 1) row offset seven and one- half ( 72') feet
from the trees in the other row, and the rows at least six ( 6')
feet apart. These trees shall be not less than six ( 6') feet in
height at the time of planting and shall be of such species that
expected height at maturity shall be not less than fifteen ( 15')
feet.
B. Alternative Two. The screening buffer shall have the same
number of evergreen trees that are required by § 420( 4)( A). However,
these trees doe not have to be placed in a linear fashion;
instead, they can be placed in an innovative, free -form manner and
do not have to be placed within the minimum required width. The
planting arrangement shall be subject to approval by the Board of
Supervisors, upon recommendation of the Township Planning Agency,
either or both of whom may seek the advice of technical experts in
the review of the alternative plans.
C. Alternative Three. The screening buffer shall have the
same number of trees that are required by § 420( 5), softening
buffers. In addition, the building and parking setbacks for the
tract must be doubled from each property line that needs a screening
buffer. For example, if a property normally had a fifty ( 50')
foot building setback and a twenty- five ( 25') foot parking setback,
the setbacks would have to be increased to one hundred ( 100') feet
for buildings and fifty ( 50') feet for parking from all property
lines that need a screening buffer.
D. All plant material shall be guaranteed for two ( 2) years.
All plant material which dies within that time shall be replaced by
the applicant at his cost. Plant material shall be chosen from the
list in §421.
5. Softening Buffer Requirements. Softening buffers shall meet
the following requirements:
A. The minimum number of trees and shrubs in. sof tening buffers
shall be as follows:
1) One ( 1) shade tree per one hundred ( 100') feet of
property line.
2) One ( 1) evergreen and one ( 1) flowering tree, or
three ( 3) flowering or evergreen shrubs per one hundred fifty
150') feet of property line.
B. All materials used for the buffers shall meet the following
criteria:
214. 14 - Page Added 7/ 16/ 1990
22, § 420)( 5)( B)( 1)) 22, § 420)( 5)( B)( 1))
1) All evergreen trees shall be at least six ( 6) feet in
height at the time of planting and shall be of such species that
expected height at maturity shall be at least fifteen ( 15') feet
tall.
2) All deciduous trees shall be at least eight ( 8') feet
in height and two and one- half ( 212") inches in caliper at the
time of planting.
3) All plant material shall be guaranteed for two ( 2)
years. All plant material which dies within that time shall be
replaced by the applicant at his or her cost.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 420)
421. Lists of Plant Materials. These lists in this Section shall be
used for all planting required by this Part. Alternative plant material
may be used only with the approval of the Board of Supervisors, after
sufficient evidence is submitted regarding their suitability for their
purposes and locations.
1. Large Shade Trees.
Minimum
Page Added 7/ 16/ 1990 - 214. 15 -
Genus, Species, Cultiver Common Name Spacing
A. Acer rubrum, cv Armstrong Armstrong Red Maple 30'
B. Carpinus betulus European Hornbeam 25'
C. Celtis occidentalis Hackberry 20'
D. Fraxius americana cv Autumn
Purpose or Rosewood White Ash 30'
E. Fraxius pennsylvanica cv
Marhsall' s Seedless or
Summit Green Ash 30'
F. Ginkgo biloba cv Autumn Gold
or Sentry Ginkgo
G. Gleditsia triacanthos var.
inermis Thornless Honeylocust 25'
H. Platanus acerifolia cv blood -
good Bloodgood London
Planetree 30'
I. Ulmus parvifolia Chinese Elm 30'
J. Zelkova serrata Japanese Zelkova 30'
K. Quercus species Scarlet,
Shingle; Bur; Red; Crownlight
Pin Various Oaks 30'
2. Smaller Shade Trees.
Minimum
Genus, Species, Cultivar Common Name S acin
A. Acer buergerianum Trident Maple 25'
Page Added 7/ 16/ 1990 - 214. 15 -
22, § 421( 2), cont' d)
B. Acer campestre
C. Amelanchier canadensis
D. Crataegus phaenophyrum
E. Crataegus cv Toba
F. Pyrus calleryana
Flowering Trees
22, § 421( 2), cont'. d)
Hedge Maple 20'
Shadblow Serviceberry 15' is
Washington Hawthorn 15'
Toba Hawthorn* 15'
Calery Pear* 25'
3. Plants for Additional Planting In and Around Parking Areas.
These plants are intended for use as specified in § 414( 10)( F) herein.
A. All trees listed in §§420( 1) and ( 2) above.
B. Flowering trees:
1) Cornus mas - Corneliancherry Dogwood
2) Koelreuteria paniculata - Golden Raintree
3) Magnolia virginiana - Sweetbay Magnolia
4) Sorbus alnifolia - Korean Mountainash
5) Syringa reticulata - Japanese Tree Lilac
6) Malus species Flowering Crab apples Sargent; Redud;
Japanese.
C. Low Growing Shrubs & Ground Covers:
1) Cotoneasters
2) Horisontal Junipers
3) Dwarf Japanese Yews
4) Ivy
5) Canby Paxistima ( Pachistima)
6) Pachysandra
D. Screening Plants:
1) Large Trees:
a) Juniperus virginiana
b) Quercus robur cv Fasigiata
2) Flowering Small Trees:
a) Crataegus phaenopyrum
b) Crataegus cv Toba
c) Pyrus calleryana cv
Chanticleer
3) Evergreen Trees:
a) Pinus thunbergii
b) Pinus strobus
c) Pinus sylvestris
Eastern Red Cedar
English Oak
Washington Hawthorn
Toba Hawthorn
Callery Pear
Japanese Black Pine
Eastern White Pine
Scotch Pine
214. 16 - Page Added 7/ 16/ 1990
22, § 421( 3) ( D) ( 3) ( d) )
d) Thuja occidentalis
e) Tsuga canadensis
f) Tsuga caroliniana
4) Hedge Plants:
a) Ligustrum japonicum
b) Ligustrum vulgare
c) Berberis thunbergii
d) Taxus cuspidata
e) Cornus racemosa
22, § 421( 3) ( D) ( 3) ( d))
American Arborvitae
Canada Hemlock
Carolina Hemlock
Japanese Privet
Common Privet
Japanese Barberry
Japanese Yew
Gray Dogwood
4. Purposes. The plant materials in these Sections were selected of
the following purposes:
A. Sections 421( 1), ( 2) and ( 3) ( A) and ( B), for their abilities
to tolerate poor soils, salt runoff, air pollution, and other adverse
environmental factors, especially within and around parking lots,
streets, and buildings, as well as for their shade providing qualities,
low maintenance characteristics, and/ or other desirable ornamental
characteristics.
B. Sections 420( 3)( C) and ( D), for their low growing or screening
characteristics as well as hardiness under adverse urbanized
environmental conditions.
C. Where more favorable planting environments can be obtained,
alternative plant materials should be considered, which may be more
suitable and attractive in those areas.
5. Sources. Plant materials in these Sections were selected from:
A. " Trees for Urban Parks," Morris Arboretum for the U. S.
Department of the Interior.
B. " Trees for American Gardens" and " Shrubs and Vines for
American Gardens," Donald Wyman.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 421)
422. Street Construction. All street construction must conform
to the construction specifications incorporated in this Section, as shown
on the construction drawings, or when such specifications are not provided,
the construction shall be in accordance with PennDOT Specifications, Publication
408 and its latest revisions. All construction must be approved by
the Township Engineer prior to acceptance by the Board of Supervisors. All
grades, horizontal and vertical curves, intersections, sight distances, and
tangents shall conform to the requirements established by this Part and
shall be subject to the approval of the Township Engineer.
1. Crushed Aggregate Base Course.
A. Description. This work consists of the construction of a
stone or slag base course. When placed on subgrade, it shall
include the preparation of the sub grade.
Page Added 7/ 16/ 1990 - 214. 17 -
22, § 422( 1) ( B)) 22, § 422( i)( B))
B. Material.
1) Course Aggregate ( fine material) : Type A, No. 10,
stone or slag, PennDOT Publication 408, Section 703. 2.
2) Course Aggregate ( course material): Type A, No. 1,
stone or slag, PennDOT Publication 408, Section 703. 2.
3) Calcium Chloride: PennDOT Publication 408, Section
721.
4) Water: PennDOT Publication 408, Section 720. 2.
C. Construction.
1) Rollers and vibratory rollers shall be used which
meet the requirements of PennDOT Publication 408, Section
108. 05 ( c). 3. a and Section 108. 05 ( c). 3. h.
2) Spread an initial layer of fine material uniformly
over the subgrade or as a bed and filler. Spread material to
a depth of two ( 2") inches on subgrade or one ( 1") inch on
subbase. Do not place this initial layer of fine material on
wet, frozen, or unsuitable subgrade or subbase.
3) Spread the course material uniformly on the initial
layer of fine material to the full width of the roadway area.
If the base course is more than ten ( 10") inches in compacted
depth, construct in two ( 2) or more layers of approximately
equal depth, with no layer less than five ( 5") inches nor more
than ten ( 10") inches in depth. Compact each layer with a
vibratory roller.
4) After the course material has been set and keyed by
vibration and rolling, spread fine material uniformly over the
surface. Operate the vibrator over the surface so that the
fines settle into the voids. Spread additional fines in one
1) or more applications to satisfactorily fill all the voids.
Broom fine material as necessary to complete the filling of
the voids.
2. Modified Base Course.
A. Description. This work consists of the construction of a
stone or slag base course. When placed on subgrade, it shall
include the preparation of the subgrade. This material may be used
in place of crushed aggregate base course.
B. Material.
1) The crushed stone material shall consist of the use
of Type A, No. 1 or No. 3, stone or slag mixed uniformly with
fine material. The material shall be a plant mix and not
mixed in the process of loading the trucks.
2) Course Aggregate ( fine material). Type A, No. 10,
stone or slag, PennDOT Publication 408, Section 703. 2.
3) Water: PennDOT Publication 408, Section 720. 2. 0
214. 18 - Page Added 7/ 16/ 1990
22, § 422( 2)( C)) 22, § 422( 2) ( C))
C. Construction.
1) Rollers and vibratory rollers shall be used which meet
the requirements of PennDOT Publication 408, Section 108. 05
c). 3. a and Section 108. 05 ( 0. 3. h.
2) Spread the modified material uniformly over the full
width of the roadway area. If the base course is more than ten
10") inches in compacted depth, construct in two ( 2) or more
layers of approximately equal depth, with no layer less than five
5") inches nor more than ten ( 10") inches in depth. Compact
each layer with a roller.
3) After placing and rolling the material all voids shall
be chocked with fine material. This shall be completed when
required by the Township Engineer.
4) Water shall be used to reduce the segregating of the
material as required by the Township Engineer.
3. Pavement Structure. All roadway pavement structures shall meet
the following depths:
A. Bituminous Wearing Course: ID -2, one ( 1") inch depth on
Bituminous Binder Course, ID - 2, two ( 2") inch depth on:
1) Residential Roads: Crushed Aggregate Base Course,
eight ( 8") inch depth or Modified Base Course, ten ( 10") inch
depth.
2) Commercial or Industrial Roads: Crushed Aggregate Base
Course, twelve ( 12") inch depth or Modified Base Course, fourteen
14") inch depth.
B. Residential Roads. On Bituminous wearing course, ID - 2, one
and one- half ( 111") inch depth; on Bituminous Concrete Base Course,
four ( 4") inch depth or on subbase, six ( 6") inch depth.
C. Commercial or Industrial Roads. On Bituminous Wearing
Course, ID - 2, one and one- half ( 112") inch depth; on Bituminous Binder
Course, ID - 2, two ( 2") inch depth; on Bituminous Concrete Base Course,
four ( 4") inch depth; or on subbase, six ( 6") inch depth.
4. The pavement cross slope shall be one- quarter [ inch] ( 0. 021 foot)
per foot. Superelevation shall not be used on any roads unless required by
the Township Engineer.
5. The Township shall require weight delivery slips for all material
used in the pavement structure.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 422)
423. Additional Regulations for Floodplain Areas. The regulations
contained herein shall apply in those areas identified as flood prone in
Part 16 of the Douglass Township Zoning Ordinance [ Chapter 271. The Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map shall be available in the Township Building for
inspection. In regard to the adopted Flood Plain Conservation District,
the regulations contained herein shall apply to those areas defined and
established as floodplain and not in conflict with the information provided
in the Flood Insurance Study.
Page Added 7/ 16/ 1990 - 214. 19 -
22, § 423( 1)) ( 22, § 423( 1))
1. The regulations contained herein are intended to conform to
the requirements of Section 60. 3d of the National Flood Insurance
Program, P. L. 93- 234, and the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,
P. L. 851, No. 166 of 1978, and as either is amended. Furthermore, it is
the purpose of these regulations to:
A. Regulate the subdivision and development of floodplain
areas in order to promote the general health, welfare, and safety
of the community.
B. Require that each subdivision lot or development site in
floodplain areas be provided with a safe building site with adequate
access; and that public facilities which serve such sites be
designed and installed to preclude flood damage at the time of
initial construction.
C. Protect individuals from buying lands which are unsuitable
for use because of flood hazards by prohibiting the subdivision and
development of unprotected floodplain areas.
D. Maintain the certification of Douglass Township and the
eligibility of the property owners in the Township for the benefits
of the National Flood Insurance Program, P. L. 93- 234.
2. Prospective developers shall consult with the Zoning Officer
to make a determination as to whether or not the proposed subdivision or
land development is located within an identified floodplain.
3. Where not prohibited by this or any other codes or ordinances,
land located in a floodplain may be subdivided or developed in accordance
with this and any other codes or ordinances regulating such
development.
4. The finished elevation of proposed streets within floodplain
areas shall be a minimum of two ( 2') feet above the base flood elevation.
Drainage openings shall be sufficient to discharge flood flows
without increasing flood heights onto lands of other property owners.
5. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the one
hundred ( 100) year flow without risk to persons or property. The
drainage system shall ensure conveyance of drainage away from buildings.
6. The Township Supervisors may require in a floodplain an underground
system to accommodate a one hundred ( 100) year flood and a
secondary surface system accommodate larger, less frequent floods.
Drainage plans shall be consistent with local and regional drainage
plans. The facilities shall be designed to prevent the discharge or
increased runoff onto adjacent properties.
7. All new or replacement sanitary sewer systems, whether public
or private, located in floodplain areas shall be flood proofed, and all
appurtenances thereto ( including, but not limited to, pumping stations)
shall be floodproofed up to a point one and one- half ( 11-2') feet above
the base flood elevation.
8. All new or replacement water systems, whether public or
private, in floodplain areas; shall be flood proofed to a point one and
one- half ( 12') feet above the base flood elevation. 0
214. 20 - Page Added 7/ 16/ 1990
22, § 422( 9)) ( 22, § 423( 9))
9. All other new or replacement public or private utilities and
facilities in floodplain areas shall be elevated or flood proofed to a
point one and one- half ( 11') feet above the base flood elevation.
10. Waivers. Guidelines for relaxation from the requirements set
forth in this Section are as follows:
A. A waiver shall not be issued within any designated regulatory
f loodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge
would result.
B. A waiver shall only be issued if there is:
1) A determination that failure to relax the requirements
would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant.
2) A determination that the relaxing of a requirements
will not result in increased flood heights, additi6nal threats to
public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances,
cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with
existing local laws or ordinances.
3) A determination that relaxing of a requirement will not
result in any adverse impact on adjacent landowners either
upstream or downstream.
C. A waiver shall only be issued upon a determination that the
waiver is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to
afford relief.
D. The Township shall ( i) maintain a record of all waivers
including justification for their issuance, and ( ii) report such
decisions issued in its annual report submitted to the Federal Insurance
Administrator.
11. Where the subdivision or land development lies partially or
completely in a floodplain, or where the subdivision or land development
borders on a floodplain, the plan shall include detailed information
identifying the following:
A. Location and elevation of existing and proposed streets,
water supply and sanitary facilities, and any other permitted improvements,
soil types, and proposed flood proofing measurers.
B. Boundaries of the floodplain and the base flood elevation as
defined in Part 16, " Flood Plain Conservation District," of the
Douglass Township Zoning Ordinance ( Chapter 271; the floodplain shall
be shaded in on all copies of the plan.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 423)
424. Sidewalk Location, Design and Construction.
1. Where Required.
A. Sidewalks shall be provided along both sides of all streets
and along common driveways and parking areas. The Supervisors may
waive the requirement for sidewalks under one ( 1) or more of the
following conditions:
1) Where proposed residential lot width will be one
hundred twenty- five ( 125') feet or greater.
Page Added 7/ 16/ 1990 - 214. 21 -
22, § 424( 1)( A)( 2)) 22, § 424( 1) ( A) ( 2))
2) There is clearly no destination to be reached by
pedestrians ( e. g. shopping centers, bus stops, employment,
schools) or none anticipated in the foreseeable future.
3) The sidewalk( s) would not be an extension of an
existing network which provides neighborhood or village
circulation.
4) An alternative pedestrian circulation concept can be
shown to be more desirable, especially when using open space
areas, provided that appropriate walks are provided between
the open space walkways and the pedestrian origins and destinations.
5) The rural character, density of the area and/ or
small size of the proposal precludes the purposeful use of
sidewalks. However, regardless of the small size of a land
development or subdivision proposal, sidewalks shall be
required wherever they fill a gap in an existing network.
B. In developments with common areas, sidewalks should be
located appropriately to serve as access between parking areas and
buildings and in common areas to serve as internal site circulation.
In addition, sidewalks shall be required where deemed
necessary by the . Supervisors to provide access to off- site
destinations.
C. Handicap ramps shall be provided at all intersections and
at other locations required by the Township.
2. Width. Sidewalks shall not be less than four ( 4') feet in
width, although the Supervisors may required additional width in commercial,
industrial, office, or higher density residential areas where
higher volumes of pedestrian traffic are anticipated.
3. On Public Streets. Sidewalks shall be located between the curb
and the right- of- way line five ( 5') feet from the face of the curb.
This distance may be less only when the near edge of the sidewalk is
within six ( 6") ' inches of the right- of- way line. The grade and paving
of the sidewalks shall be continuous across driveways except in certain
cases where heavy traffic volume dictates special treatment. The
Township may reduce the off -set distance when existing conditions
require such a change.
4. Construction. Sidewalks shall be constructed so as to discharge
drainage to the street, the grade of which shall not be less than
one- fourth (; 4") inch per foot. The finish grade between the outside of
the sidewalk to the curb line ( edge of the cartway) shall never exceed
the total vertical elevation change of one ( 1') foot. All concrete
sidewalks shall be constructed on a four ( 4") inch crushed stone base to
insure proper drainage. The concrete shall be placed so that there
there is a separate expansion joint every five ( 5') feet. One- half ( 2")
inch pre -molded expansion joints shall be placed between the adjacent
curb and sidewalk. All concrete sidewalks shall have a minimum thickness
of four ( 4") inches except under drives where they shall have a
minimum thickness of six ( 6") inches for residential drives and eight
8") inches for commercial and industrial drives. The concrete apron
for the driveway shall be reinforced with wire six by six ( 6" X 6")
214. 22 - Page Added 7/ 16/ 1990
22, § 424, cont' d) ( 22, § 424, cont' d)
inches, No. 9 wire ( minimum). Two ( 2) layers of this wire shall be utilized
with a minimum of two ( 2") inch spacing between layers. The wire shall
not be installed so that it is closer than one- half 0") inch from the top
or bottom surfaces of the driveway.
5. Additional sidewalks shall be required where deemed necessary by
the Supervisors to provide access to schools, churches, parks, community
facilities, and commercial or employment centers, and to provide necessary
pedestrian circulation within land development and/ or subdivisions where
otherwise required sidewalks would not be sufficient for public safety and
convenience. Such additional sidewalks may be constructed of alternative
materials, in compliance with the Douglass Township Engineering Standards.
Ord. 91- 121
6. Sidewalks shall be designed to facilitate access and use by the
handicapped, as approved by the Township Engineer. [ Ord. 91- 121
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 424; as amended by Ord. 91- 12, 10/ 22/ 1991, § 3)
425. Curbs.
1. Where Required. Concrete curbs shall be installed along each side
of all roads in accordance with the chart in § 405 of this Chapter. The
Board of Supervisors may required curbs for any road if deemed necessary
for stormwater control by the Township Engineer. The Board of Supervisors
may waive the curbing requirement if satisfactory justification is provided
by the developer to do so.
2. Curb Dimensions. Concrete curbs shall be eighteen ( I8") inches
deep, seven ( 7") inches wide at the top and eight ( 8") inches wide at the
base. The curbing shall have an eight ( 8") inch face and a one and onehalf
( 1}") inch reveal at the depressed curb for drives. Curbing shall be
constructed in ten ( 10') foot lengths and an expansion joint with an
approved filler shall be constructed at least every thirty ( 30') feet.
3. Construction. All concrete used for curb construction shall be
certified to develop a compressive strength of at least three thousand
3, 000) PSI at twenty- eight ( 28) days. Certification of the mix shall be
provided to the Township upon request. All edges shall be finished with an
edging tool. Slipform curb machines may be used only when approved by the
Township.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 425)
426. Rights -of -Way and Easements. Rights- of- way or easements
required for roadway construction and maintenance, sanitary sewer systems,
storm drainage systems, water systems, and any other utilities and for any
other specific purposes shall be required by the Board of Supervisors as
needed, with the location and width in each case to be determined by the
Board of Supervisors.
1. The building setback shall be at least ten ( 10') feet from the
near side of all existing and proposed easements. The total setback from
the property line shall not be less than that required by the applicable
zoning district.
2. Nothing shall be permitted to be placed, planted, set, or put
within the area of an easement. The area shall be maintained as a lawn
unless further use is allowed in writing by the Board of Supervisors.
Page Revised 10/ 22/ 1991 - 214. 23 -
22, § 426( 3)) 22, § 426( 3))
3. The owner of any lot, upon written request by the Township, and
at the owner' s sole expense, shall remove unauthorized items which have
been placed, planted, set, or put ( with or without prior knowledge of
this regulation) within the area of any easement.
4. To the fullest extent possible, easements shall be adjacent to
rear and side lot lines.
5. Minimum Easement Widths.
A. Drainage easements shall be required along natural water
courses with a minimum width of fifty (50`) feet. Such easements
may be used for storm drainage systems, sanitary sewer Fines, and
open space. Where conditions warrant, such as in floodplains,
additional width may be required.
B. A minimum easement width of twenty ( 20') feet shall be
required for all storm drainage systems and sanitary sewer systems -
which are located outside of the public right- of- way and wherever
storm drainage is collected in swales and ditches. An additional
five ( 5') feet of easement width shall be required for each additional
utility which is placed within the easement area.
C. Snow removal easement shall be forty ( 40) feet wide at the
ultimate right- of- way line and fifteen ( 15) feet deep. No shrubbery,
fence, mailbox or any obstruction which would hinder the placement of
snow shall be placed within the easement. [ Ord. 96- 11
6. Easements required to be obtained by developers shall provide
for the maintenance, repair, and replacement of the facilities including
the right of passage for such work. The Township shall have the right
of review and correction of all easements obtained by developers from
other property owners which shall be turned over to the Township. The
developer shall convey, at no cost to the Township, all requested
easements
7. No right- of- way nor easement for any purpose shall be recited
or described in any deed unless the same has been shown on the approved
plan. Any error found in a deed shall be immediately corrected and
recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds for Montgomery County,
at the sole expense of the developer.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 426; as amended by Ord. 96- 1, 1/ 15/ 1996)
427. Utilities.
1. All underground facilities shall be installed the full width of
the right- of- way prior to the paving of the streets. The location of
all underground facilities within the right- of- way shall be approved by
the Township.
2. All water, sewer, and gas mains shall be installed underground.
All electric, telephone, and other communication services, both main and
service lines, shall be installed underground except where it is demonstrated
to the satisfaction of the Township Supervisors that underground
installations herein required are not feasible because of physical
conditions of the land involved.
214. 24 - Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996
C
22, § 427( 3)) 22, § 427( 3))
3. All electric and communication mains and services located within
the public right- of- way shall be installed at least three ( 3`) feet deep.
4. The provisions in this Part shall not be constructed as to
limit or interfere with the construction, installation, operation, and
Text continued on following page.]
Page Added 6/ 17/ 1996 - 214. 24. 1 -
22, § 427, cont' d) ( 22, § 427, cont' d)
maintenance of public utility structures or facilities which may hereafter
be located within public easements or rights- of- way designated for such
purposes.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 427)
428. Sanitary Sewers and On - Lot Disposal.
1. Sanitary Sewers. Wherever practicable, sanitary sewers shall be
installed and connected to the the Berks -Montgomery Municipal Authority
system. In areas not presently served by public sanitary sewers, the
Township Supervisors may require, in addition to the installation of
temporary, individual on -lot sewage disposal facilities, the installation
of a capped sanitary sewer system which would include house connections if
studies by the Township Supervisors indicate that extension of the public
sanitary sewer mains or laterals to the property being subdivided appears
probable or necessary to protect public health.
A. Construction. All sanitary sewer systems shall be designed
and constructed in accordance with the requirements of the Berks -
Montgomery Municipal Authority and DER.
B. Planning Approvals.
1) The developer must obtain approval from DER for all
public sewer connections in excess of one ( 1) equivalent dwelling
unit ( EDU). The developer shall update the Township Sewage
Facilities Plan through the use of revisions as required by
Chapter 71 of the Pennsylvania Code.
2) When required by DER, the developer shall obtain a
water quality permit for the proposed sanitary sewer system or
extension.
2. On -Lot Disposal Systems. If public sewage disposal is not available,
and the sewage treatment is on a project or individual lot basis,
such private facilities must be installed by the developer or builder under
the direct supervision of the Montgomery County Health Department or DER
representative, whichever is applicable. [ Ord. 94- 21
A. The developer or builder shall obtain approval from DER
through the use of the Planning Module for Land Development for all
developments which consist of more than one ( 1) EDU.
B. Proof of sewerability of every lot or parcel shall be provided
before final plan approval of any subdivision or development
unless waived by the Board of Supervisors. Where plan approval is not
required by the Board of Supervisors, then a sewage permit shall be
required before issuance of a building permit.
C. The Montgomery County Health Department or DER representative
shall require percolation tests, soil tests, and other data to determine
the size and extent of the facilities. Such tests shall be
conducted for each lot to be developed. During installation of such
facilities, and before final coverage, the applicable inspector shall
make inspections and check to assure that all requirements and specifications
have been met. They shall be granted free access to the
development area at all times during this construction period. [ Ord. 0 94- 2j
Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994 - 214. 25 -
22, § 428( 2), cont' d) 22, § 428( 2), cont' d)
D. A septic tank shall be required and shall be provided with
a cover to facilitate cleaning. Abandoned wells shall not be used
as cesspools or any type of sewage disposal.
E. The on -lot sewage systems shall be designed and constructed
in accordance with any other Township regulations or ordinance,
and DER requirements.
F. In no instance shall a septic tank tile field or other
effluent dissminating system be located nearer to a drilled well
than one hundred ( 100') feet.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 428; as amended by Ord. 94- 2, 3/ 7/ 1994, § 8)
429. Water Supply.
1. Public and Community Water Systems.
A. All systems shall be designed and constructed in accordance
with the requirements established by the Township Board of
Supervisors. These requirements shall include the standards
established by the Borough of Boyertown when it is anticipated that
the proposed system will be part of the Boyertown system or the
standards established by any other water company servicing the
Township when it is anticipated that the proposed system will be
part of a particular water company' s system.
B. All water mains and lines as indicated on the approved
plans shall be installed from each lot to the municipal or community
supply..
C. Fire hydrants shall be located at accessible points
throughout the subdivision or land development when public water
supply is available, and shall be located within six hundred ( 600')
feet of all existing and proposed structures as measured along
roadways. As part of the capped water system, the fire hydrant
line shall be built to the location of the hydrant and capped.
2. On - Lot Water Systems.
A. Where no public or community water supply is available,
wells shall be constructed for each lot or land development.
B. All wells shall be designed and constructed in accordance
with the requirements of all other Township regulations or ordinances
and DER regulations.
3. Capped Water Svstems.
A. In areas not presently served by municipal or community
water supply, the Township Supervisors may require, in addition to
individual wells, the installation of a capped water system, if
studies by the Township indicates that a municipal or community
water supply appears probable or necessary to protect public
health. Such systems shall include all service connections to the
lots or parcels.
B. All systems shall be designed and constructed in accordance
with the requirements for public and community water systems,
429( 1) of this Part. 0
214. 26 - Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994
22, § 429( 3)( C))
C. A circular area with a radius of
shall be shown around each well to denote
on -lot sewage system is to be located.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 429)
430. Erosion and Sediment Control.
22, § 429( 3)( C))
one hundred ( 100`) feet
clear space in which no
1. No changes shall be made in the contour of the land, no grading,
excavation, removal, or destruction of the topsoil, trees, or other vegetative
cover of the land shall commence until such time that a plan for
minimizing erosion and sedimentation has been approved by the Township or
it is determined that such plan is not necessary.
2. All erosion control facilities shall be designed and constructed
in accordance with the regulations of the Township, Montgomery County
Conservation District, and DER.
3. An NPDES stormwater permit is required for construction sites over
five ( 5) acres in accordance with Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection regulations, 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 92, before final plan approval
is granted by the Township Board of Supervisors. The Township may require
erosion and sedimentation control approval be obtained from the Montgomery
County Conservation District for construction sites under five ( 5) acres.
When final plan approval in not required by the Board, a building permit
shall not be issued until such erosion and sedimentation control approvals
mentioned in subsections ( 1) and ( 2), above, have been obtained or the
Township should determine that such erosion and sedimentation control will
not be necessary. [ Ord. 96- 11
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 430; as amended' by Ord. 96- 1, 1/ 15/ 1996)
431. Bridges and Culverts.
1. All bridges and culverts shall be designed to meet current
PennDOT standards to support the expected load and to carry expected
flows. They shall be constructed to the full width of the right- of- way.
2. Approvals or waivers shall be obtained from DER for all bridges,
culverts, and storm drainage pipes unless the Township has determined that
such application would not be necessary.
3. Extensions, construction or reconstruction of bridges, culverts,
and pipes which are a part of the County or State roadway system shall
require their approval before final plan approval by the Board of
Supervisors.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 431)
432. Survey Monuments.
1. Survey monuments shall be placed on the right- of- way lines at
corners, angle points, beginning and end of curves, at all corners and
changes in directions of the boundary of the tract under development and at
other points as required by the Township. All monuments, existing and
proposed, shall be shown on the record plans. The monuments shall be
placed after all roadway improvements have been completed.
Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996 - 214. 27 -
22, § 432( 2)) 22, § 432( 2))
2. One ( 1) of the following types of permanent reference monuments
shall be installed by the developer or property owner at all locations
mentioned above:
A. Concrete monuments with minimum dimensions of twenty ( 20")
inches by four ( 4") inches square with forty- five ( 45°) degree beveled
edges.
B. Solid steel pins which minimum dimensions of five -eights
5/ 8") inch in diameter and twenty- four ( 24") inches in length.
3. Bench Marks. All survey work for plan preparation and other
required design shall be based upon the BMMA sanitary sewer systems
datum. When such is not available, the U. S. G. S. datum shall be used.
Local survey datum may be used only upon approval by the Township.
4. Lot Stakeout. All lot corners and other changes in direction
shall be marked with metal pins upon completion of all lot grading. All
markers shall be permanently located and shall be at least a five -eights
5/ 8") inch metal pin with a minimum length of twenty- four ( 24") inches,
located in the ground to the finished grade.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 432)
433. Signs. The developer or property owner shall provide and
install all street signs, speed limit signs, and all other regulatory
signs required by the Township. All signs shall meet the requirements
of PennDOT. ( Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 433)
434. Street Lighting. Street lights shall be installed when
required by the Township. The developer or property owner shall provide
a street lighting plan which shall be approved by the utility company
and the Township Board of Supervisors before final plan approval. ( Ord.
90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 434)
435. Wetlands.
1. All subdivision and land development shall have determined the
limits of the wetlands as defined by the " U. S. Federal Manual for Identifying
and Delineating Jursidictional Wetlands." Such delineation
shall be recorded on the record plan.
2. When wetlands are present, a certification note as shown in
306( 2)( C)( 5) of this Chapter shall be placed on the record plan and
signed.
3. A copy of the wetlands identification report shall be provided
to the Township for their records.
4. Buildings shall not be located in wetlands and must be set back
at least twenty- five ( 25') feet from the edge of wetlands.
5. The Township Board of Supervisors may waive the wetland requirements
upon the advice of the Township Engineer and/ or the Township
Planning Commission.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 435)
214. 28 - Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996
22, § 501) ( 22, § 5 01)
Part 5
Improvement Construction Requirements
500. Applicability. The improvement construction requirements set
forth in this Part apply to all applicants submitting a final plan, for
subdivision or land development in Douglass Township. No lot in a subdivision
may be sold; no permit to erect, alter or repair any building upon
land may be issued; and no building may be erected, unless the improvements
required by the Board of Supervisors in connection therewith have either
been constructed or guaranteed as required in this Part. ( Ord. 90- 2,
7/ 16/ 1990, § 500)
501. Required Improvements. The applicant shall agree in writing to
construct streets and other improvements required by this Chapter from the
lot or lots to be sold or built upon to an existing improved street,
subject to the provisions of § 105( 2) herein. The work shall be performed
in strict accordance with the approved plans and Township standards and
specifications, or the applicable provisions of the Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation specifications, or other agency having jurisdiction over
the improvement. No plan shall be finally approved until the developer has
completed all of the necessary and appropriate improvements as required, or
until such time at the applicant has provided a proper financial guarantee
as required by this Part, in accordance with the Municipalities Planning
Code, to cover the estimated construction costs and engineering cost for
such improvements. The applicant shall also guarantee that no lot will be
sold or building constructed in any flood prone area prior to completion of
all floodproofing measures planned for such lot and necessary access
facilities. ( Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 501)
502. Financial Security. In lieu of the completion of any improvements
required for final plan approval, financial security in an amount
sufficient to cover the costs of any improvements or common amenities shall
be provided to the Township in accordance with this Section.
1. Type of Security. Without limitations as to the type of financial
security which the Township may approve, which approval shall not be
unreasonably withheld, irrevocable letter of credit from a Federal for]
Commonwealth chartered lending institution and/ or restrictive or escrow in
such lending institutions shall be deemed acceptable financial security for
the purposes of this Section. Such financial security shall be posed with
a bonding company or Federal or Commonwealth chartered lending institution
chosed by the developer, builder or subdivider posting the financial
security, provided said bonding company or lending institution is authorized
to conduct business within the Commonwealth.
2. Amount. The amount of the financial security to be posted for the
completion of the required improvements shall be equal to one hundred ten
110%) percent of the cost of completion estimated as of ninety ( 90) days
following the date scheduled for completion by the developer.
3. Determination of Improvement Costs. The amount of financial
security required shall be based upon an estimate of the costs of completion
of the required improvements submitted by an applicant or developer
and prepared by a professional engineer licensed as such in the Common -
Page Added 7/ 16/ 1990 - 214. 29 -
22, § 502( 3), cont' d) ( 22, § 502( 3), cont' d)
wealth of Pennsylvania and certified by such engineer to be a fair and
reasonable estimate of such cost. The Douglass Township Board of Supervisors,
upon the recommendation of the Township Engineer, may refuse to
accept such estimate for good cause. If the applicant or developer and
Douglass Township are unable to agree upon an estimate, then the estimate
shall be recalculated and recertified by another professional
engineer chosen mutually by Douglass Township and the applicant or
developer. The estimate certified by the third engineer shall be
presumed fair and reasonable, and shall be the final estimate.
4. Time Limit. Such financial security shall provide for and
secure to the public the completion of all subdivision improvements for
which such security is being posted on or before the date fixed in the
subdivision plan or subdivision agreement for completion of such
improvements.
5. Delayed Completion. If the subdivider, developer or builder
requires more than one ( 1) year from the date of posting of the financial
security to complete the required improvements, Douglass Township
may adjust the amount of the financial security by comparing the actual
cost of the improvements which have been completed and the estimated
cost of the completion of the remaining improvements as of the expiration
of the ninetieth ( 90th) day after either the original date scheduled
for completion or a rescheduled date of completion. After this
adjustment, the Township may required the developer to post additional
security in order to assure that the financial security equals one
hundred ten ( 110%) percent of the cost of completion.
6. Development in Stages. In the case where development is
projected over a period of years, the Board of Supervisors may authorize
submission of final plats by sections or stages of development in accordance
with § 310( 3) of this Chapter and subject to such requirements or
guarantees as to improvements in future sections or stages of
development.
7. Water and Sewer Facilities. If water mains or sanitary sewer
lines, or both, along with apparatus or facilities related thereto, are
to be installed under the jurisdiction and pursuant to the rules and
regulations of a public utility or municipal authority separate and
distinct from Douglass Township, financial security to assure proper
completion and maintenance thereof shall be posed in accordance with the
regulations of the controlling public utility or municipal authority and
shall not be included within the financial security as otherwise required
by this Section.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 502)
503. Release From Liabilitv.
1. Partial Release. As the work of installing the required
improvements proceeds, the party posting the financial security may
request the Board of Supervisors to release, or authorize the release
from time to time, such portions of the financial security necessary for
payment to the contractor( s) performing the work. Any such request
shall be in writing addressed to the Douglass Township Board of Supervisors
and subject to the provisions for release as established in 5509
of Act 247, The Pennsylvania Municipalities' Code.
214. 30 Page Added 7/ 16/ 1990
22, § 503( 2)) ( 22, § 503( 2))
2. Release in Full. The portion of the financial security unencumbered
by the post -completion security of § 503( 4) shall be released only
upon completion of installation of the required improvements in accordance
with the approved improvement construction plan. Strict compliance with
procedures established by § 510 of Act 247, The Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, shall be followed with respect to the release of financial
security posted by the subdivider, owner, developer, or builder. If the
Douglass Township Board of Supervisors fails to comply with the time
limitations of § 510 of Act 247, all improvements will be deemed to have
been approved and the developer shall be released from all liability
pursuant to the financial security.
3. Incomplete Improvements. If the required improvements are not
completely installed within the period fixed or extended by the Board of
Supervisors, the Board of Supervisors shall declare the financial security
in default to collect the amount payable thereunder. Upon receipt of such
amount, the Township shall install such improvements as were covered by the
security and are commensurate with the extent of building development which
has taken place in the subdivision or land development, not exceeding in
cost, however, the amount collected upon the security. Strict compliance
with procedures established by § 511 of Act 247, The Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, shall be followed.
4. Post -Completion Security. The developer shall be responsible for
maintenance of all subdivision or land development improvements until such
improvements are offered for dedication and accepted by the Township, and
ten percent ( 10%) of the performance guarantee shall be held back until a
maintenance guarantee has been posted as provided for in §602( 3).
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 503)
504. Inspection of Work and Materials.
1. Notice. The Township Engineer shall be notified forty- eight ( 48)
hours in advance of the commencement of any construction or installation
operation, in order that provision may be made for inspection by the
Township. Construction and installation operations shall also be subject
to inspection by Township officials during the progress of the work. The
subdivider, developer or builder shall pay for all inspections.
2. Improvement Specifications. All required road improvements shall
be constructed in accordance with the applicable provisions of the latest
edition of the PennDOT Publication 408, dated 1976, including the latest
revisions and other applicable regulations. All other required improvements
shall be constructed in accordance with approved specifications.
A. Specifications. The specifications will be furnished to the
applicant by the Township. If any of the specifications are unavailable
at the Township building, the Township Engineer shall provide the
applicable specifications.
B. Sample of Materials. During or after construction of any
required improvement, should the Township require a sample of materials,
said sample shall be furnished by the appropriate contractor, in
form specified by the Township Engineer.
Page Added 7/ 16/ 1990 - 214. 31 -
22, § 504( 3)) ( 22, § 504( 3))
3. Delivery Slips. Copies of all delivery slips for materials
used in the construction of any storm sewers, sanitary sewers, roads,
curbs, sidewalks, or any other facility within a Township right- of- way
or easement shall be supplied to the Township.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 504)
505. Off -Site Improvements. Certain improvements beyond the geographical
boundaries of a site to be subdivided and/ or developed,
including but not limited to road improvements, may be required to be
constructed where it can clearly be demonstrated that such improvements
have been made necessary solely through the additional burden imposed by
the subdivision and/ or development of the site. The Solicitor shall
render final judgment in any instances where a dispute arises as to the
direct cause relationship for the improvement( s). The subdivider or
developer may be required to cover costs which must be incurred by the
Township or other governmental jurisdiction in order to make these
improvements feasible. The legal and financial arrangements to cover
costs of the off- site improvements shall be the same as those prescribed
in §502. ( Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 505)
214. 32 - Page Added 7/ 16/ 1990
22, § 600) (
22, § 600)
0 Part 6
Fees, Conditions of Acceptance and Penalties
600. Applicability. This Part sets forth the fees and costs for the
subdivision and development of land, engineering and inspection services
and related site tests and material, and the opening and dedication of
roads, streets, drainage facilities and other public improvements in the
Township. Conditions of acceptance of any street or site improvements and
penalties for the violation of this Chapter are provided in this Part.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 600)
601. Fees and Costs. The subdivider, builder or developer shall be
required to furnish a bond and to pay the following fees and costs as
applicable.
1. Preliminary Plan. The Township filing fee and Montgomery County
Planning Commission review fee.
2. Final Plan. The subdivider, developer, or builder will be required
to furnish financial security, in an amount and with such surety as
shall be approved by the Board of Supervisors, to guarantee the payment of:
A. Professional Services. The services of the Township Engineer
and/ or Solicitor provided in these rules and regulations. In addition,
all costs for other engineering, legal and professional certification
as deemed necessary-.
B. Material and Facilities Tests. The actual cost of all
drainage, water and/ or material tests.
C. Inspection. All costs of the Township Inspector at the
current hourly rate while engaged on the project.
D. Dedication. Legal fees, advertising and other costs involved
in the dedication of streets and public improvements to the Township.
3. Such bonds as may be required under the regulations of the applicable
sewer and water authorities.
4. Fee schedule will be set by resolution by the Board of
Supervisors.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 601)
602. Conditions of Acceptance.
1. Conditions. The Township shall have no obligation to take over
and make public any street or other improvement unless:
A. The required improvements, utility mains and laterals, and
monuments, shown on an approved plan or plans have been constructed in
compliance with all requirements.
B. It is established to the satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors
that there is a need for the improvements to be taken over and
made public.
2. Acceptance. The Township shall have not responsibility with
respect to any street or other improvement, not withstanding the use of the
Page Added 7/ 16/ 1990 - 214. 33 -
22, § 602( 2), cont' d) ( 22, § 602( 2), cont' d)
same by the public, unless the street or other improvement is accepted
by an ordinance adopted by the Board of Supervisors.
3. Guarantee. The Board of Supervisors shall require the posting
of financial security to secure structural integrity of all improvements
located in the development as well as the functioning of said improvements
in accordance with the design and specifications as depicted on
the final plat for a term not to exceed eighteen ( 18) months from the
date of acceptance of dedication. Said financial security shall be of
the same type as otherwise required with regard to installation of such
improvements, and the amount of the financial security shall not exceed
fifteen ( 151) percent of the actual cost of installation of said
improvements.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 602)
603. Penalties. Any person, partnership, or corporation who or
which has violated the provisions of this Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance shall, upon being found liable therefore in a civil
enforcement proceeding commenced by Douglass Township, pay a judgment of
not more than five hundred ($ 500. 00) dollars plus all court costs,
including reasonable attorney fees incurred by Douglass Township as a
result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied, or be
payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the
district justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the
judgment, Douglass Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate violation, unless the district justice
determining that there has been a violation further determines that
there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership, or corporation
violating this Chapter to have believed that there was no such violation,
in which event there shall be deemed to have been only one ( 1)
such violation until the fifth ( 5th) day following the date of the
determination of a violation by the district justice and thereafter each
day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
All fines collected for such violations shall be paid to the Township.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 603)
604. Jurisdiction.
1. Subdivision and Land Development Control. It shall be unlawful
for the owner of any land in the Township, or any other person, firm or
corporation, to subdivide any lot, tract, or parcel of land, or to lay
out, construct, open or dedicate for public use of travel, any street,
sanitary sewer, storm sewer, drainage facilities, or other facilities in
connection therewith, or for the common use of occupants of buildings
within the subdivision or land development, unless and until final plans
of such subdivision or development shall have been prepared by a registered
professional engineer, or registered surveyor, submitted to and
approved in writing thereon by the Township Board of Supervisors and
recorded in the Montgomery County Recorder of Deeds Office in Norristown,
Pennsylvania.
2. Sale of Lots; Issuance of Building Permits; Erection of
Buildings. 0
11
214. 34 - Page Added 7/ 16/ 1990
E
22, § 604( 2)( B)) 22, § 604( 2) ( B))
A. No lot in a subdivision may be sold, and no permit to erect,
or alter, any building upon land in a subdivision or land development
may be issued unless and until the municipal improvements required by
the Board of Supervisors in connection therewith have either been
constructed or guaranteed as herein provided.
B. No building in a subdivision or land development depending
for ingress and egress upon the improvements of any street or streets,
herein provided for, shall be permitted to be occupied before improvements
are fully completed from an existing paved street to and across
the lot on which the building is located, and/ or to a sufficient depth
along the side of the lot to service any driveway, driveways, or
parking areas.
C. No building shall be permitted to be occupied before permits
have been issued for the required sewage and water facilities and
these facilities are fully provided and operational.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 604)
Page Added 7/ 16/ 1990 - 214. 35 -
is
22, § 700) (
22, § 700)
Part 7
Amendments; Validity; Repealer
700. Amendment Procedure. The Board of Supervisors may, from time
to time, amend, supplement, change, modify, or repeal this Chapter by
proceeding in accordance with the regulations of this Part. The Board of
Supervisors shall, by resolution adopted at a regular or special meeting,
fix the time and place of a public hearing on the proposed amendment and
cause public notice thereof to be given as follows:
1. By publishing a notice thereof once each week for two ( 2) successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. The
first notice shall not be more than thirty ( 30) days or less than fourteen
14) days from the date of the hearing.
2. The notice shall state the time and place of the hearing, the
general nature of the proposed amendment and that full opportunity to be
heard will be given to any citizen and all parties in interest attending
such hearing.
3. Whenever a proposed amendment affects a particular property, there
shall be posted upon said property or premises at such place or places as
the Board of Supervisors may direct, notice of said proposed amendment.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 700)
701. Referral to Planning Commissions. A11 proposed amendments
before adoption shall be referred to the Township Planning Agency and the
Montgomery County Planning Commission at least thirty ( 30) days prior to
the public hearing, for recommendation and report, which shall be advisory.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 701)
702. Validity. Should any section of this Chapter be declared to be
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the Chapter as a whole or any other Part thereof.
Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 702)
703. Repealer. All ordinances and parts of ordinances inconsistent
herewith are hereby repealed upon the effective date of this Chapter;
otherwise to remain in full force and effect. ( Ord. 90- 2, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 703)
Page Added 7/ 16/ 1990 - 214. 37 -
22, § 801)
Part 8
Floodplain Areas
801. General Provisions.
22, 801)
1. The regulations contained herein shall apply in those areas
defined and established as Floodplain Conservation District in Part 16 of
the Douglass Township Zoning Ordinance.
2. The regulations contained herein are intended to conform to the
requirments of Section 60. 3 of the National Flood Insurance Program, P. L.
93- 234, and the Pennsylvania Floodplain Management Act, P. L. 851, No. 166
of 1978, and as either is amended. Furthermore, it is the purpose of these
regulations to: [ Ord. 96- 1]
A. Regulate the subdivision and development of floodplain areas
in order to promote the general health, welfare and safety of the
community;
B. Require that each subdivision lot or development site in
floodplain areas be provided with a safe building site with adequate
access; and that public facilities which serve such sites be designed
and installed to preclude flood damage at the time of initial construction;
C. Protect individuals from buying lands which are unsuitable
for use because of flood hazards by prohibiting the subdivision and
development of unprotected floodplain areas.
D. Maintain the certification of Douglass Township and the
eligiblility of the property owners in Douglass Township for the
benefits of the National Flood Insurance Program.
Ord. 84- 7, 5/ 7/ 1984, § 800; as amended by Ord. 96- 1, 1/ 15/ 1996)
802. Waivers. The guidelines for relaxation from the requirements
set forth in this Part are as follows:
1. A waiver shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
2. A waiver shall only be issued if there are:
A. A determination that failure to relax the requirements would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant;
B. A determination that the relaxing of a requirement will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public
safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws
or ordinances.
C. A determination that relaxing of a requirement will not
result in any adverse impact on adjacent landowners either upstream or
downstream.
Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996 - 214. 39 -
22, § 802( 3)) ( 22, § 802( 3))
3. A waiver shall only be issed upon a determination that the waiver
is the minimum action necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
4. The Township shall ( i) maintain a record of all waivers including
justification for their issuance, and ( ii) report such decisions issued in
its annual report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administrator.
Ord. 84- 7, 5/ 7/ 1984, § 801)
803.- Pre -Application Procedures for Subdivision and Land Developments.
1. Prior to the preparation of any plans, it is suggested that prospective
developers consult with the Montgomery County Health Department
concerning soil suitability when on- site sewage disposal facilities are
proposed. [ Ord. 94- 2]
2. Prospective developers shall consult the Montgomery County
Conservation District representative concerning erosion and sediment
control measures and the effect of geologic conditions on the proposed
subdivision and land development.
3. Prospective developers shall consult with Douglass Township and
Montgomery County Planning Commission to make a dtermination as to whether
or not any flood hazards either exist or will be created as a result of the
subdivision and land development.
Ord. 84- 7, 5/ 7/ 1984, § 802; as amended by Ord. 94- 2, 3/ 7/ 1994, § 9)
804. Preliminary Plan Requirements for Subdivision and Land DeveloDments.
The following information shall be required as part of the Preliminary
Plan and shall be prepared by a registered Engineer or Suerveyor:
1. Name of Engineer, Surveyor, or other qualified person responsible
for providing the information required in this section.
2. A map showing the location of the proposed subdivision or land
development with respect to the municipality' s floodplain areas including
information on, but not limited to, the Established Flood Level and Regulatory
Flood Elevation, boundaries of floodplain areas, proposed lots and
sites, fill, flood or erosion protective facilities, and areas subject to
deed restrictions.
3. Where the subdivision or land development lies partially or completely
in a floodplain area, or where the subdivision or land development
borders on a floodplain area, the Preliminary Plan shall include detailed
information giving the location and elevation of existing and proposed
streets, water supply and sanitary facilities, building sites, soil types
and proposed floodproofing measures. Such maps shall also show contours at
intervals of two ( 2') or five feet ( 5') depending upon the slope of the
land and indentify accurately the boundaries of the floodplain areas.
4. All subdivision and land development plans shall be drawn to
assure that:
A. Proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage;
B. Public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems are located and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damage; and
214. 40 - Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994
22, § 804, cont' d) 22, § 804, cont' d)
1) adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure
to flood hazards.
5. The developer shall provide a certification from a Registered
Professional Engineer that adequate precautions against flood damage have
been taken with respect to the design of any buildings or structures
located wholly or partially within a floodplain area. [ Ord. 86- 6]
6. A copy of all plans for new construction in floodplain areas shall
be submitted by Douglass Township to Montgomery County Conservation District
for review and comment prior to the issuance of a building permit.
The recommendations of the Conservation District shall be considered by the
Board of Supervisors of Douglass Township for possible incorporation into
the proposed plan.
7. A copy of all plans for new construction in floodplain areas shall
be submitted by Douglass Township to any other appropriate agencies or
individuals, including but not limited to, Montgomery County Planning
Commission; any appropriate Watershed Association; Soil Conservation
Service ( U. S. Department of Agriculture); Montgomery County Conservation
District; and municipal engineer for review and comment.
8. Where a non- residential structure is intended to be made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation:
A. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop
and/ or review structural design, specifications and plans for the
construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction
are in accordance with the requirements of § 302( 2), Chapter
8, Part 3.
B. A record of such certifications which includes the specific
elevation ( in relation to the mean sea level) to which such structures
are flood -proofed shall be maintained by the Township.
Ord. 84- 7, 5/ 7/ 1984, 46803; as amended by Ord. 86- 6, 7/ 21/ 1986; and by Ord.
87- 5, 12/ 7/ 1987, § 7)
805. Final Plan Requirements. The following information shall be
required as part of the Final Plan and shall be prepared by a registered
engineer or surveyor:
1. All information required for the submission of the Preliminary Plan
incorporating any changes requested by the Board of Supervisors of Douglass
Township.
2. A map showing the exact location and elevation of all existing and
proposed roads, buildings, structures, water supply and sanitary facilities
to be constructed in floodplain areas. Such maps shall also show contours
at intervals of two feet ( 2') or five feet ( 5') depending upon the slope of
the land and identify accurately the boundaries of floodplain areas.
Ord. 84- 7, 5/ 7/ 1984, § 804)
806. Design Standards and Improvements. The following requirements
shall apply for all subdivision and land developments proposed in Douglass
Township.
Page Added 7/ 16/ 1990 - 214: 41 -
22, § 806) 22, § 806)
1. General.
A. Where not prohibited by this or any other codes or ordinances
land located in floodplain areas may be subdivided or developed with
the provision that the developer construct all buildings and structures
to preclude flood damage in accordance with this and any other
codes or ordinances regulating such development.
B. Within the floodway part of the Floodplain Conservation
District, no subdivision or land development shall be approved if the
proposed development or improvements will, individually or collectively,
result in any increase, in the one hundred ( 100) year flood
elevation.
C. If Board of Supervisors of Douglass Township determines that
only a portion of a proposed plan can be safely developed, it shall
limit development to that portion and shall require that the development
proceed consistent with this determination.
D. When a developer does not intend to develop the plan himself
and the Board of Supervisors of Douglass Township determines that
additional controls are required to insure safe development, it may
require the developer to impose appropriate deed restrictions on the
land. Such deed restrictions shall be inserted in every deed and
noted on the Record Plan.
2. Excavation and Grading. Where any excavation or grading is
proposed, or where any existing trees, shrubs or other vegetative cover
will be removed, the developer shall consult the Montgomery County Conservation
District representative concerning plans for erosion and sediment
control and a report on the soil characteristics of the site in order to
determine the type and magnitude of development the site may safely accom
modate. Before undertaking any excavation or grading, the developer shall
conform to all pertinent laws, regulations and ordinances of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania and Douglass Township.
3. Drainage Facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed
to convey the flow of surface waters without risk to persons or property.
The drainage system shall insure drainage at all points along streets, and
insure conveyance of drainage away from buildings and on- site waste disposal
facilities.
The Board of Supervisors of Douglass Township may require an underground
system to accommodate frequent floods and a secondary surface system
to accommodate larger, less frequent floods. Drainage plans shall be
consistent with local and regional drainage plans. The facilities shall be
designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent
properties.
4. Streets. The finished elevation of proposed streets within floodplain
areas shall be a minimum of two ( 2') feet above the Base Flood
Elevation. Drainage openings shall be sufficient to discharge flood flows
without increasing flood heights onto lands of other property owners.
5. Sewer Facilities. All sanitary sewer systems located in floodplain
areas, whether public
Regulatory Flood Elevation.
or private, shall be floodproofed up to the
I &
214. 42 - Page Added 7/ 16/ 1990
22, § 806, cont' d) ( 22, § 806, cont' d)
A. The Board of Supervisors of Douglass Township may prohibit
installation of sewage disposal facilities requiring soil absorption
systems where such systems will not function due to high ground water,
flooding or unsuitable soil characteristics. The Board of Supervisors
of Douglass Township may require that the developer note on the plan
and in any deed or conveyance that on- site sewage disposal systems are
prohibited in designated floodplain areas.
B. The Board of Supervisors of Douglass Township may prescribe
adequate methods for waste disposal. If a public sanitary sewer
system is located within or near the proposed subdivision or land
development, the Board of Supervisors of Douglass Township shall
require the developer to connect to this system where practical, and
shall prescribe the procedures to be followed by the developer in
connecting to said system.
6. Water Facilities, All water systems in floodplain areas, whether
public or private, shall be floodproofed to the Regulatory Flood Elevation.
If there is an existing public water supply system within or near the
subdivision or land development, the Board of Supervisors of Douglass
Township shall require the developer to connect to this system where
practical, and shall prescribe the procedures to be followed by the developer
in connecting to said system.
7. Other Public Utilities and Facilities. All other public or private
utilities and facilities shall be elevated or floodproofed to the Regulatory
Flood Elevation.
Ord. 84- 7, 5/ 7/ 1984, § 805)
807. Performance Bond. No Final Plan shall be approved by the Board
of Supervisors of Douglass Township until the improvements required by this
Part are constructed in a satisfactory manner. In lieu of such construction,
the Board of Supervisors of Douglass Township may grant final approval
prior to completion, providing:
1. The developer enters into an agreement with the Board of Supervisors
of Douglass Township guaranteeing that the improvements will be
installed in accordance with the plans, specifications, and schedules
approved by the Board of Supervisors of Douglass Township prior to Final
Plan approval. This agreement shall also guarantee that no lot will be
sold or building constructed in any floodplain area prior to completion of
all floodproofing measures planned for such lot and necessary access
facilities.
2. Simultaneous with the execution of the agreement specified in
subsection ( 1) above, the developer shall offer security to guarantee performance
of this agreement and the installation of improvements by the
developer at his expense in accordance with the approved plans, specifications
and schedules. The security shall be in the full amount of the
estimated costs. The agreement shall be conditioned upon final approval of
the plan. The security shall consist of a certified check, escrow account
acceptable or irrevocable letter of credit in favor of the Board of Supervisors
of Douglass Township.
Page Added 7/ 16/ 1990 - 214. 43 -
22. § 807, cont' d)
3. The developer shall agree that
by the Board of Supervisors for the
and may be held for a period of three
such improvements for the purpose of;
22, § 807, cont' d)
any deposit in escrow may be applied
completion of improvements as agreed
3) months after final completion of
A. Guaranteeing and securing the correction of any defect in
material or workmanship furnished for such improvements, and not
discernible at the time of final inspection or acceptance by the Board
of Supervisors; and
B. Guaranteeing against any damage to such improvements by reason
of the settling of the ground, bed or foundation.
Such agreement shall also provide that the security may be applied by
the Board of Supervisors of Douglass Township to any costs incurred correcting
such defects. The balance of such security, if any, held at the
end of such period shall be returned by the Board of Supervisors to the
depositor or paid to the order of the depositor without payment of interest
by the Board of Supervisors.
4. Prior to offering any improvements to the, Board of Supervisors,
the developer shall furnish a written guarantee that all indebtedness
incurred for supplies, material, labor furnished, or engineering and
professional services in the construction of improvements have been paid in
full and that there are no claims for damage or suits against the contractor
involving such improvements.
Ord. 84- 7, 5/ 7/ 1984, § 806)
808. Conflict. It is not intended by this Part to repeal, abrogate,
annul or interfere with any existing ordinances or enactments, or with any
rule, regulation or permit adopted or issued thereunder, except insofar as
the same may be inconsistent or in conflict with any of the provisions of
this Part; provided that where this Part imposes greater restrictions than
any such previous ordinance or enactment, then the provisions of this Part
shall control. ( Ord. 84- 7, 5/ 7/ 1984, § 807)
809. Validity. Should any section or provision of this Part be
declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision
shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole, or any other
part thereof. ( Ord. 84- 7, 5/ 7/ 1984, § 808)
810. Municipal Liability. The approval of a subdivision or land
development plan near or within the Floodplain Area shall not constitute a
representation, guarantee or warranty of any kind by the municipality, or
by any official or employee thereof of the practicability or safety of the
proposed plan and shall create no liability upon Douglass Township, its
officials or employees. The degree of floodproofing intended to be provided
by this Part is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes. and is
based on engineering and scientific methods of study. This Part is not
intended to imply that land outside floodplain areas or subdivisions or
developments permitted within such areas will always be totally free from
flooding or flood damage. ( Ord. 84- 7, 5/ 7/ 1984, § 809)
214. 44 - Page Added 7/ 16/ 1990
C
22, § 811) 22, § 811)
811. Definitions.
BASE FLOOD - the flood which has been selected to serve as the basis
upon which the floodplain management provisions of this and other ordinances
have been prepared; for purposes of this Part, the one hundred ( 100)
year flood, as referenced in the current Douglass Township Flood Insurance
Study, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Federal Insur-,
ance Administration.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION - the one hundred ( 100) year flood elevation in
the Douglass Township Flood Insurance Study, prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, Federal Insurance Administration.
BUILDING - a constructed edifice designed to stand more or less
permanently, covering a space of land, usually covered by a roof and more
or less completely enclosed by walls, and serving as a dwelling, storehouse,
factory, gas or liquid storage tank, shelter for animals, or other
useful structure --distinguished from structures not designed for occupancy
such as fences or monuments) and from structures not intended for use in
one ( 1) place ( as boats or trailers) even though subject to occupancy -- of
which at least fifty-one percent ( 51%) of value is located above ground
see STRUCTURE definition).
CONSTRUCTION - the construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair,
extension, alteration or relocation of a building or structure including
the placement of manufactured homes.
DEVELOPMENT - any man- made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, the
placement of manufactured homes, streets and other paving, utilities,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation or drilling operations and
the subdivision of land.
FLOOD - a temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas.
FLOODPLAIN AREAS - Floodplain Conservation District as defined by the
Douglass Township Zoning Ordinance [ Chapter 271 as amended.
FLOODPROOFING - any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents. [ Ord. 91- 41
FLOODWAY - the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
a designated height. [ Ord. 91- 4]
HISTORIC STRUCTURES - any structure that is:
A. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places ( a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminary
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register.
B. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.
Page Revised 10/ 22/ 1991 - 214. 45 -
22, § 811, cont' d) 22, § 811, cont' d)
C. Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places
in States with historic preservation programs which have been approved
by the Secretary of Interior.
D. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places
in communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:
1) By an approved State program as determined by the
Secretary of the Interior; or,
2) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in States
without approved programs.
Ord. 91- 4)
MANUFACTURED HOME - a mobile home or a transportable, single- family
dwelling intended for permanent occupancy, office, or place of assembly,
contained in one ( 1) or more sections, built on a permanent chassis, which
arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and
incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed so that it
may be used with or without a permanent foundation. The term includes park
trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles which are placed on a
site for more than one hundred eighty ( 180) consecutive days. [ Ord. 91- 41
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK - a parcel of land under single ownership,
which has been planned and improved for the placement of two ( 2) or more
manufactured homes for non -transient use. [ Ord. 91- 41
ONE HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD - a f lood that has one chance in one hundred
100) or a one percent ( 1%) chance of being equalled or exceeded in any one
1) year. For the purposes of this Part, the one hundred year flood ( base
flood) as defined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Feder -1
Insurance Administration in the Flood Insurance Study, Douglass Township).
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE - a vehicle which is ( i) built on a single
chassis; ( ii) four hundred ( 400) square feet or less when measured at the
largest horizontal projection; ( iii) designed to be self- propelled or
permanently towable by a light duty truck; and ( iv) designed primarily not
for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational camping, travel or seasonal use. [ Ord. 91- 41
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION - the one hundred year flood elevation plus
a freeboard safety factor of one and one- half feet ( 12'). -
START OF CONSTRUCTION - includes substantial improvement and is the
date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within one
hundred eighty ( 180) days of the permit date. The actual start means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a
site, such as : he pouring of the slab or footings, the installation of
piers, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation;
or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading
and filling; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, or foundation or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it
include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. If the actual start of construction does not occur within one
214. 46 - Page Revised 10/ 22/ 1991
22, § 811, cont' d) ( 22, § 811, cont' d)
hundred eighty ( 180) days, a time extension for the date of start up
construction shall be granted only if a written request is submitted by the
applicant, which sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the Building
Inspector to approve such a request. [ Ord. 87- 51
STRUCTURE - any form or arrangement of building material involving the
necessity of providing proper support, bracing, tieing, anchoring, or other
protection against the forces of the elements ( see BUILDING definition).
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE - damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition
would equal or exceed fifty ( 50%) percent of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred. [ Ord. 91- 41
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT - any repair, reconstruction, or improvement
of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent ( 507.)
percent of the market value of the structure, either:
A. Before the improvement or repair is started; or,
B. If the structure has been damaged and is being restored,
before the damage occurred.
For the purpose of this definition " substantial improvement" is considered
to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other
structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not,
however, include either:
A. Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing State or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications
which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or,
B. Any alteration of a structure listed va a National Register
of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
Ord. 84- 7, 5/ 7/ 1984, § 810; as amended by Ord. 91- 4, 8/ 5/ 1991, §§ 1 and 2)
Page Revised 10/ 22/ 1991 - 214. 47 -
CHAPTER 23
SWIMMING POOLS
Part 1
Maintenance and Use of Private Swimming Pools
101. Definition
102. Applicability
103. Construction Permit and Approval
104. Enclosure
105. Location on the Property
106. Design and Construction Requirements
107. Portable Pools
108. Property Rights
109. Shielding Lights
110. Unnecessary Noise
111. Electrical Connections
112. Penalties
113. Severability
114. Effective Date
Page revised 10/ 3/ 1988 215 -
23, § 101)
Part 1
Maintenance and Use of Private Swimming Pools
23, § 101)
101. Definition. As used in this Part 1, Swimming Pool or Pool
hereby is defined as an outdoor swimming pool used or intended to be used
by the owner of a residential property and his family, or by the lessee
thereof and his family, and by guests invited without the payment of any
fee. ( Ord. 88- 4, 10/ 3/ 1988, § 1)
102. Applicability. This Part 1 shall apply to all new outdoor
swimming pools hereinafter constructed as well as existing swimming pools,
above -ground or underground, having a depth of eighteen ( 18) inches or more
at any one point. ( Ord. 88- 4, 10/ 3/ 1988, § 2)
103. Construction Permit and Approval.
1. Before any work is commenced on the construction of a swimming
pool or on any alteration, addition, remodeling or other improvement to a
swimming pool, an application for a permit for construction, together with
plans and specifications pertinent to the construction, as well as explanatory
data, shall be submitted to the Board of Supervisors of Douglass
Township. No part of the work shall be commenced until approval has been
granted the applicant by a written permit. The fee for such permit shall
be fifty ($50. 00) dollars. No concrete shall be placed until an inspection
has been made by Douglass Township Zoning Officer or an electrician or
inspector satisfactory to him.
2. All plans, including a plot plan, shall bear the name and seal of
a registered architect or registered engineer. The plot plan shall show
the location of all buildings and the proposed pool on the property,
distances to all property lines in the immediate vicinity of the swimming
pool and dwelling, and the location of wells, sewage disposal systems and
enclosure or fence around the pool.
3. Standard pools, properly designed by established swimming pool
companies and having the approval of a registered engineer or registered
architect shall be acceptable when accompanied by suitable plans and
specifications, including information required above.
Ord. 88- 4, 10/ 3/ 1988, § 3)
104. Enclosure. Every swimming pool shall be completely surrounded
by a fence, wall or similar enclosure not less than four ( 4) feet in
height, which shall be so constructed with no openings, holes or gaps
larger than two ( 2) inches in any dimension. If the fence or wall is a
picket fence, the horizontal dimensions maintained shall not exceed four
4) inches. A dwelling or accessory building may be used as part of such
enclosure.
All gates or door openings through such enclosure shall be equipped
with a self- closing, self -latching device on the pool side for keeping the
gate or door securely closed at all times when not in use, except that the
door of any dwelling or accessory building which forms a part of the
Page added 10/ 3/ 1988 - 216. 1 -
23, § 104, cont' d) ( 23, § 104, cont' d)
enclosure need not be so equipped. The fence shall surround the pool and
the deck area. Fences shall be erected around all existing swimming pools
no later than June 1, 1989.
Ord. 88- 4, 10/ 3/ 1988, § 4)
105. Location on the Property.
1. A swimming pool shall be located at the rear or along the side of
the dwelling where practicable.
2. There shall be a minimum of three ( 3) feet of concrete, stone,
brick or block sidewalk or other all weather surface around all pools,
except portable above -ground pools.
3. Swimming pools or appurtenances including decks and shelters shall
be set back from property lines the same distance as required by the Zoning
Chapter for buildings or structures in the District where such facilities
are located. In no event shall swimming pools or appurtenance including
decks and shelters be considered accessory buildings for purposes of
application of § 113 of the Zoning Chapter ( Chapter 27, Part 1, § 113).
Otherwise, however, swimming pools shall be considered an accessory use..
4. No swimming pool shall be located so as to interfere with the
operation of a well or on- site sewer system, or be located where there is
potential danger of a sewer system discharging into the pool or onto the
adjacent area around the pool.
Ord. 88- 4, 10/ 3/ 1988, § 5)
106. Design and Construction Requirements. The following requirements
shall apply to new swimming pools:
1. Material. The material used for lining a swimming pool shall be
light in color, impervious and shall provide a tight tank with easily _
cleaned surfaces. Uncovered sand or dirt bottoms are prohibited.
2. Walls and Bottoms. All pool walls and bottoms shall be designed
to withstand water pressure from within and to resist the pressure of earth
or ground water when the pool is empty.
3. Steps, Ladders, Handholds. One or more steps, ladders, stepholes
or handholds shall be provided for all pools. The coping of the swimming
pool, if not higher than eight ( 8) inches above the water surface, shall be
considered a handhold.
4. Make -Up Water. Pools shall be equipped with suitable facilities
for adding make- up water as required. There shall be no physical connection
between the water supply line and the pool system. When make- up water
is added to the pool, the inlet shall be at least six ( 6) inches above the
pool water surface.
5. Drainage Outlet. No pool water shall be drained at the curb,
along the gutter line of any street or on the surface of any street.
6. Recirculation. Provision shall be made for complete circulation
of water throughout the pool. The system shall be designed and constructed
so that there is a turnaround at least once every twelve ( 12) hour period.
0
216. 2 - Page added 10/ 3/ 1988
23, § 106( 6), cont' d) 23, § 106( 6), cont' d)
Recirculation systems shall consist of pumping equipment, hair -and - lint
catcher, filters, together with all necessary pipe connections to the pool
inlets and outlets, facilities and pipe connections necessary for backwashing
or cleaning filters.
7. Safety Equipment. Life preservers, ropes and poles shall be
readily available at the pool site.
Ord. 88- 4, 10/ 3/ 1988, § 6)
107. Portable Pools. Above -ground pools are not subject to permit
or design requirements as set forth herein. However, all such pools having
walls less than four ( 4) feet in height shall be enclosed in accordance
with the provisions of this Part 1.
Portable above -ground pools having walls four ( 4) feet or greater in
height are excluded from the fencing requirement only if such pools are
equipped with access ladders which may be raised and locked in a near
vertical position when the pool is unattended. An above -ground pool as
described in this paragraph which is served by a ladder or steps which
cannot be raised and locked to prevent access by small children shall be
enclosed in accordance with § 103.
Page added 10/ 3/ 1988 - 216. 3 -
Ord. 88- 4, 10/ 3/ 1988, § 7)
108. Property Rights. No swimming pool shall be so located or
maintained as to interfere unduly with the enjoyment of the property rights
of others. ( Ord. 88- 4, 10/ 3/ 1988, § 8)
109. Shielding Lights. Lights used to illuminate any swimming pool
shall be so arranged to reflect light away from adjoining premises. ( Ord.
88- 4, 10/ 3/ 1988, § 9)
110. Unnecessary Noise. It shall be unlawful for any person to
make, continue or cause to be made or continued at any swimming pool, any
loud, unnecessary or unusual noise which disturbs, injures or endangers the
comfort, health, peace or safety of others. ( Ord. 88- 4, 10/ 3/ 1988, § 10)
111. Electrical Connections. All electrical installations shall
conform to the specifications of the National Electrical Code. No electric
wires or conductors shall cross, either overhead or underground, on any
part of the swimming pool, nor shall any electric wiring be installed
parallel to any pool wall closer than five ( 5) feet, if underground, unless
enclosed in a rigid conduit, or within five ( 5) feet, if overhead.
All underwater lights must be watertight, self- contained units with
ground connections running from a waterproof junction box to a proper
grounding facility or medium. All underground electric wires supplying
current to said lights within a distance of five ( 5) feet of a pool wall
shall be enclosed in rigid conduits.
All metal fences, enclosures or railings, or other electrically
conductive components near or adjacent to a swimming pool, which might
become electrically charged as a result of contact with broken overhead
conductors, or from any other cause, shall be effectively grounded.
Ord. 88- 4, 10/ 3/ 1988, § 11)
Page added 10/ 3/ 1988 - 216. 3 -
23, § 112) 23, § 112)
112. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate
any provision of this Part, upon conviction thereof in an action brought
before a district justice in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($ 1, 000. 00)
plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed ninety ( 90) days. Each day that a violation of
this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall be found to
have been violated shall constitute a separate offense. ( Ord. 88- 4,
10/ 3/ 1988, § 12; as amended by Ord. 96- 5, 11/ 4/ 1996; and by Ord. 97- 2,
7/ 7/ 1997)
113. Severability. If any sentence, clause, section, or part of
this Part 1 is for any reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or
invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall not
affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses,
sections or parts of this Part 1. It is hereby declared as the intent
of the Board of Supervisors of Douglass Township that this Part l would
have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid
sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included herein.
Ord. 88- 4, 10/ 3/ 1988, § 14)
114. Effective Date. This Part 1 shall become effective on
September 1, 1988. ( Ord. 88- 4, 10/ 3/ 1988, § 15)
216. 4 - Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997
CHAPTER 24
TAXATION, SPECIAL
Part 1
Occupational Privilege Tax
101. Short Title
102. Definitions
103. Levy of Tax
104. Amount of Tax
105. Payment of Tax
106. Duty of Employers
107. Individuals Engaged in More Than One Occupation
108. Employer' s Date of Determination of Liability for Tax
109. Self -Employed Individuals and Employers Beyond the Corporate Limits
of Douglass Township
110. Domestics
111. Tax Imposed in Addition to Other Taxes
112. Powers and Duties of the Collector
113. Employment in More Than One Political Subdivision
114. Suits for Collection
115. Enforcement and Remedies
116. Distress and Sale of Goods
117. Saving Clause
118. Authority
Part 2
Per Capita Tax
201. Tax Levy
202. Collection of Taxes
203. Tax Collector to Give Bond
204. Expenses and Compensation for Collection
205. Discount and Penalty
Part 3
Earned Income Tax
301. Definitions
302. Imposition of Tax
303. Declaration and Payment of Tax
304. Collection at Source
305. Powers and Duties of Income Tax Officer
306. Compensation of Income Tax Officer
307. Suit for Collection of Tax
308. Interest and Penalties
309. Fines and Penalties for Violation of this Part
Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997 - 217 -
310. Payment of Tax to Other Political Subdivisions or States as a Credit
of Deduction - Withholding Tax
311. Collection of Delinquent Earned Income Taxes from Employer, Etc.
312. Collection of Delinquent Earned Income Taxes from the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania
313. Collection of Taxes by Suit
Part 4
Realty Transfer Tax
401. Short Title
402. Authority
403. Definitions
404. Imposition of Tax; Interest
405. Exempt Parties
406. Excluded Transactions
407. Documents Relating to Associations or Corporations and Members,
Partners, Stockholders or Shareholders Thereof
408. Acquired Company
409. Credits Against Tax
410. Extension of Lease
411. Proceeds of Judicial Sale
412. Duties of Recorder of Deeds
413. Statement of Value
414. Civil Penalties
415. Lien
416. Enforcement
417. Regulations
Part 5
Real Estate Taxes
501. Annual Levy
502. Penalty for Late Payment
218 - Page revised 1/ 19/ 1987
24, § 101) ( 24, 5101)
Part I
Occupational Privilege Tax
101. Short Title. This Part shall be known and may be cited as the
Occupational Privilege Tax Ordinance of 1984." ( Ord. 83- 10, 12/ 19/ 1983,
1)
102. Definitions. The following words and phrases when used in this
Part shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, unless the
context clearly indicates a different meaning.
COLLECTOR - the person appointed by Douglass Township to collect the
occupational privilege tax herein levied.
DOUGLASS TOWNSHIP - the area within the corporate limits of Douglass
Township.
EMPLOYER - an individual, partnership, association, corporation,
governmental body, agency or other entity, employing one or more persons on
a salary, wages, commissions or other compensation basis, including a
self- employed person.
HE, HIS, HIM - shall mean and indicate the singular and plural number
as well as male, female and neuter gender.
INDIVIDUAL - any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation,
trade or profession within the corporate limits of Douglass Township.
OCCUPATION - any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or otherwise, carried
on or performed within the corporate limits of Douglass Township, for which
compensation is charged or received, whether by means of salary, wages,
commissions or fees for services rendered.
PRIVILEGE - the exercising or carrying on by any means or manner any
occupation whatsoever as hereinabove defined.
TAX - an occupational privilege tax in the amount of ten dollars
10. 00) per year levied on each engagement in any occupation as heretofore
defined within the corporate limits of Douglass Township.
Ord. 83- 10, 12/ 19/ 1983, § 2)
103. Levy of Tax. Effective January 1, 1984, and continuing thereafter
annually on a calendar year basis, Douglass Township hereby imposes
on each individual engaged in an occupation within the corporate limits of
Douglass Township, for the privilege of engaging in such occupation, an
annual occupation tax in the manner and at the rate hereinafter set forth.
Ord. 83- 10, 12/ 19/ 1983, 53)
104. Amount of Tax. Beginning on the first day of January, 1984,
each engagement in an occupation subject to this tax, as set forth in § 102
hereof, shall be subject to the payment of an occupational privilege tax of
ten dollars ($ 10. 00) to be paid by each individual exercising the privilege
of engaging in any such occupation as hereinbefore defined within the
corporate limits of Douglass Township. ( Ord. 83- 10, 12/ 19/ 1983, § 4)
219 -
24, § 105) 24, § 105)
105. Payment of Tax.
1. Said tax shall be paid to the Collector and shall be due and
payable in accordance with the following schedule:
Taxes Due & Withheld
January 1 - March 1
April 1 - June 30
Reports Due & Payable
April 30
July 31
July 1 - September 30 October 31
October 1 - December 31 January 31
2. If the said tax is not paid within thirty ( 30) days after due
dates specified in § 105( l) a penalty of five percent ( 5%) shall be added
thereto.
Ord. 83- 10, 12/ 19/ 1983, § 5)
106. Duty of Employers. Each employer within Douglass Township is
hereby charged with the duty of collecting and paying over to the Collector
from each employer engaged in his services, the said tax of ten dollars
10. 00) per year upon each individual employed by said employer who
performs services on behalf of said employer within the geographical limits
of Douglass Township or who is engaged in an occupation as hereinbefore
defined, for the benefit of said employer or in the service of employer
within the geographical limits of Douglass Township. Each employer shall
make a return in payment of said tax and is authorized to deduct the said
occupational privilege tax at rates hereby imposed from each employee in
his service, whether said employee is paid by salary, wages or commission.
Each employer within Douglass Township shall prepare and file a return
showing a computation of the tax on a form to be obtained by him from the
tax collector. Each employer in filing his return and making payment by
deduction from salary, wages commissions or other compensation payable by
him to his employees shall be entitled to retain a commission calculated at
two percent ( 2%) on the gross tax due and payable by each individual,
provided that such taxes are collected and paid over by the employer on or
before due dates as listed in § 105( 1). It is further provided that if the
employer fails to file said return and pay said tax, but makes collection
thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him to said employee,
the employer shall be responsible for the payment of the tax in full
without any deductions or commissions, as though the tax had originally
been levied against him. ( Ord. 83- 10, 12/ 19/ 1983, 56)
107. Individuals Engaged in More Than One Occupation. Each individual
who shall hzve: ncrt! Shan one ( 1) occupation within Douglass Township
shall be subject to the payment of the annual occupational tax solely upon
the privilege of engaging in his principal occupation and his principal
occupation employer shall deliver to him a certificate of payment in a form
to be furnished to the employer by the Collector certifying to any other
employer of such individual that said occupational privilege tax has been
paid by the employee to the employer, and in turn remitted by said employer
to the Collector. Any employer receiving said certificate of payment of
occupational tax by another employer by deduction from the said individual
shall not deduct or collect the occupational tax imposed by this Part.
Ord. 83- 10, 12/ 19/ 1983, § 7)
220 -
is
24, § 108) ( 24, § 108)
108. Employer' s Date of Determination of Liabilitv for Tax. Each
employer in Douglass Township shall use his employment records as of
January 1, 1984, and January 1 of each calendar year thereafter, in determining
the number of employees from whom the said occupational privilege
tax shall be deducted and paid over to the Tax Collector. Each employer
who engages the services of an individual in an occupation to be performed
in Douglass Township on or after January 1, 1984 and January 1 of each
calendar year thereafter shall require said employee to furnish to him a
certificate of payment from the Tax Collector showing that the occupational
privilege tax has theretofore been paid. In the event that such employee
has not previously paid his occupational privilege tax, the employer shall
deduct same within thirty ( 30) days after the employee is hired and remit
to the Tax Collector on or before the due dates listed in § 105( 1). ( Ord.
83- 10, 12/ 19/ 1983, § 8)
109. Self -Employed Individuals and Employers Beyond the Corporate
Limits of Douglass Township. Each self- employed individual in Douglass
Township who performs any services of any kind or any type within the
corporate limits of Douglass Township, whether the same be regarded either
as a professional or as a business shall be required to pay an occupational
tax of ten dollars ($ 10. 00) for himself and shall be further required to
deduct and pay over in the manner hereinbefore set forth in 5106, an annual
occupational privilege tax of ten dollars ($ 10. 00) for every individual in
his employ who is engaged in the performance of any occupation or profession
for him within Douglass Township. Any individual engaged in any
occupation within Douglass Township who is the employee of another and who
is subject to this tax, as hereinbefore defined, shall be liable for the
payment of the occupational tax of ten dollars ($ 10. 00) for himself and
shall be treated and regarded as a self- employed individual if the location
of the business of his employer is beyond the corporate limits of Douglass
Township. Each employer whose business is located beyond the corporate
limits of Douglass Township shall be required to furnish to the Collector a
list of all individuals employed by him who exercise the privilege of
engaging in any occupation of any type or character within the corporate
limits of Douglass Township during the fiscal year. ( Ord. 83- 10,
12/ 19/ 1983, § 9)
110. - Domestics. Where a person is engaged in domestic services for
others, and has more than one employer in the performance of such services,
the employer by whom such domestic is employed on January 1, 1984, and
January 1 for each calendar year thereafter, shall be responsible for the
collection and payment of the annual occupational privilege tax for such
domestics to the Collector and in the event the domestic is not employed by
any person on January 1, 1984, and January 1 for each calendar year thereafter,
the said responsibility for deducting and payment over to Douglass
Township of the occupational privilege tax rest upon the employer of the
domestic on the next succeeding date following January 1, 1984 and January
1 for each calendar year thereafter and said employer shall furnish to said
domestic employee a certificate of payment of said occupational tax to be
exhibited to all other employers of said domestic and the production of
said certificate of such other employers shall excuse them from the deduc-
Lion of any further occupational privilege tax from said domestic employee
for the year. ( Ord. 83- 10. 12/ 19/ 1983, § 10)
221 -
24, § 111) 24, § 111)
111. Tax Imposed in Addition to Other Taxes. The tax imposed by
this Part shall be in addition to all other taxes of any kind or nature
heretofore or hereafter levied by Douglass Township. ( Ord. 83- 10,
12/ 19/ 1983, § 11)
5112. Powers and Duties of the Collector.
1. It shall be the duty of the Collector to collect and receive the
taxes, fines and penalties imposed by this Part and to keep a record of the
amount received, the date of such receipt and the names of the employer and
employee paying such taxes;
2. The. Collector hereby is charged with the administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this Part, hereby is empowered to prescribe,
adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to the
administration and enforcement of this Part, including provision for. the
examination of the payroll records of any employer within Douglass Township
and the re- examination and correction of any returns made in compliance
with this Part and the correction of any overpayment. Any person aggrieved
by any decision of the Collector shall have the right to appeal as in other
cases provided;
3. The Collector hereby is authorized to examine the books and
payroll of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return made
by any employer on behalf of his employees, or if no return was made, to
ascertain the occupational privilege tax due. Each employer in Douglass
Township is hereby directed and required to give to the Collector the
means, facilities and opportunities for such examinations and investigations
as are hereby authorized.
Ord. 83- 10, 12/ 19/ 1983, § 12)
113. Employment in More Than One Political Subdivision. In the
event any person subject to the payment of this tax is employed in more
than one ( 1) political subdivision during the year, which levies an occupational
privilege tax, the priority of claim to collect such occupational
privilege tax shall, in accordance with Act 511, be in the following order:
First, the political subdivision in which the ' person maintains his
principal office or is principally employed;
Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and
works, if such tax is levied by that political subdivision;
Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and
which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person' s home. The place of
employment shall be determined as of the date the taxpayer first becomes
subject to the tax during the calendar year.
Ord. 83- 10, 12/ 19/ 1983, § 13)
114. Suits for Collection.
1. In the event that any tax under this Part remains due and unpaid
for sixty ( 60) days after the due dates set forth in § 105( 1), the Collector
may sue for the recovery of any such tax due and unpaid under this Part,
together with interest and penalty.
222 -
C
24, § 114, cont' d) 24, § 114, cont' d)
2. If, for any reason, the tax is not paid when due, interest at the
rate of six percent ( 6%) on the amount of said tax shall be calculated,
beginning thirty ( 30) days after due dates above set forth together with
the penalty set forth in § 105( 2). Where suit is brought for the recovery
of any occupational privilege tax, the individual liable therefor shall, in
addition, be responsible and liable for the cost of collection and the
interest and penalties imposed thereon.
Ord. 83- 10, 12/ 19/ 1983, § 14)
115. Enforcement and Remedies.
1. Enforcement Notice.
A. If it appears to the Township that a violation of this Part
has occurred, the Township shall initiate enforcement proceedings by
sending an enforcement notice as provided in this Section.
B. The enforcement notice shall be sent to the violator and, if
applicable, the owner of record of the parcel on which the violation
has occurred, to any person who has filed a written request to receive
enforcement notices regarding that parcel and to any other person
requested in writing by the owner of record.
C. An Enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
1) The name of the violator and, if applicable, the owner
of record and any other person against whom the Township intends
to take action.
2) The location of the violation and, if applicable, the
property in violation.
3) The specific violation with a description of the
requirements which have not been met, citing in each instance the
applicable provision of this Part.
4) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be completed.
5) That the recipient of the notice has the right to
appeal to the Board of Supervisors within a period of ten ( 10)
days.
6) That the failure to comply with the notice within the
time specified, unless extended by appeal to the Board of Supervisors,
constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly
described.
2. Enforcement Remedies.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has
violated or permitted the violation of the provisions of this Part
shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Township, pay a judgment of not more than six
hundred dollars ($ 600. 00) plus all court costs, including reasonable
attorney fees incurred by the Township as a result thereof. No
judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the
date of determination of a violation by the district justice. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township
Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997 223 -
24, § 115( 2)( A), cont' d) ( 24, § 115( 2)( A), cont' d)
may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil
procedure. Each day that a violation continues or each Section of
this Part which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute
a separate offense.
B. Nothing contained in this Section shall be construed or
interpreted to grant to any person or entity other than the Township
the _right to commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this
Section.
C. District justices shall have initial jurisdiction over
proceedings brought under this Section.`
Ord. 83- 10, 12/ 19/ 1983, § 15; as amended by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986; by Ord.
96- 5, 11/ 4/ 1996; and by Ord. - 97- 2, 7/ 7/ 1997)
116. Distress and Sale of Goods. The Tax Collector shall have power
in case of the neglect or refusal of any person, partnership, association
or corporation to make payment of the amount of the tax due by him, after
sixty ( 60) days from the date of the tax notice, to levy the amount of said
tax, any penalty due thereon and costs, not exceeding costs and charges
allowed constables for similar services by distress and sale of the goods
and chattels of such delinquent, wherever situate, or found, upon giving at
least ten ( 10) days' public notice of such sale by posting ten ( 10) written
or printed notices and by one ( 1) advertisement in a newspaper of general
circulation published in the county. The Tax Collector shall have all
powers regarding the collection of delinquent occupational privilege taxes
as are set forth in the Local Tax Enabling Act. ( Ord. 83- 10, 12/ 19/ 1983,
16)
1.17. Saving Clause. Nothing contained in this Part shall be construed
to empower Douglass Township to levy and collect the tax hereby
imposed on any occupation not within the taxing power of Douglass Township
under the Constitution of the United States and the laws of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this Part shall be
declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, as to any individual, the decision of the Court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of
the tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
Ord. 83- 10, 12/ 19/ 1983, § 18)
118. Authority. This Part is enacted under the Authority of the Act
of December 31, 1965, effective January 1, 1966, being Act No. 511, known
as " The Local Tax Enabling Act of 1965." ( Ord. 83- 10, 12/ 19/ 1983, § 20)
0
224 - Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997
24, § 201) ( 24, § 201)
Part 2
Per Capita Tax
201. Tax Levy.
1. By authority of the Act of General Assembly of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, approved December 31, 1965, Act. No. 511, as amended, known
as " The Local Tax Enabling Act", a per capita tax of five dollars ($ 5. 00)
is hereby levied and assessed for the fiscal year 1973 and for each subsequent
fiscal year thereafter, upon each resident or inhabitant of the
Township of Douglass, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, eighteen ( 18) years
of age and over, which tax shall be in addition to any other taxes levied
and assessed by the Township of Douglass, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
2. Said tax is levied for general revenue purposes of Douglass
Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
Ord. 72- 5, 12/ 6/ 1972, 5§ 1 and 2)
5202. Collection of Taxes. Said tax shall. be collected by the duly
elected or appointed Tax Collector of Township taxes for Douglass Township,
Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, in the manner and at the same time or
times as other Township taxes are collected from all residents or inhabitants
of the Township. ( Ord. 72- 5, 12/ 6/ 1972, § 3)
203. Tax Collector to Give Bond. The Tax Collector shall give bond
for the faithful performance of his duties, secured and conditioned for the
collection and payment of such taxes as provided by law for other Township
taxes. ( Ord. 72- 5, 12/ 6/ 1972, 14)
204. Expenses and Compensation for Collection. The expenses of
collection and compensation of the Tax Collector shall be paid and allowed
as provided by law and as fixed from time to time by the Board of Supervisors
of Douglass Township for the collection of other Township taxes.
Ord. 72- 5, 12/ 6/ 1972, § 5)
205. Discount and Penalty. The amount and periods of discount and
penalty for payment of said tax shall be the same as provided for by law in
the case of other similar Township taxes. ( Ord. 72- 5, 12/ 6/ 1972, § 6)
225 -
24, § 301) ( 24, § 301)
Part 3
Earned Income Tax
301. Definitions. The following words and phrases, when used in
this Part, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
ASSOCIATION - a partnership, limited partnership or any other unincorporated
group of two or more persons.
BUSINESS - an enterprise, activity, profession or any other undertaking
of an unincorporated nature conducted for profit or ordinarily
conducted for profit whether by a person, partnership, association or any
other entity.
CORPORATION - a corporation or joint stock association organized under
the laws of the United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any
other state, territory, foreign country or dependency.
CURRENT YEAR - the calendar year for which the tax is levied.
DOMICILE - the place where one lives and has his permanent home and to
which he has the intention of returning whenever he is absent. Actual
residence is not necessarily domicile, for domicile is the fixed place of
abode which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent rather than
transistory. Domicile is the place in which a man has voluntarily fixed
the habitation of himself and his family, not for a mere special or limited
purpose, but with the present intention of making a permanent home, until
some event occurs to induce him to adopt some other permanent home. In the
case of businesses, or associations, the domicile is that place considered
as the center of business affairs and the place where " its functions are
discharged.
EARNED INCOME - salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses, incentive
payments, fees, tips and other compensation received by a person or his
personal representative for services rendered, whether directly or through
an agent, and whether in cash or in property; not including, however, wages
or compensation paid to persons on active military service, periodic
payments for sickness and disability other than regular wages received
during a period of sickness, disability or retirement or payments arising
under workmen' s compensation acts, occupational disease acts and similar -
legislation, or payments commonly recognized as old -age benefits, retirement
pay or pensions paid to persons retired from service after reaching a
specific age or after a stated period of employment or payments commonly
known as public assistance, or unemployment compensation payments made by
any governmental agency or payments to reimburse expenses or payments made
by employers or labor unions for wage and salary supplemental programs,
including, but not limited to, programs covering hospitalization, sickness,
disability or death, supplemental unemployment benefits, strike benefits,
social security and retirement.
EMPLOYER - a person, partnership, association, corporation, institution,
governmental body or unit or agency, or any other entity employing
one or more persons for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation.
227 -
24, § 301, cont' d) ( 24, 6301, cont' d)
INCOME TAX OFFICER OR OFFICER - person, public employee or private
agency designated by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Douglass •
to collect and administer the tax on earned income and net profits.
NET PROFITS - the net income from the operation of a business, profession,
or other activity, except corporations, after provision for all
costs and expenses incurred in the conduct thereof, determined either on a
cash or accrual basis in accordance with the accounting system used in such
business, profession, or other activity, but without deduction of taxes
based on income.
NONRESIDENT a person, partnership, association or other entity
domiciled outside the Township of Douglass.
PERSON OR INDIVIDUAL- a natural person.
PRECEDING YEAR the calendar year before the current year.
RESIDENT - a person, partnership, association or other entity domiciled
in the Township of Douglass.
SUCCEEDING YEAR - the calendar year following the current year.
TAXPAYER - a person, partnership, association, or any other entity,
required hereunder to file a return of earned income or net profits, or to
pay a tax thereon.
Ord. 24, 12/ 16/ 1966, 51)
302. Imposition of Tax. A tax of one percent ( 1%) is hereby imposed
for general revenue purposes ( a) in the case of a taxpayer, on a calendar
year basis, for the current year, beginning January 1, 1967 and ending
December 31, 1967, and for each year thereafter beginning January 1 of said
year and ending December 31 of said year, and ( b) in the case of a taxpayer
on a fiscal year basis other than a calendar year, for the current year
beginning January 1, 1967 and ending at the end of the taxpayer' s fiscal
year, current on, or beginning on, January 1, 1967, and for each taxpayer' s
fiscal year beginning after January 1, 1967, beginning at the beginning of
said taxpayer' s fiscal year and ending at the ending thereof, upon the
following:
1. Salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation earned for
activities or services, wherever performed or rendered by individual
residents of the Township of Douglass.
2. Salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation earned for
activities or services performed or rendered within the Township of
Douglass by individual nonresidents of the Township of Douglass.
3. Net profiles earned from operation of a business, profession or
other activity wherever carried on by residents of the Township of
Douglass.
4. Net profits earned from operation of a business, profession or
other activity carried on within the Township of Douglass by nonresidents
of the Township of Douglass.
The taxes levied under 1. and 2. herein shall relate to and be imposed •
upon salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation paid by any
employer or on his behalf to a person who is employed by him. The tax
228 -
24, § 302, cont' d) 24, § 302, cont' d)
levied under 3. and 4. herein shall relate to and be imposed upon the net
profits of any business, profession or other activity carried on by any
person or persons.
Ord. 24, 12/ 16/ 1966, 52)
303. Declaration and Payment of Tax.
1. Net Profits -
A. Every taxpayer making net profits shall on or before April
15, 1967, make and file with the Income Tax Officer on a form prescribed
or approved by the Officer a declaration of his estimated net
profits during the period beginning January 1, 1967 and ending
December 31, 1967 and thereafter shall make and file with the said
Officer on or before April 15 of the then current year on said form a
declaration of his estimated net profits during the period beginning
January 1 and ending December 31 of the then current year. Every
taxpayer making net profits shall pay to the Income Tax Officer the
tax due on said estimated net profits for 1967 in four ( 4) quarterly
installments as follows:
The first installment at the time of filing the declaration
and other installments on or before June 15 of the current year,
September 15 of the current year, and January 15 of the succeeding
year, respectively.
B. Any taxpayer who first anticipates any net profit after April
15, 1967 shall make and file on said form a declaration of his estimated
net profits during the period beginning on the date he first
anticipates any net profit and ending December 31 of the then current
year on or before July 15 of the then current year, September 15 of
the then current year, or December 31 of the then current year,
whichever of these dates next follows the date on which the taxpayer
first anticipates such net profit. Any taxpayer who first anticipates
such net profit after April 15, 1967 shall pay the Income Tax Officer,
in equal installments, the tax due thereon, as follows:
1) the first installment at the time of filing the declaration
and the other installments on or before the quarterly
payment dates which remain for the year 1967, after the filing of
the declaration.
2) any taxpayer who first anticipates any net profit after
April 15 of any year beginning after December 31, 1966, shall pay
to the Income Tax Officer, in equal installments, the tax thereon
as follows:
a) the first installment at the time of filing the
declaration and the other installments on or before the
quarterly payment dates which remain for said year after the
filing of the declaration.
C. Every taxpayer on or before April 15, 1968, and on April 15
of every year after 1968 shall make and file with the Income Tax
Officer, on a form prescribed or approved by the Officer, a final
isreturn showing the amount of net profits earned during the period
229 -
24, § 303, cont' d) 24, § 303, cont' d)
beginning January 1, 1967 and ending December 31, 1967 and on each
succeeding year showing the amount of net profits earned during the
period beginning January 1 of the immediately prior year and ending
December 31 of said immediately prior year, the total amount of tax
due thereon and the total amount of tax paid thereon. At the time of
filing the final return, the taxpayer shall pay to the Officer the
balance of tax due or shall make demand for refund or credit in the
case of overpayment.
Any taxpayer may, in lieu of paying the January quarterly installment
of his estimated tax for any year, elect to make and file
with the Income Tax Officer on or before January 31 of the succeeding
year the final return as hereinabove required.
D. The Income Tax Officer may provide for the making and filing
of adjusted declaration of estimated net profits and for the payments
of the estimated tax in cases where a taxpayer who has filed the
declaration hereinabove required anticipates additional net profits
not previously declared, or finds that he has over- estimated his
anticipated net profits.
E. Every taxpayer who discontinues business prior to December 31
of any year shall, within thirty ( 30) days after the discontinuance of
business file his return as hereinabove required and pay the tax due.
2. Earned Income -
A. Annual - Earned Income Tax Return - Every taxpayer, on or
before April 15, 1968, and on or before April 15 of every succeeding
year, shall make and file with the Income Tax Officer on a form
prescribed or approved by the Officer, a final return showing the
amount of earned income received during the period beginning January
1, 1967 and ending December 31, 1967, and for every succeeding year
beginning January 1 of the immediately prior year and ending December
31 of said immediately prior year, the total amount of tax due thereon,
the amount of tax paid thereon, the amount of tax thereon that has
been withheld pursuant to the provisions relating to the collection at
source and the balance of tax due. At the time of filing the final
return, the taxpayer shall pay the balance of the tax due or shall
make demand for refund or credit in the case of overpayment.
B. Earned Income Not Subject to Withholding - Every taxpayer who
is employed for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation and
who received any earned income not subject to the provisions relating
to collection at source, shall make and file with the Income Tax
Officer on a form prescribed or approved by the Officer, a quarterly
return on or before April 30, 1967, July 31, 1967, October 31, 1967,
and January 31, 1968 and for every succeeding year on April 30 of the
then current year, July 31 of the then current year, October 31 of the
then current year, and January 31 of the then current year, setting
forth the aggregate amount of earned income not subject to withholding
by him during the three month periods ending March 31 of the then
current year, June 30 of the then current year, September 30 of the
then current year, and December 30 of the then current year, respectively,
and subject to the tax, together with such other information
230 -
C7
C
24, § 303, cont' d) 24, § 303, cont' d)
as the Officer may require. Every taxpayer making such return shall,
at the time of filing thereof, pay the Officer the amount of tax shown
as due thereon.
Ord. 24, 12/ 16/ 1966, § 3)
304. Collection at Source.
1. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch,
warehouse, or other place of business within the Township of Douglass who
on January 1, 1967 employs one or more persons, other than domestic servants,
- for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation, shall on or
before January 25, 1967, register with the Officer his name and address and
such other information as the Officer may require. Every employer having
an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse or other place of business
within the Township of Douglass who after January 1, 1967 employs for the
first time after that date one or more persons, other than domestic servants,
for a salary, wage, commission, or other compensation shall within
twenty- five ( 25) days after becoming an employer, register with the Officer
his name and address and such other information as the Officer may require.
2. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch,
warehouse, or other place of business within the Township of Douglass, who
employs one or more persons, other than domestic servants, for a salary,
wage, commission, or other compensation, shall deduct at the time of
payment thereof, the tax imposed by this Part on the earned income due to
his employee or employees, and shall, on or before April 30, 1967, July 31,
1967, October 31, 1967, and January 31, 1968 and for every succeeding year
on April 30 of the then current year, July 31 of the then current year,
October 31 of the then current year and January 31 of the then current
year, file a return and pay to the Income Tax Officer the amount of taxes
deducted during the preceding three month periods ending March 31 of the
then current year, June 30 of the then current year, September 30 of the
then current year, and December 31 of the then current year, respectively.
Each such return filed, unless otherwise agreed upon between the Income Tax
Officer and the employer shall show the name and social security number of
each such employee, the earned income of such employee during the preceding
three month period, the tax deducted therefrom, the political subdivision
imposing the tax upon such employee, the total earned income of all such
employees, during such preceding three month period, and- the total tax
deducted therefrom and paid with the return.
Any employer who for two of the preceding four quarterly periods has
failed to deduct the proper tax, or any part thereof, or has failed to pay
over the proper amount of tax to the Income Tax Officer of the Township of
Douglass, may be required by such Officer to file his return and pay the
tax monthly. In such cases, payments of tax shall be made to the Officer,
on or before the last day of the month succeeding the month for which the
tax was withheld.
3. On or before February 28, 1968 and on or before February 28 of
every succeeding year every employer shall file with the Officer:
A. An annual return showing the total amount of earned income
paid, the total amount of tax deducted, and the total amount of tax
paid to the Officer for the period beginning January 1, 1967 and
231 -
24, § 304( 3), cont' d) 24, 5304( 3), cont' d)
ending December 31, 1967 and for every succeeding year for the period
beginning January 1 of the immediately prior year and ending December
31 of the immediately prior year.
B. A return withholding statement for each employee employed
during all or any part of the period beginning January 1, 1967 and
ending December 31, 1967 and for every succeeding year for the period
beginning January 1 of the immediately prior year and ending December
31 of the immediately prior year, setting forth the employee' s name,
address and social security number, the amount of earned income paid
to -the employee during said period, the amount of tax deducted, the
political subdivisions imposing the tax upon such employee, and the
amount of tax paid to the Officer. Every employer shall furnish two
2) copies of the individual return to the employee for whom it is
filed.
4. Every employer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of
any current year shall, within thirty ( 30) days after the discontinuance of
business, file the returns and withholding statements hereinabove required
and pay the tax due.
5. Except as otherwise provided by Section 9 of the Act of the
General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, approved the 31st day
of December, 1965, No. 511, known as " The Local Tax Enabling Act", every
employer who wilfully or negligently fails or omits to make the deductions
required by this § 304 of this Part shall be liable for payment of the taxes
which he was required to withhold to the extent that such taxes have not
been recovered from the employee.
6. The failure or omission of any employer to make the deductions
required by this §304 of this Part shall riot relieve any employee from the
payment of the tax or from complying with the requirements of this Part
relating to the filing of declaration and returns.
Ord. 24, 12/ 16/ 1966, § 4)
305. Powers and Duties of Income Tax Officer.
1. It shall be the duty of the Income Tax Officer to collect and
receive the taxes, fines and penalties imposed by this Part. It shall also
be his duty to keep a record showing the amount received by. him from each
person or business paying the tax and the date of such receipt.
Upon the filing of a final return for any year and its acceptance as
true and correct by the Income Tax Officer, said Officer shall promptly
refund any overpayment of tax demanded therein to the taxpayer.
The Income Tax Officer shall pay all taxes, fines and penalties
collected by him, less ( 1) refunds made to taxpayers for overpayment of tax
and ( 2) a reasonable reserve for refunds which must be made therefrom, to
the Treasurer of the Township of Douglass within one month fifteen ( 15)
days after receipt of the same.
2. The Income Tax Officer, before entering upon his official duties,
shall give and acknowledge a bond to the Township of Douglass in such
amount as may be fixed from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors, which amount shall be equal to the maximum amount of taxes, of is
232 -
24, 305, cont' d) 24, 6305, cont' d)
which sum Officer may be in possession at any given time. If the Board of
Supervisors shall by resolution designate any bond previously given by the
Income Tax Officer as adequate, such previously given bond shall satisfy
the requirements of this subsection.
The bond of the Income Tax Officer shall be joint and several, with
one or more corporate sureties which shall be surety companies authorized
to do business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and duly licensed by the
Insurance Commissioner of said Commonwealth.
Said bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful discharge by said
Officer, his clerks, assistants and appointees of all trusts, confided in
him by virtue of his office, upon the faithful execution of all duties
required by him by virtue of his office, upon the just and faithful accounting
and paying over, according to law, of all moneys and balances
thereof, to be paid to, received or held by him to virtue of his office and
upon the delivery of his successor or successors in office of all books,
papers, documents or other official things held in right of his office.
Said bond shall be taken in the name of the Township of Douglass, and
shall be for the use of the Township of Douglass and for the use of such
other person or persons for whom money shall be collected or received, or
as its or his interest shall otherwise appear, in case of a breach of any
of the conditions of said bond by the acts or neglect of the principal on
the bond.
The Township of Douglass or any person may sue upon said bond in its
or his own name for its or his own use.
The bond shall contain the name or names of the surety companies bound
thereon.
The Township of Douglass may, at any time, upon cause, shown and due
notice to the Officer, and his surety or sureties, require or allow the
substitution or the addition of a surety company acceptable to said Township
for the purpose of making the bond sufficient in amount, without
releasing the surety or sureties first approved from any accrued liability
or previous action on said bond.
The Secretary of the Township of Douglass shall be the custodian of
the bond required to be given by the Income Tax Officer, unless said
Township Secretary is appointed as the Income Tax Officer, in which event,
the Township Treasurer shall be the custodian of the said bond. In the
event that the Secretary is appointed as the Income Tax Officer, and that
the Township Secretary and the Township Treasurer are one and the same
individual, the the Chairman of the Board of Supervisors shall be the
custodian of the said bond.
3. The Income Tax Officer is hereby empowered to prescribe, adopt and
promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to any matter pertaining
to the administration and enforcement of this Part, including
provisions for the re- examination and correction of declarations and
returns, and of payments alleged or found to be incorrect, or as to which
an overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred, and to make refunds in
case of overpayment, for any period of time not to exceed six ( 6) years
subsequent to the date of payment of the sum involved, and to prescribe
233 -
24, § 305( 3), cont' d) ( 24, § 305( 3), cont' d)
forms necessary for the administration of this Part. No rule or regulations
of any kind shall be enforceable unless it has been approved by •
resolution of the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Douglass. A copy
of all such rules and regulations from time to time in force shall be
available for public inspection at the office of the Earned Income Tax
Officer.
4. The Earned Income Tax Officer shall refund, on petition of and
proof by the taxpayer, earned income tax paid on the taxpayer' s ordinary
and necessary business expenses, to the extent that such expenses are not
paid by the taxpayer' s employer.
5. The Income Tax Officer and the agents designated by him are hereby
authorized to examine the books, papers and records of any employer or of
any taxpayer, or of any person whom the Income Tax Officer reasonably
believes. to be an employer or taxpayer, in order to verify the accuracy of
any declaration or return, or if no declaration or return was filed, to
ascertain the tax due. Every employer and every taxpayer and every person
whom the Income Tax Officer reasonably believes to be an employer or
taxpayer, is hereby directed and required to give to the Officer, or to any
agent designated by him, the means, facilities and opportunity for such
examination and investigation, as are hereby authorized.
6. Any information gained by the Income Tax Officer, his agent, or by
any other official or agent of the Township of Douglass, as a result of any
declarations, returns, investigations, hearings or verifications required
or authorized by this Part, shall be confidential, except for official
purposes and except in accordance with a proper judicial order, or as
otherwise provided by law.
7. The Income Tax Officer is hereby authorized to establish different
filing, reporting and payment dates for taxpayers whose fiscal years do not
coincide with the calendar year.
Ord. 24, 12/ 16/ 1966, 95)
306. Cwnpensation of Income Tax Officer. The Income Tax Officer
shall receive such compensation for his services and expenses as determined
from time to time by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Douglass.
Ord. 24, 12/ 16/ 1966, § 6)
307. Suit for Collection of Tax.
1. The Income Tax Officer may sue in the name of the Township of
Douglass for the recovery of taxes due and unpaid under this Part.
2. Any suit brought to recover the tax imposed by this Part shall be
begun within three ( 3) years after such tax is due or within three ( 3)
years after the declaration or return has been filed, whichever date is
later; provided, however, that this limitation shall not prevent the
institution of a suit for the collection of any tax due or determined to be
due in the following cases:
A. Where no declaration or return was filed by any person
although a declaration or return was required to be filed by him under
provisions of this Part, there shall be no limitation. •
234 -
24, § 307, cont' d) 24, § 307, cont' d)
B. Where an examination of the declaration or return filed by
any person, or of other evidence relating to such declaration or
return in the possession of the Officer, reveals a fraudulent evasion
of taxes, there shall be no limitation.
C. In the case of substantial understatement of tax liability of
twenty- five percent ( 25%) or more, and no fraud, suit shall be begun
within six ( 6) years.
D. Where any person has deducted taxes under provisions of this
Part, and has failed to pay the amount so deducted to the Income Tax
Officer, or where any person has wilfully failed or omitted to make
the deductions required by this section, there shall be no limitation.
E. This action shall not be construed to limit the Board of
Supervisors of the Township of Douglass from recovering delinquent
taxes by any other means provided by this Part or by other appropriate
law.
3. The Income Tax Officer may sue for recovery of an erroneous refund
provided such suit is begun within two ( 2) years after making such refund,
except that the suit be brought within five ( 5) years if it appears that
any part of the refund was induced by fraud or misrepresentation of
material fact.
Ord. 24, 12/ 16/ 1966, 57)
308. Interest and Penalties. If, for any reason, the tax is not
paid when due, interest at the rate of six percent ( 6%) per annum on the
amount of said tax, and an additional penalty of one- half of one percent is ( fix) of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction thereof
during which the tax remains unpaid, shall be added and collected.
Where suit is brought for the recovery of any such tax, the person
liable therefor shall, in addition, be liable for the cost of collection
and the interest and penalties therein imposed.
Ord. 24, 12/ 16/ 1966, § 8)
5309. Fines and Penalties for Violation of this Part.
1. Any person who fails, neglects, or refuses to make any declaration
or return required by this Part, any employer who fails, neglects or
refuses to register or to pay the tax deducted from his employees, or
fails, neglects or refuses to deduct or withhold the tax from his
employees, any person who refuses to permit the Officer or any agent
designated by him to examine his books, records and papers, and any person
who knowingly makes any incomplete, false, or fraudulent return or attempts
to do anything whatsoever to avoid the full disclosure of the amount of his
net profits or earned income in order to avoid the payment of the whole or
any part of the tax imposed by this Part, shall, upon conviction thereof
before any district justice of the peace, or court of competent jurisdiction
in the County of Montgomery, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than five hundred dollars ($ 500. 00) for each offense, and costs, and,
in default of payment of said fine and costs shall be imprisoned for a
period not exceeding thirty ( 30) days.
235 -
24, § 309, cont' d) ( 24, § 309, cont' d)
2. Any person who divulges any information which is confidential
under the provisions of this Part,, shall, upon conviction thereof, before
any district justice of the peace, or court of competent jurisdiction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($ 500. 00) for
each offense, and costs, and, in default of payment of said fine and costs
shall be imprisoned for a period not exceeding thirty ( 30) days.
3. The penalties imposed under this section shall be in addition to
any other penalty imposed by any other section of this Part.
4. The failure of any person to receive or procure forms required for
making the declaration or returns required by this Part, shall not excuse
him from making any such declaration or return.
Ord. 24, 12/ 16/ 1966, § 9)
310. Payment of Tax to Other Political Subdivisions or States as a
Credit or Deduction; Withholding Tax. Payment of any tax on salaries,
wages, commissions, other compensation or net profits of business, professions
or other activities to a political subdivision by residents
thereof pursuant to an ordinance or resolution passed or adopted under the
authority of the Act of December 31, 1965, No. 511, known as the " Local Tax
Enabling Act" shall be credited to and allowed as a deduction from the
liability' of such persons for any other like tax respectively on salaries,
wages, commissions, other compensation or on net profits of businesses,
professions or other activities imposed by this Part.
Payment of any tax on income to any political subdivision by residents
thereof pursuant to an ordinance or resolution passed or adopted under the •
authority of the Act of December 31, 1965, No. 511, known as the " Local Tax
Enabling Act," shall, to the extent that such income includes salaries,
wages, commissions, other compensation or net profits of businesses,
professions or other activities, but in such proportion as hereinafter set
forth, be credited to and allowed as a deduction from the liability of such
persons for any other tax on salaries, wages, commissions, other compensation
or on net profits of businesses, professions or other activities
imposed by this Part.
Payment of any tax on income to any political subdivision other than
the school district of which the Township of Douglass forms a part by
residents thereof pursuant to an ordinance or resolution passed or adopted
under the authority of the Act of December 31, 1965, No. 511, known as " The
Local Tax Enabling Act" shall to the extent that such income includes
salaries, wages, commissions, other compensation or net profits of businesses,
professions or other activities, but in such proportions as hereinafter
set forth, be credited to and allowed as a deduction from the
liability of such persons for any other tax on salaries, wages, commissions,
other compensation or on net profits of businesses, professions or
other activities imposed by this Part.
Payment of any tax on income to any state, other than the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, or to any political subdivision of such other state by
residents thereof, pursuant to any State or local law, shall, to the extent
that such income includes salaries, wages, commissions, or other compensation
or net profits of businesses, professions or other activities, but in
236 -
24, § 310, cont' d) ( 24, § 310, cont' d)
such proportions as hereinafter set forth, be credited to and allowed as a
deduction from the liability of such persons for any other tax on salaries,
wages, commissions, other compensation or net profits of businesses,
professions or other activities imposed by this Part, if residents of the
Township of Douglass receive credits and deductions of a similar kind to a
like degree from the tax on income imposed by the other State or political
subdivision. -
Where a credit or a deduction is allowable under the provisions of
this section, it shall be allowed in proportion to the concurrent periods
for which taxes are imposed by the other State or respective political
subdivisions, but not in excess of the amount previously paid for a concurrent
period.
Ord. 24, 12/ 16/ 1966, § 10)
4311. Collection of Delinquent Earned Income Taxes From Employer,
Etc. The Earned Income Tax Officer shall demand, receive and collect from
all corporations, political subdivisions, associations, companies, firms or
individuals employing persons owing delinquent earned income taxes, or
having in possession unpaid commissions or earnings belonging to any person
or persons owing delinquent earned income taxes, upon the presentation of a
written notice in demand under oath or affirmation, containing the name of
the taxable and the amount of tax due. Upon the presentation of such
written notice and demand, it shall be the duty of any corporation, political
subdivision, association, company, firm or individual to collect from
the wages, commissions or earnings of such individual employees then owing
or that shall within sixty ( 60) days thereafter become due, or from any
unpaid commissions or earnings of any such taxable in its or his possession,
or that shall, within sixty ( 60) days thereafter come into its or his
possession, a sum sufficient to pay the respective amount of the delinquent
earned income taxes, and costs, shown upon the written notice or demand,
and to pay the same to the Earned Income Tax Officer of the Township of
Douglass within sixty ( 60) days after such notice shall have been given.
Such corporation, political subdivision, association, firm or individual
shall be entitled to deduct from the moneys collected from each employee
the costs incurred from the extra bookkeeping necessary to record such
transactions, not exceeding two percent ( 2Z) of the amount of money so
collected and paid over to the Earned Income Tax Officer. Upon the failure
of any such corporation, political subdivision, association, company, firm
or individual to deduct the amount of such taxes or to pay the same over to
the Earned Income Tax Officer, less the cost of bookkeeping involved in
such transaction, as above provided, within the time hereby required, such
corporation, political subdivision, association, company, firm or individual
shall forfeit and pay the amount of such tax, for each such taxable
whose taxes are not withheld and paid over, or that are withheld and not
paid over, together with a penalty of ten percent ( 10%) added . thereto, to
be recovered by an action of assumpsit in a suit to be instituted by the
Earned Income Tax Officer, or by the proper authorities of the Township of
Douglass, as debts of like amount are now by law recoverable, except that
such person shall not have the benefit of any stay of execution or exemption
law. ( Ord. 24, 12/ 16/ 1966, § 11; as amended by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986)
i
237 -
24, § 312) ( 24, 5312)
312. Collection of Delinquent Earned Income Taxes from the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania. Upon presentation of a written notice and demand •
under oath or affirmation, to the State Treasurer or any other fiscal
office of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or its boards, authorities,
agencies, or commissions, it shall be the duty of the Treasurer or Officer
to deduct from the wages then owing, or that shall within sixty ( 60) days
thereafter become due to any employee, a sum sufficient to pay the respective
amount of the delinquent earned income taxes and costs shown on the
written notice. The same shall be paid to the Earned Income Tax Officer of
the Township of Douglass within sixty ( 60) days after such notice shall
have been given. ( Ord. 24, 12/ 16/ 1966, § 12)
313. Collection of Taxes by Suit. The Township of Douglass, in
accordance with the authority granted it by Section 21 of the Act of
December 31, 1965, No. 511, known as " The Local Tax Enabling Act", shall
have the power to collect unpaid earned income taxes from the persons owing
such taxes by suit in assumpsit or other appropriate remedy. Upon each
such judgment, execution may be issued without any stay or benefit of any
exemption law. ( Ord. 24, 12/ 16/ 1966, § 13)
238
24, § 401) .'( 24, § 401)
Part 4
Realty Transfer Tax
401. Short Title. This Part shall be known as the " Realty Transfer
Tax Ordinance of Douglass Township." ( Ord. 87- 1, 1/ 19/ 1987, § 1)
402. Authority. A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes
is hereby imposed upon the transfer of real estate or interest in real
estate situated within the Township, regardless of where the documents
making the transfer are made, executed or delivered, or where the actual
settlements on such transfer took place, as authorized by Article XI -D,
Local Real Estate Transfer Tax," 72 P. S. § 8101 et seq. ( Ord. 87- 1,
1/ 19/ 1987, § 2)
403. Definitions.
ASSOCIATION - a partnership, limited partnership or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two ( 2) or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent' s estate.
CORPORATION - a corporation, joint- stock association, business trust
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of this
Commonwealth, the United States or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT - any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title of
real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does
not pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the
contract has been paid or any cancellation thereof unless the consideration
is payable over a period of time exceeding thirty ( 30) years, or
instruments which solely grant, vest or confirm a public utility easement.
Document" shall also include a declaration of acquisition required to be
presented for recording under § 402.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION - a corporation of which at least seventy- five
percent ( 75%) of its assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and
at least seventy- five percent ( 75%) of each class of stock of the
corporation is continuously owned by members of the same family. The
business of agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
A. Recreational activities such as, but not limited to, hunting,
fishing, camping, skiing, show competition or racing;
B. The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game
birds, fish, cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in
sporting or recreational activities;
C. Fur farming;
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations; or
9 E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
Page Corrected 4/ 7/ 1993 - 239 -
24, § 403, cont' d) 24, § 403, cont' d)
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY - any individual, such individual' s
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual' s parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendents of any of . the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing, and the estate of any of the
foregoing. Individuals related by the half- blood or legal adoption shall
be treated as if they were related by the whole -blood.
PERSON - every natural person, association, or corporation. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or
both. The term " person" as applied to associations, shall include the
responsible members or general partners thereof, and as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE
A. All lands, tenements or hereditaments within this
Township, including without limitation, buildings, structures,
fixtures, mines, minerals, oil, gas, quarries, spaces with or without
upper or lower boundaries, trees and other improvements, immovables or
interests which by custom, usage or law pass with a conveyance of
land, but excluding permanently attached machinery and equipment in an
industrial plant.
B. A condominium unit.
C. A tenant -stockholder' s. interest in a cooperative housing
corporation, trust or association under a proprietary lease or
occupancy agreement.
REAL ESTATE COMPANY - a corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, ninety
percent ( 90%) or more of the ownership interest in which is held by
thirty- five ( 35) or fewer persons and which:
A. derives sixty, percent ( 60%) or more of its annual gross
receipts from the ownership or disposition of real estate; or
B. holds real estate, the value of which comprises ninety
percent ( 90%) or more of the value of its entire tangible asset
holdings exclusive of tangible assets which are freely transferable
and actively traded on an established market.
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE
A. Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of
time, the termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a
specific number of years, including without, limitation an estate in
fee simple, life estate or perpetual leasehold; or
B. Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of
years but which, either by reason of the length of the term or the
grant of a right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consist
of a group of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple,
life estate or perpetual leasehold, including without limitation a
leasehold interest or possessory interest under a lease or occupancy
agreement for a term of thirty ( 30) years or more or a leasehold
interest or possessory interest in real estate in which the lessee has
equity.
240 - Page revised 1/ 19/ 1987
24, § 403, cont' d). 24, $ 403, cont' d)
D. The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any
executory agreement for the construction of buildings, structures- or
other permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and
other persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor of a
related corporation, association or partnership and the grantee
existing before or effective with the transfer.
Ord. 87- 1 1/ 19/ 1987, § 3)
404. Imposition of Tax; Interest.
1. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents
for recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording, shall be subject
to pay for and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof, a tax at
the rate of one percent ( 1%) of the value of the real estate represented by
such document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the
document is presented for recording or within thirty ( 30) days of
acceptance of such document or within thirty ( 30) days of becoming an
acquired company.
Page revised 1/ 19/ 1987 - 241 -
TOWNSHIP - Douglass Township, Montgomery county, Pennsylvania
TRANSACTION - the making, executing, delivering, accepting or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE
A. In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm' s
length for actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual
consideration therefor, paid or to be paid, including liens or other
encumbrances thereon existing before the transfer and not removed
thereby, whether or not the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and
ground rents, or a commensurate part thereof where such liens or other
encumbrances and ground rents also encumber or are charged against
real estate: Provided, That where such documents shall set forth a
nominal consideration, the " value" thereof shall be determined from
the price set forth in or actual consideration for the contract of
sale;
B. In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or
upon the foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions
without consideration or for consideration less than the actual
monetary worth of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy
agreement, a leasehold or possessory interest, any exchange of
properties, or the real estate of an acquired company, the actual
monetary worth of the real estate determined by adjusting the assessed
value of the real estate for local real estate tax purposes for the
common level ratio factor developed by the Pennsylvania Department of
Revenue for Pennsylvania realty transfer tax base calculations;
C. In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate,
the value of which is not determinable under clause ( A) or ( B), the
actual monetary worth of such interest; or
D. The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any
executory agreement for the construction of buildings, structures- or
other permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and
other persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor of a
related corporation, association or partnership and the grantee
existing before or effective with the transfer.
Ord. 87- 1 1/ 19/ 1987, § 3)
404. Imposition of Tax; Interest.
1. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents
for recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording, shall be subject
to pay for and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof, a tax at
the rate of one percent ( 1%) of the value of the real estate represented by
such document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the
document is presented for recording or within thirty ( 30) days of
acceptance of such document or within thirty ( 30) days of becoming an
acquired company.
Page revised 1/ 19/ 1987 - 241 -
24, § 404( 2)) 24, § 404( 2))
2. The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the recorder of deeds whereon •
the date of the payment of the tax, amount of the tax and the signature of
the collecting agent shall be set forth.
3. It is the intent of this Part that the entire burden of the tax
imposed herein on a person or transfer shall not exceed the limitations
prescribed in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31,' 1965, P. L.
1257, 53 P. S. § 6901 et seg., so that if any other political subdivision'
shall impose or hereafter shall impose such tax on the same person or
transfer then the tax levied by the Township under the authority of that
Act shall during the time such duplication of the tax exists, except as
hereinafter otherwise provided, be one- half ( 1/ 2) of the rate and such
one- half ( 1/ 2) shall become effective without any action on the part of the
Township provided, however, that the Township and any other political
subdivision which impose such tax on the same person or transfer may agree
that, instead of limiting their respective rates to one- half ( 1/ 2) of the
rate herein provided, they will impose respectively different rates, the
total of which shall not exceed the maximum rate permitted under " The Local
Tax Enabling Act."
4. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the
rate in effect at the time the taxis due, shall be added and collected.
405. Exempt Parties. _ The United States, the Commonwealth or any of
their instrumentalities, agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt
from payment of the tax imposed by this Part. The exemption of such
governmental bodies shall not, however, relieve any other party to a
transaction from liability for the tax. ( Ord. 87- 1, 1/ 19/ 1987, § 5)
406. Excluded Transactions. The tax imposed by § 404 shall not be
imposed upon:
A. A transfer to the Commonwealth, or to any of its
instrumentalities, agencies or political subdivisions, by gift,
dedication or deed in lieu of condemnation or deed or confirmation in
connection with condemnation proceedings, or a reconveyance by the
condemning body of the property condemned to the owner of record at
the time of condemnation which reconveyance may include property line
adjustments provided said reconveyance is made within one ( 1) year
from the date of condemnation,
B. A document which the Township is prohibited from taxing under
the Constitution or statutes of the United States.
C. A conveyance to a municipality, township, school district or
county pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, township, school
district or county of a tax delinquent property at sheriff sale or tax
claim bureau sale.
D. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which
corrects or confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does
not extend or limit existing record legal title or interest.
242 Page revised 1/ 19/ 1987
24, § 406( E)) 24, § 406( E))
E. A transfer or division in kind for no or nominal actual
consideration of property passed by testate or intestate succession
and held by covenants; however, if any of the parties take shares
greater in value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the
excess.
F. A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced, provided the
property or interest therein subject to such transfer was acquired by
the husband and wife or husband or wife prior to the granting of the
final decree in divorce, between parent and child or the spouse of
such child, between brother or sister or spouse of a brother or sister
and brother or sister or the spouse of a brother or sister, and
between a grandparent and grandchild or the spouse of such grandchild,
except that a subsequent transfer by the grantee within one ( 1) year
shall be subject to tax as if the grantor were making such transfer.
G. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal representative
of a decedent to the decedent' s devisee or heir.
H. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a
trustee of an ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property
would be exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to
all of the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries
are contingent or specifically named. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the recorder of deeds is presented with a copy of the
trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all possible
beneficiaries.
I. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a
trustee to a beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
J. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from
trustee to successor trustee.
K. A transfer ( i) for no or nominal actual consideration between
principal and agent or straw party; or ( ii) from or to an agent- or
straw party where, if the agent or straw party were his principal, no
tax would be imposed under this Part.
Where the document by which title is acquired by a grantee or
statement of value fails to set forth that the property was acquired
by the grantee from, or for the benefit of, his principal, there is a
rebuttable presumption that the property is the property of the
grantee in his individual capacity if the grantee claims an exemption
from taxation under this clause.
L. A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the department reasonably determines that the
primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is avoidance
of the tax imposed by this Part.
M. A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate
held of record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the association
in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of the
Page added 1/ 19/ 1987 - 242. 1 -
24, § 406( M), cont' d) ( 24, § 406( M), cont' d)
real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the corporation or
the interest in the association has been held by the grantee for more
than two ( 2) years.
N. A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt of the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
0. A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if: ( i)
the grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary
purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding, processing,
publishing, research and development, transportation, energy conversion,
energy production, pollution control, warehousing or agriculture;
and ( ii) the agency or authority has the full ownership interest
in the real estate transferred.
P. A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide
mortgage in default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to
a judicial sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder
of a mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
Q. Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies
or persons holding title for a religious organization if such real
estate is not being or has not been used by such transferor for
commercial purposes.
R. A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax exempt
status pursuant to Section 501( c)( 3) of the Internal Revenue Code of
1954, ( 68A Stat. 3, 26 U. S. C. § 501( c)( 3)) and which has as its primary
purpose preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic,
agricultural or open space opportunities.
S. A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture
to a family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directlyownsat least seventy- five percent ( 75%) of each class of the
stock thereof.
T. A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
U. A transaction wherein the tax is one dollar ($ 1. 00) or less.
V. Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural
gas or minerals and assignments thereof.
In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true,
full and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the Statement of
Value. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of Value
may be submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals, the Statement of Value may be limited to an explanation of the
reason such document is not subject to tax under this Part.
Ord. 87- 1, 1/ 19/ 1987, § 6)
242. 2 - Page added 1/ 19/ 1987
24, § 407) ( 24, § 407)
407. Documents Relating to Associations or Corporations and Members,
Partners, Stockholders or Shareholders Thereof. Except as otherwise
provided in §406, documents which make, confirm or evidence any transfer or
demise of title to real estate between associations or corporations and the
members, partners, shareholders or stockholders thereof are fully taxable.
For the purposes of this section, corporations and associations are entities
separate from their members, partners, stockholders and shareholders.
Ord. 87- 1, 1/ 19/ 1987, § 7)
408. Acquired Company.
1. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change does not
affect the continuity of the company; and of itself or together with prior
changes has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly, ninety
percent ( 907) or more of the total ownership interest in the company within
a period of three ( 3) years.
2. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a
family farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary
or involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition or
transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation under
this Part.
3. Within thirty ( 30) days after becoming an acquired company, the
company shall present a declaration of acquisition with the recorder of
each county in which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary
stamps and recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real
estate holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Declaration of Acquisition may be submitted
for this purpose.
Ord. 87- 1, 1/ 19/ 1987, § 8)
409. Credits Against Tax.
1. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed'
real estate broker which property was transferred to him within the preceding
year as consideration for the purchase of other residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to him
shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due upon the transfer.
2. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property
which was transferred to the builder within the preceding year as a consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property,
a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to
the builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
3. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the
grantor, a credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall
be given the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
4. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
Page added 1/ 19/ 1987 - 242. 3 -
24, § 409( 4), cont' d) ( 24, § 409( 4). cont' d)
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of the tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
5. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given
under this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is
greater than the amount of tax due, no refund or carryover credit shall be
allowed.
Ord. 87- 1, 1/ 19/ 1987, § 9)
410. Extension of Lease In determining the term of a lease, it
shall be presumed that a right or option to renew or extend a lease will be
exercised if the rental charge to the lessee is ' fixed or if a method for
calculating the rental charge is established. ( Ord. 87- 1, 1/ 19/ 1987, § 10)
411. Proceeds of Judicial Sale. The tax herein imposed shall be
fully paid, and have priority out of the proceeds of any judicial sale of
real estate before any other obligation, claim, lien, judgment, estate or
costs of the sale and of the writ upon which the sale is made except the
state realty transfer tax, and the sheriff, or other officer, conducting
said sale, shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the first, moneys paid to
him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale are insufficient
to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be liable for the
remaining taxa ( Ord. 87- 1, 1/ 19/ 1987, § 11)
412. Duties of Recorder of Deeds. -
1. As provided in 16 P. S. § 11011- 6, as amended by Act of July 7,
1983, ( P. L. 40, No. 21), the recorder of deeds shall be the collection -
agent for the local realtytransfer tax, including any amount payable to
Township based on a redetermination of the amount of tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax,
without' compensation fromtheTownship.
2. In order to ascertain the amount of the taxes due when the property
is located in more than one political subdivision, the recorder shall
not accept for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a statement
of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
3. On or before the tenth of each month, the recorder shall pay over
to the Township all local realty transfer taxes collected, less two percent
2%) for use of the county, together with a report containing the
information as is required by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting
collections of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The two percent ( 2%)
commission shall be paid to the county.
4. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the recorder shall rerecord' the deed or
record the additional realty' transfer tax form only when both the state and
local amounts and a rerecording or recording fee has been tendered.
Ord. 87- 1, 1/ 19/ 1987, § 12)
413. Statement of Value. Every document lodged with or presented to
the recorder of deeds for recording, shall set forth therein and as a part
of such document the true, full and complete value thereof, or shall be
242. 4 - Page added 1/ 19/ 1987
24, § 413, cont' d) ( 24, § 413, cont'"d)
accompanied by a statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this Part. A copy of the Pennsylvania
Realty Transfer Tax Statement of Value may be submitted for this purpose.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to any excludable real
estate transfers which are exempt from taxation based on family
relationship. Other documents presented for the affixation of stamps shall
be accompanied by a certified copy of the document and statement of value
executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction showing
such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value thereof
or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under this
Part. ( Ord. 87- 1 1/ 19/ 1987, § 13)
414. Civil Penalties.
1. If any part of any underpayment of taxes imposed by this Part is
due to fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to fifty
percent ( 507) of the underpayment.
2. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this
ordinance on the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such
failure is due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax five
percent ( 57) of the amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than
one ( 1) month, with an additional five percent ( 57) for each additional
month or fraction thereof during which such failure continues, not
exceeding fifty percent ( 507) in the aggregate.
Ord. 87- 1. 1/ 19/ 1987, § 14)
415. Lien. The tax imposed by this Part shall become a lien upon
the lands, tenements or hereditaments, or any interest therein, lying,
being situated, wholly or in part within the boundaries of the
Township, which lands, tenements, hereditaments or interest therein, are
described in or conveyed by or transferred by the deed which isthesubject
of the tax imposed, assessed and levied by this Part, said lien to begin at
the time when the tax under this Part is due and payable, and continue
until discharged by payment, or in accordance with the law, and the
solicitor is authorized to file a municipal or tax claim in the Court of
Common Pleas of Montgomery County, in accordance with the provisions of the
Municipal Claims and Liens Act of 1923, 53 P. S. § 7101 et sec., its
supplements and amendments. ( Ord. 87- 1. 1/ 19/ 1987, § 15)
416. Enforcement. All taxes imposed by this Part together with
interest and penalties prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other
debts of like character are recovered. ( Ord. 87- 1, 1/ 19/ 1987, § 16)
417. Regulations. The Treasurer of the Township is charged with
enforcement and collection of tax and is empowered to promulgate and
enforce reasonable regulations for enforcement and collection of the tax.
The regulations which have been promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department
of Revenue under 72 P. S. Section 8101- C et seq., are incorporated into and
made a part of this Part. ( Ord. 87- 1, 1/ 19/ 1987, § 17)
Page added 1/ 19/ 1987 - 242. 5 -
24, § 501) ( 24, 9501)
Part 5
Real Estate Taxes
501. Annual Levy.
1. Real estate taxes shall be levied annually by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors.
2. In addition to other real estate taxes, a uniform tax of 10 mills
per dollar ( 100 cents on each $ 100) on the assessed valuation of all and
every parcel of real estate within the Township of Douglass, shall be, and
the same hereby is levied and assessed. The said tax being levied for the
purpose of purchasing road machinery in accordance with the Act of Assembly
of May 1, 1933, P. L. 103, Art. IX, # 912, Added 1951, May 24, P. L. 370, # 12.
Ord. 58- 1, 1/ 1/ 1959; as amended by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986; and by Res.
121586( 1), December 15, 1986)
502. Penalty for Late Payment. A penalty of ten percent ( 10%) shall
be charged against all taxpayers who shall fail to make payment of taxes
levied on real property within said Township for four ( 4) months after the
date of the tax notice. Said penalty shall be added to the taxes and
collected by the Tax Collector. ( Ord. 80- 1, 2/ 18/ 1980)
Page revised 1/ 19/ 1987 - 243 -
CHAPTER 25
TREES
Reserved to accommodate future ordinances)
245 -
CHAPTER 26
WATER
Part 1
Private Wells
101. Purpose
102. Definitions
103. Well Drilling Regulations
104. Certification of Well Construction and Permits
105. Additional Regulations
106. Fee Schedule
107. Penalties
Part 2
Water Conservation
201. General Policy
202. Water Conservation Performance Standards for Plumbing Fixtures and
Fittings
203. Special Provisions
204. Official Review and Modification
205. Penalties
Page Revised 4/ 7/ 1993 - 247 -
26, § 101) ( 26, § 101)
Part I
SPrivateWells
101. Purpose.
1. To promote and protect the general health and welfare of the
residents of the Township by conserving the supply of underground waters
and preventing the pollution thereof.
2. To establish minimum construction standards for all private water
wells constructed in Douglass Township on or after the effective date of
this Part.
Ord. 85- 6, 11/ 18/ 1985, § 1)
102. Definitions. The terms listed below as used in this Part shall
have the following meanings:
ANNULAR SPACE - the space between two circular objects, one of which
surrounds the other, such as the space between a casing pipe and liner pipe
or between casing pipe and excavation.
BOARD - the Douglass Township Board of Supervisors.
CAPACITY - except in the case of free flowing wells, the daily
capacity of the pumps permanently installed.
DRILLING - all action necessary for the construction of wells such as
S drilling, boring, cording, digging or driving. Drilling of blast holes in
quarries or to core holes three and one- half inches ( 31") or less in
diameter drilled for exploration or investigation. -
GROUT or GROUTING MATERIAL - a stable impervious, bonding material
which is capable of providing a watertight seal between the casing and the
formation throughout the depth required to protect against objectionable
matter, and which is reasonably free of shrinkage.
INDIVIDUAL WATER SUPPLY - water supply on the property of a private
home and servicing said home.
PERSON - a corporation, partnership, municipal authority, association
or individual.
SEMI- PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY - a water supply which serves one or several
facilities such as industrial or commercial establishments, parks, camps,
hotels, motels, schools, institutions, eating or drinking establishments,
where the water supply is owned by the owner of the facility or facilities.
A water supply servicing two or more dwelling units.
UNDERGROUND WATERS - waters of underground streams, channels, artesian
basins, or other bodies of water in or under the ground, whether
percolating or otherwise.
WELL - any excavation that is drilled, cored, bored, washed, driven,
dug, or otherwise constructed for the location, diversion or acquisition of
underground waters or charging of water into underground strata.
Ord. 85- 6, 11/ 18/ 1985, § 2)
249 -
26, § 103)
103. Well Drilling Regulations.
26, § 103)
1. No well may be drilled within the Township of Douglass except in
strict accordance with the provisions of this Part and the well drilling
regulations adopted by the Board hereunder. Such regulations shall be
prepared and approved by resolution of the Board and when so approved shall
have the same force and effect as provisions of this Part. The said
regulations may be amended, modified, or repealed by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors.
2. Location.
A. The source of supply shall be from a water -bearing formation
drawn not less than twenty feet ( 20') from the ground surface. All
sources of water obtained less than forty feet ( 40') in depth shall
include a bacteria test of the water supply and a copy of the well
driller' s log. This information shall be a part of the Certification
of Well Construction hereinafter required. [ Ord. 86- 2]
B. Drilled and driven wells shall be located a minimum distance
from sources of pollution as required by the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Resources.
3. Construction.
A. Casing the well shall have a water -tight and durable wrought
iron, steel or other type of casing approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources with a minimum thickness of 3116
inches. The sections shall be joined together by threaded couplings
or joints or by welding or any other water -tight joint or coupling.
B. The casing shall be carried to a minimum depth of twenty feet
20'), of which at least five feet ( 51)
shall penetrate into the
bedrock or other impervious strata. All drilled wells shall penetrate
bedrock or other impervious material at least five feet ( 5'). Driven
wells shall be provided with a drop pipe or effective casing. [ Ord.
86- 2' 1
4. An annular space shall be provided between the well casing and the
earth formation of a radius of at least one inch ( 1") greater than the
casing radius, excluding coupling for internal pressure grouting; or two
inches ( 2") greater than the casing radius, excluding coupling for external
grouting. The annular space shall be completely filled with impervious
grout to the top of the water -bearing formation, bedrock, or other impervious
strata, or otherwise to a depth of at least twenty feet ( 20'). The
grout shall be placed upward from the bottom of the space to be grouted to
the top.
5. The casing shall be effectively sealed against entrance of water
from water -bearing formations which are subject to pollution through which
the casing may pass. If casings of smaller diameter are used in the lower
portions of the well effective watertight seals shall be provided between
the casings where they telescope. In such instances, sections of the well
casing shall telescope for a minimum distance of four feet ( 4').
250 -
26, § 103, cont' d) ( 26, § 103, cont' d)
6. The ground surface at the well shall be elevated above the adjacent
land level and graded to drain away for at least four feet ( 4') in
all directions from the casing. The casing shall extend above the ground
surface for at least twelve inches ( 12") and shall be effectively sealed
against the entrance of contamination.
Ord. 85- 6, 11/ 18/ 1985, § 3; as amended by Ord. 86- 2, 3/ 3/ 1986)
104. Certification of Well Construction and Permits.
1. The well contractor must complete a " Certification of Well Construction"
upon completion of the work. One copy shall be delivered to
Douglass Township and one copy to the owner. No well may be used until
Douglass Township has received a Certification of Well Construction indicating
that all provisions of this Part have been complied with. A water
well completion report as required by the Bureau of Topographic and
Geologic Survey may be used in place of the Certification of Well Construction
when approved by the Township Engineer.
2. Permits - It shall be unlawful for any person to locate, drill, or
have drilled any well; or alter an existing well until a permit for such
location, drilling or alteration shall have been issued by the duly appointed
administrative officer.
3. Application and Forms - Where the capacity of any new well or
wells, or the total capacity of old and new wells on or for use of one
property in excess of ten thousand ( 10, 000) gallons per day or where close
spacing of wells in an area so dictates in taking action on applications,
the. Board shall have the authority to impose such conditions and make such
requirements and limitations as may in their opinion be necessary to
protect the people of the Township and the applicant and may issue limited
and revokable permits for such wells.
Ord. 85- 6, 11/ 18/ 1985, § 4)
105. Additional Regulations.
1. Wells for Waste Disposal - No well shall be drilled nor any
existing wells used for the purpose of disposal of domestic or industrial
wastes.
2. Sealing of Abandoned Wells - The owner of any well shall upon
abandonment of any existing well or test hole effectively seal and fill
such wells and test holes with impervious grout to the top of the casing.
A well not in operation for three ( 3) or more years and improperly maintained
to prevent contamination may be deemed to have been abandoned.
Ord. 85- 6, 11/ 18/ 1985, § 5)
106. Fee Schedule. A fee schedule shall be established in the rules
and regulations adopted under the terms of this Part. ( Ord. 85- 6,
11/ 18/ 1985, § 6)
107. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate
any provision of this Part, upon conviction thereof in an action brought
before a district justice in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than one thousand dollars
1, 000. 00) plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs,
Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997 - 251 -
26, § 107, cont' d) 26, § 107, cont' d)
to a term of imprisonment not to exceed ninety ( 90) days. Each day that a
violation of this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall
be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense. Ord.
85- 6, 11/ 18/ 1985, § 7; as amended by Ord. 86- 10, 12/ 1/ 1986; by Ord. 96- 5,
11/ 4/ 1996; and by Ord. 97- 2, 7/ 7/ 1997)
252 - Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997
26, § 201) ( 26, § 201)
Part 2
Water Conservation
201. General Policy. No water shall be provided for internal or
external use to any residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural,
recreational, governmental or public building or structure of any kind
which is constructed or remodeled and in which plumbing, water piping or
water fixtures are installed, extended or altered in any way, and for which
construction a permit is required to be obtained from Douglass Township ( or
would be required but for an exemption from a permit requirement for public
or governmental agencies) unless the new, extended or altered plumbing,
water piping and other water using fixtures therein conform to the requirements
and standards of § 202 of this Part. The provisions of this Part
shall apply to any such building or structure for which such a building
permit is issued, or would otherwise be required to be issued but for such
an exemption, on or after the effective date of this Part. ( Ord. 92- 2,
5/ 4/ 1992, § 1)
202. Water Conservation Performance Standards for Plumbing Fixtures
and Fittings.
1. Water Closets and Associated Flushing Mechanisms. The water
consumption of water closets shall not exceed an average of one and six
tenths ( 1. 6) gallons per flush cycle over a range of test pressures from
twenty ( 20) to eighty ( 80) psi. The fixture shall perform in accordance
with the test requirements of the ANSI A112. 19. 2M and ANSI A112. 19. 6M.
2. Urinals and Associated Flushing Mechanisms. Urinal water consumption
shall not exceed an average of one and one- half ( 1. 5) gallons per
flush cycle over a range of test pressures from twenty ( 20) to eighty ( 80)
psi. The fixtures shall perform in accordance with the test requirements
of ANSI A112. 19. 2M and ANSI A112. 19. 6M.
3. Showerheads. Showerhead discharge rates shall not exceed three
3. 0) gallons of water per minute over a range of test pressures from
twenty ( 20) to eighty ( 80) psi. The fixture shall perform in accordance
with the test requirements of ANSI A112. 18. 1M.
4. Faucets. Sink and lavatory faucet discharge rates shall not
exceed three ( 3. 0) gallons of water per minute over a range of test pressures
from twenty ( 20) to eighty ( 80) psi. The fixture shall perform in
accordance with the test requirements of ANSI A112. 18. 1M.
Ord. 92- 2, 5/ 4/ 1992, § 2)
203. Special Provisions.
1. Special Purpose Equipment. The performance standards of § 202
shall not apply to fixtures and fittings such as emergency showers,
aspirator faucets and blowout fixtures that, in order to perform a
specialized function, cannot meet the specified standards.
Page Added 4/ 7/ 1993 - 252. 1 -
26, § 203( 2)) ( 26, § 203( 2))
2. Exemptions. Any person( s) may apply to Douglass Township for an
exemption to the terms of this Part, which may be granted by the Board of
Supervisors upon proof that some other device, system or procedure will
save as much or more water as those set forth herein, or that those set
forth herein cannot be complied with, without undue hardship.
Ord. 92- 2, 5/ 4/ 1992,,§ 3)
204. Official Review and Modification. The Board of Supervisors
may, from time to time, modify, add to or remove from the standards and
restrictions herein. ( Ord. 92- 2, 5/ 4/ 1992, § 4)
205. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate
any provision of this Part, upon conviction thereof in an action brought
before a district justice in the manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than one . thousand dollars ($ 1, 000. 00)
plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed ninety ( 90) days. Each day that a violation of
this Part continues or each Section of this Part which shall be found to
have been violated shall constitute a separate offense. ( Ord. 92- 2,
5/ 4/ 1992, § 5; as amended by Ord. 96- 5, 11/ 4/ 1996; and by Ord. 97- 2,
717/ 1997)
252. 2 - Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997
t
CHAPTER 27
ZONING
Part 1
General Provisions
100. Short Title
101. Statement of Community Development Objectives
102. Establishment of Controls
103. Establishment of Districts and Other Regulations
104. Adoption of Zoning Map
105. District Boundary Lines
106. Lot Sizes
107. Lots of Record, Nonconforming
108. Reduction of Lot Area
109. Obstruction to Vision at Intersections Prohibited
110. Access to Public Street
111. Existing Interior Lots
112. Accessory Uses
113. Minimum Setback for Accessory Buildings
114. Projections into Required Yards
115. Height Exceptions
116. Minimum Habitable Floor Area
117. Manufactured Home and Manufactured Home Parks
118. Exceptions for Public Utility Corporations and Township
119. Condominium Ownership Plans
120. Prohibition of Public Nuisances
121. Garage or Yard Sales
122. Heliports _ 7
123. Required Permit
1
124. tey
125. Interpretation of Regulations:.
126. Severability
127. Repealer
128. Rear Lotting
129. On -Lot Sewage Disposal
130. Commercial Vehicles in Residential Districts
131. Adult Use Standards and Criteria
132. Review by Planning Agency; Approval or Disapproval by Board of
Supervisors
133. Keeping of Livestock
134. Provisions for Day Care Facilities
135. Provisions for Home Occupations
136. Regulations for Communications Antennae
200. Language Interpretations
201. Definitions
Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997
Part 2
Definitions
253 -
Part 3
R- 1 Agricultural - Residential District
300. Declaration of Legislative Intent
301. Permitted Uses
302. Area, Width, Yard and Building Coverage Regulationsfor Single -
Family Detached Dwellings
303. Height Regulations
304. Signs
305. Parking
Part 3A
Reserved for future use)
Part 4
R- 2 Residential District
400. Declaration of Legislative Intent
401. Permitted Uses
402. Area, Width, Yard and Building Coverage Regulations
403. Height Regulations
404. Sewer and Water Facilities
405. Signs
406. Parking
Part 5
R- 3 Residential District
500. Declaration of Legislative Intent
501. Permitted Uses
502. Minimum Tract Size
503. Density
504. Dimensional Standards
505. Attachment of Dwelling Units and Buildings
506. General Regulations
507. Parking Regulations
508. Open Space Requirements
509. Signs
510. Lighting Facilities
511. Buffer Requirements
Part 6
R - 4 - Residential District
600. Declaration of Legislative Intent
254 - Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996
601. Permitted Uses
602. Minimum Tract Size
603. Density
604. Dimensional Standards
605. General Regulations
606. Parking Requirements
607. Open Space Requirements
608. Signs
609. Lighting Facilities
610. Buffer Requirements
Part 7
Cluster Development Regulations
700. Declaration of Legislative Intent
701. Prerequisite for Cluster Development
702. Density/ Number of Lots
703. Dimensional Standards
704. Open Space Regulations
705. Water Facilities
706. General Regulations
707. Signs
708. Lighting Facilities
709. Parking
0 Part 8
In - Institutional District
800. Declaration of Legislative Intent
801. Permitted Uses
802. Class One Permitted Uses
803. Class Two Permitted Uses
804. Class Three Permitted Uses
805. Additional Use Regulations
806. Dimensional Standards
807. Maximum Building Height
808. Building Size and Spacing and Impervious Coverage
809. Parking and Service Areas
810. Additional Controls
811. Criteria for Considering Rezoning Applications
812. Buffer Requirements
813. Landscape Planting
Part 9
LC - Limited Commercial District
900. Declaration of Legislative District
1*
Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996 - 255 -
901. Permitted Uses
902. Special Exception
903. Standards and Criteria for Special Exceptions and Conditional Uses
904. Dimensional Standards
905. Parking Capacity Regulations
906. Parking and Vehicular Access Design Standards
907. Standards for Conversions
908. Sewer and Water Facilities
909. Other Development Regulations
910. Buffer Requirements
Part 10
CC - Convenience Commercial District
1000. Declaration of Legislative Intent
1001. Permitted Uses
1002. Planned Development
1003. Dimensional Standards
1004. Vehicular Access Standards
1005. Additional Standards for Gasoline Stations
1006. General Regulations
1007. Parking Requirements
1008. Sewer and Water Facilities
1009. Buffer Requirements
Part 11
GC - General Commercial District
1100. Declaration of Legislative Intent
1101. Use Regulations
1102. Class One Permitted Uses
1103. Class Two Permitted Uses
1104. Class Three Permitted Uses
1105. Class Four Permitted Uses
1106. Class Five Permitted Uses
1107. Dimensional Standards for Class One Through Four Permitted Uses
1108. Dimensional Standards for Class Five Permitted Uses
1109. Satellite Use Regulations
1110. Vehicular Access Standards
1111. Lot Line Developments
1112. General Regulations
1113. Sewer and Water Facilities
1114. Parking Requirements
1115. Buffer Requirements
Part 12
M- 1 Office and Light Industrial District
1200. Declaration of Legislative Intent
256 - Page Revised 10/ 22%1991
1201. Permitted Uses
1202. Performance Standards
1203. [ Repealed]
1204. Dimensional Standards
1205. General Regulations
1206. Parking
1207. Plan Submission Requirements
Part 13
M- 2 Manufacturing Industrial District
1300. Declaration of Legislative Intent
1301. Permitted Uses
1302. Performance Standards
1303. Conditional Use Criteria and Requirements
1304. Dimensional Standards
1305. General Regulations
1306. Plan Submission Requirements
1307. Parking
Part 14
Manufactured Home Park Development Regulations
1400. Declaration of Legislative Intent
1401. Use Regulations
1402. Conditional Use Application
1403. Conditional Use Criteria
1404. Density
1405. Site Design - Conventionally -Built and Modular Homes
1406. Site Design - Manufactured Homes
1407. General Regulations, Parking, Open Space, Signs, Lighting
Facilities and Buffering Requirements
1408. Service Buildings
1409. Maintenance
Part 15
Sign Regulations
1500. Declaration of Legislative Intent
1501. Conformance with Sign Regulations
1502. Identification Signs
1503. Temporary Real Estate and Contractors Signs
1504. Incidental Signs
1505. Additional Signs in Residential Districts
1506. Signs in the R- 4 District
1507. Business Signs
1508. Height of Business Signs
1509. Roof Signs
1510. Ground Signs
1511. Multiple Directory Signs
Page Corrected 4/ 7/ 1993 - 257 -
1512. Corporate or Company Flags
1513. Temporary Signs
1514. Special Sales, Etc.
1515. Directional Signs
1516. Special Signs
1517. Off -Site Signs
1518. Advertising Vehicles
1519. Placement of Signs
1520. Sign Movement and Illuminated Signs
1521. Permits
1522. Additional Signs Permitted for Automobile Fuel/ Service Stations
1523. Nonconforming Signs
1524. Exemptions
1525. Notice of Violation, Penalties and Remedies
Part 16
Flood Plain Conservation District
1600. Declaration of Legislative Intent
1601. Definitions and Establishment of Flood Plain Conservation District
1602. Permitted Uses
1603. Prohibited Uses
1604. Planning Agency Approval
1605. Boundary Disputes and Changes
1606. Determination of the One Hundred Year Flood Elevation
1607. Building Floor Elevations
1608. Changes in Existing Structures
1609. Variance Procedures and Conditions
1610. Municipal Liability
Part 17
Nonconforming Uses, Premises, Structures and Lots
1700. Continuation
1701. Alteration or Enlargement of Nonconforming Buildings, Structures or
Land
1702. Discontinuance
1703. Change in Use
1704. Damage or Destruction
1705. Nonconforming Lots of Record
1706. [ Repealed]
1800. Administration
1801. Duties
Part 18
Administrative Procedures
258 - Page Corrected 4/ 7/ 1993
1802. Appeal
1803. Complaints Regarding Violations
1804. Notification of Violation
1805. Enforcement
1806. Enforcement Penalties
1807.' Requirements for Zoning Permits
1808. Enforcement Remedies
1809. Application for Permits
1810. Issuance of Permits
1811. Expiration of Permits
1812. Certificate of Occupancy
1813. Permits for Variances and Special Exceptions
1814. Procedures for Consideration of, a Conditional Use Application
1815. Amendments
1816. Public Notice
1817. Referral to Township and County Planning Agencies
1818. Schedule of Fees
Part 19
Fence Regulations
1900. Declaration of Legislative Intent
1901. Conformance with Fence Regulations
1902. Application and Fees
1903. Height Regulations in Residential and Limited Commercial Districts
1904. Height Regulations in Nonresidential Districts
1905. - Construction of Fences
1906. Exemptions
Part 20
Chronological History of Zoning Enactments
Part 21
AHA Airport Hazard Area
2100. Declaration of Legislative Intent
2101. District Delineation
2102. Airport Hazards Area Definitions
2103. Airport Surface Zones
2104. Airport Surface Zone Height Limitations
2105. Use Restrictions
2106. Nonconforming Uses
2107. Permits and Variances
Page Revised 10/ 22/ 1991 - 259 -
Part 22
MU Office and Mixed -Use Planned Development
2200. Declaration of Legislative Intent
2201. Permitted Uses
2202. Mixed -Use Requirements
2203. Conditional Use Criteria
2204. General District Regulations
2205. Dimensional Standards
2206. Parking and Access Requirements
2207. Common Open Space and Plaza Standards
2208. Landscape Plan
2209. Pedestrian Circulation
2210. Design Standards
2211. Private Ownership and Maintenance of Common Elements
2212. Financial Subdivision
260 - Page Revised 10/ 22/ 1991
27, § 100) ( 27, § 100)
Part 1
General Provisions
100. Short Title. This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as
the Douglass Township Zoning Ordinance of 1982. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
101. Statement of Community Development Objectives. This Chapter is
enacted in conformance with the requirements of Act 247, The Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended. It is the intent of this Chapter to implement
the goals and objectives set forth in the Douglass Township Comprehensive
Plan, as updated in 1988, in such a way that land uses appropriate for the
character of the Township are encouraged and environmentally sensitive
areas such as steep slopes and flood plains are protected from inappropriate
development. The following specific development goals and objectives
are intended to serve the needs of Douglass Township' s future: ( Ord.
94- 2j
Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994 - 261 -
1. Residential Goals and Objectives -
A. To encourage the maintenance of the rural character of the
Township while providing for a variety of housing types and densities.
B. To provide for low density residential development in areas
which are removed from the Gilbertsville core area and which neither
have, nor are planned to have, centralized sewer or water service.
C. To allow for the timing of growth at a rate consistent with
recent past growth and the availability of appropriate community
facilities and municipal services.
D. To channel higher densities of development into areas which
provide adequate community facilities and municipal services or are
planned for their expansion.
E. To direct manufactured home park development into areas most
suited for it in terms of required community facilities and municipal
services as well as other medium density residential land use requirements.
2. Industrial Development Goals and Objectives -
A. To provide adequate land for all types of industrial development.
B. To adequately protect surrounding development from the
noxious effects of heavy industry.
C. To permit Light Industrial and Research and Development uses
to be located on appropriate sites which are consistent with surrounding
development patterns.
3. Commercial Development Goals and Objectives -
A. To make provisions for adequate commercial facilities to
serve the present and projected population of Douglass Township.
B. To permit the development of planned convenience centers
which would permit easy access for convenience goods.
Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994 - 261 -
27, § 101( 3)( C)) ( 27, § 101( 3)( C))
C. To limit " strip commercial" uses in mixed commercial and
residential areas to uses which do not attract large volumes of
traffic and continuous customer turnover, including uses such as
specialty and personal service shops, especially when located in
conversions of existing buildings.
4. Environmental and Open Space Goals and Objectives -
A. To adopt zoning which encourages preservation and protection
of environmental amenities.
B. To encourage the retention of appropriate open space by means
of innovative development techniques.
C. To ensure that inappropriate development will not occur in
flood plains, areas of steep slopes, or other environmentally sensitive
areas.
5. Institutional Goals and Objectives -
A. To encourage institutional uses needed and desired by Township
residents.
B. To provide guidance and standards for locating and developing
institutional uses.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 87- 5, § 11; and by Ord. 94- 2,
3/ 7/ 1994, § 1)
102. Establishment of Controls.
1. For New Structures, Subdivisions and Uses - All new buildings or
other structures shall be constructed, and all parcels of land shall be
subdivided, developed and/ or used only in accordance with the regulations
specified for each district. Any new building, other structure, or tract
of land approved after the effective date of this Chapter, as a result of
the granting of a variance or other appropriate, lawful form of relief,
shall be deemed nonconforming and subject to the regulations of Part 17 of
this Chapter.
2. For Existing Structures, Parcels and Uses - Any lawful buildings,
other structures, parcels, or uses of land in existence on the effective
date of this Chapter, which are not in conformance with the applicable
regulations contained herein, shall be deemed nonconforming, and subject to
the regulations of Part 17 of ,this Chapter.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
103. Establishment of Districts and Other Regulations.
1. For the purposes of this Chapter, the Township of Douglass is
hereby divided into districts, which shall be designated as follows:
R- 1 Agricultural - Residential District
R - 1A Agricultural - Residential Alternate
R- 2 Residential District
R- 3 Residential District
R- 4 Residential District
IN Institutional District
LC Limited Commercial District
CC Convenience Commercial District
District
262 - Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994
l
27, § 103, cont' d) ( 27, § 103, cont' d)
GC General Commercial District
M- 1 Office and Light Industrial District
M- 2 Manufacturing Industrial District
FP Flood Plain Conservation District
MU Office and Mixed -Use District
Ord. 90- 81
2. In addition, there shall be two Parts which provide for other
development options within the framework of several of the residential
districts listed above. These Parts shall be designated as follows:
Cluster Development Regulations
Manufactured Home Park Regulations
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 87- 5, 12/ 7/ 1987, § 11; by Ord.
90- 1, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 15; and by Ord. 90- 8, 11/ 19/ 1990, § 2)
104. Adoption of Zoning Map. The areas within the Township limits
as assigned to each district and the location of boundaries of the districts
established by this Chapter are shown upon the Zoning Map, which is
declared to be a part of this Chapter and shall be kept on file by the
Township Secretary. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
105. District Boundary Lines. Where uncertainty exists with respect
to the boundaries of the various districts, as shown on the Zoning Map, the
following rules shall apply:
1. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center line of
streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow center lines;
2. Boundaries indicated as approximately following plotted lot lines
shall be construed as following such lines;
3. Boundaries indicated as approximately following Township boundaries
shall be construed as following such boundaries;
4. Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed
to be midway between the main tracks; or following the centerline of
the right- of- way if the tracks are removed;
5. Boundaries indicated as following streams and rivers shall be
construed to follow center lines of the same;
6. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features
indicated in 5. and 6. above shall be so construed by the Township.
Distances not specifically indicated on the Zoning Map shall be determined
by the scale of the Map.
7. When a district boundary line divides a lot held in single and
separate ownership at the time this Chapter becomes effective, the regulations
as to use in the less restrictive district may, when authorized as a
special exception, extend over a portion of the lot in the more restrictive
district, not to exceed fifty feet ( 50').
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
106. Lot Sizes. Any lot, as well as the open space reserved on it,
must equal or exceed the minimum sizes prescribed by this Chapter for the
district in which the lot is located. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
Page Revised 10/ 22/ 1991 - 263 -
27, § 107) 27, § 107)
107. Lots of Record, Nonconforming. A lot of public record, in
single and separate ownership at the time of enactment of this Chapter, or
amendments thereto, which is not in conformance with the area or other
dimensional requirements of the district in which it is located, shall be
deemed nonconforming, and shall be subject to the regulations of § 1705 of
this Chapter. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
108. Reduction of Lot Area. No lot shall be so reduced that the
area of the lot, or the dimensions of the required open space shall be less
than herein prescribed. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
109. Obstruction to Vision at Intersections Prohibited. On corner
lots, no physical improvements or planting areas shall be erected, altered
or maintained within the required yards which shall cause obstruction to
driver vision from the abutting intersection. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as
amended by Ord. 96- 1, 1/ 15/ 1996)
110. Access to Public Street. All lots shall have direct access to
a public street in compliance with the minimum lot width regulations of the
district in which they are located. In the R- 1 and R- 2 Zoning Districts
access may be provided by a strip of land at least fifty feet ( 50') wide,
provided that the area of the access strip is not calculated in the minimum
lot area, and that the lot or lots comply with the requirements of § 128,
Rear Lotting. In the R- 3 District, single- family attached dwelling units
may share common access driveways or roads which serve clusters of dwelling
units. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
111. Existing Interior Lots. In computing the area of such lots,
the area of the access strip shall not be included. The access strip shall
be used as access to only the particular lot of which it is a part, except
when other lots, with street frontage and lot width in compliance with this
Chapter, obtain access via the access strip for safety or convenience
purposes. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
112. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses authorized in this Chapter
shall include any of the following or similar uses:
1. Uses accessory to agricultural use:
A. Greenhouses
B. Preparation of products produced on the premises
2. Uses accessory to dwelling:
A. Private garage, childrens' playhouse, private swimming pool,
parking space, private stables, barn, shelter for pet, storage shed.
264 - Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996
27, § 112, cont' d) ( 27, § 112, cont' d)
B. Non- commercial greenhouses.
C. Home gardening.
D. Home occupations as defined in § 201 and as limited by § 135.
Ord. 91- 81
E. Any and all of the above listed accessory uses shall employ
no more than one individual, not a resident in the dwelling, and shall
be under the supervision of the resident practitioner of the business.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 85- 5, 8/ 19/ 1985; by Ord. 90- 1,
7/ 16/ 1990, § 1; and by Ord. 91- 8, 10/ 22/ 1991, § 1)
113. Minimum Setback for Accessory Buildings.
1. An accessory building having less than one hundred fifty ( 150')
square feet may be erected within side or rear yards, provided:
A. It is located at least as far back from the street line as
the foremost portion of the principal building, and
B. The distance from the accessory building to the side and rear
property line is at least ten ( 10') feet.
2. There shall be ng distinction between permanent accessory buildings
and non -permanent accessory buildings.
Page Revised 10/ 22/ 1991 - 265 -
3. Accessory buildings having one hundred fifty ( 150') square feet or
more shall comply with the yard regulations applicable to the principal
building on the lot.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 86- 8, 7/ 21/ 1986; and by Ord. 87- 4,
11/ 16/ 1987
114. Projections into Required Yards. No structure and no part of a
structure shall be erected within or shall project into any minimum required
yard in any district except that:
1. An enclosed porch, not more than fourteen feet ( 14') in height may
be erected to extend into a required front or rear yard a distance of not
more than ten feet ( 10'), provided that the remaining setback from a
property line is not less than feet ( 5').
2. An uncovered terrace, that does not extend above the level of the
first floor of the building may be erected to extend into a required yard a
distance of not more than ten feet ( 101),
provided that the remaining
setback from a property line is not less than five feet ( 5').
3. A buttress, chimney, cornice, pier or pilaster of a building may
project not more than eighteen inches ( 18") into a required yard.
4. Open, unenclosed fire escapes, steps, bay windows and balconies
may project not more than three feet ( 3') into a required yard.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
Page Revised 10/ 22/ 1991 - 265 -
27, § 115) 27, § 115)
115. Hecht Exceptions. Exceptions to the maximum height specified
in each district shall be governed by the following:
1. Chimneys, skylights, tanks, radio or television receiving antennas
or similar uses or structures shall not be included in calculating the
height where such structures are customarily vertical projections of a
permitted building.
2. In any Residential District the prescribed basic height limit may
be exceeded by one foot ( 1') for each foot by which the width of each side
yard and the depth of each front and rear yard are increased beyond the
minimum requirements up to a maximum of ten feet ( 10').
3. Vertical projections of buildings described in 1., above, and
self- supporting structures of other types when permitted ( e. g. windmills,
radio or water towers) may exceed the maximum permitted height limits,
provided that the setback from all property lines of the lot on which the
structure is located equals or exceeds the total height of the vertical
projection or structure.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
116. Minimum Habitable Floor Area. No dwelling, dwelling unit, or
other structure designed for residential occupancy shall be constructed or
occupied for residential purposes unless the same shall contain an inhabitable
floor area of not less than six hundred ( 600) square feet. ( Ord.
82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
117. Manufactured Home and Manufactured Home Parks. Manufactured
homes are a permitted use in R- 1, R- 1 Alternate, R- 2, and R- 3 Residential
Districts, subject to the following regulations:
1. In R- 1, R - 1A, R- 2 and R- 3 Districts, a manufactured home maybe
located on a lot as a single family detached dwelling, in compliance with
the applicable provisions of the respective district, provided it is
permanently installed on a building foundation constructed in compliance
with the Township' s Building Code [ Chapter 5, Part 21.
2. In the R- 2 District, in addition to being permitted as specified
in § 117( 1) above, manufactured homes are a permitted use under the provisions
of Part 7, " Cluster Development," in compliance with the regulations
of that Part and and subsection ( 2) above.
3. In the R- 3 District, manufactured home parks are permitted as a
conditional use when developed in compliance with the regulations of Part
14, " Manufactured Home Park Development," and subsection ( 4), below.
4. The undercarriage of all manufactured homes shall be screened from
view by means of foundation walls or appropriate skirting, and wheels shall
be removed.
5. Sewer and water facilities shall be required for manufactured
homes in accordance with the provisions of the respective districts in
which they are located.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 87- 5, 12/ 7/ 1987,§ 11; and by Ord. Am
90- 1, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 17)
266 - Page Revised 10/ 22/ 1991
27, § 118) 27, § 118)
118 Exceptions for Public Utility Corporations and Township. This
Chapter shall not apply to any existing or proposed building or extension
thereof, used or to be used by a public utility corporation, if upon
petition of such corporation the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission
shall, after a public hearing, decide that the present or proposed situation
of the building in question is reasonably necessary for the convenience
or welfare of the public; nor shall this Chapter apply to any building
of the Township, or extension thereof, or to the use. of any premises by the
Township. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
119. Condominium Ownership Plans. No section of this Chapter shall
be construed to prohibit condominium ownership as permitted by the applicable
enabling legislation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. ( Ord.
82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
120. Prohibition of Public Nuisances. The following standards shall
be followed throughout the Township.
1. No building may be erected, altered, or used, and no lot or
premises may be used, for any trade, industry or business that is noxious
or offensive by reason of odor, dust, smoke, gas, vibration, illumination
or noise.
2. * No lot or premises shall be used for the storage, deposit or
disposal of rubbish, junk or any noxious, offensive or otherwise objectionable
material.
9 ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
121. Garage or Yard Sales. No person shall conduct more than two
2) garage sales or yard sales on any lot in an R- 1, R- 2, R- 3 or R- 4
District during any calendar year. Each sale shall be limited to a maximum
of ten ( 10) days. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
122. Heliports. Recognizing the increasing use of helicopters in
personal transportation, commercial, public safety, and emergency operations,
the following provisions shall apply to the establishment of heliports
in Douglass Township.
1. Personal use heliports shall be permitted as a Special Exception
in the M- 1 and M- 2 Districts, only when licensed by the Bureau of Aviation
of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, and subject to the
standards of the district in which it is located. In addition, no personal
use heliport shall be located closer than fifty feet ( 50') from the property
line of the parcel on which it is located or" one hundred feet ( 100')
from a residential district or use.
2. Commercial heliports shall be permitted as a Special Exception in
the M- 2 District only when licensed by the Bureau of Aviation of the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation and complying with all pertinent
PennDOT standards, and subject to the standards of the M- 2 District. In
addition, no structure, or storage area for helicopters shall be located
closer than one hundred feet ( 100') from any Residential District or use,
of which at least fifty feet ( 50') shall be maintained as a green area and
planted in grass, shrubs and/ or trees.
Page Revised 10/ 22/ 1991 - 267 -
27, § 122, cont' d) ( 27, § 122, cont' d)
3. Signs, parking for cars, screening and green area must conform to
the requirements for the district in which it is located. 9
4. Fencing, which does not interfere with the landing of the helicopters,
shall be required whenever necessary to restrict pedestrian
access.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 88- 1, 4/ 18/ 1988)
123. Reqtiired Permit.
1. It shall be unlawful to take off or land a helicopter anywhere
within Douglass Township except at a site for which a permit, issued by the
Township as hereinafter provided, is in force unless landing or takeoff is
done:
A. When necessary for law enforcement purposes or for emergencies;
or
B. On an occasional basis ( nor more than two ( 2) landings and
takeoffs per year in one location) not including the activities listed
under 1( A) above.
2. Permits for establishing, using and maintaining sites shall be
issued to the owner or leasee of a site by the Zoning Officer within thirty
30) days after the granting of a Special Exception by the Zoning Hearing
Board. Notwithstanding the locational requirements set forth herein, a
permit will be issued for a helicopter landing and takeoff in conjunction
with a special event such as an athletic contest, a holiday celebration,
commercial promotion, parade or similar activity provided that the Township
is given at least one week' s notice and the landing area is approved by a
safety specialist from the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation,
Bureau of Aviation.
Ord. 82- 81
3. The permit shall be deemed automatically revoked if:
A. The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Bureau of
Aviation revokes the license or refuses to re -license the site after
one of its periodic inspections ( said inspections are made at least
annually); or,
B. Thirty ( 30) days after the Zoning Officer has notified the
permit holder in writing that the site is no longer in compliance with
the requirements set forth herein for the initial granting of the
permit, provided the alleged defect has not been cured within said
thirty ( 30) days period.
4. Procedure after Revocation - When the site permit has been revoked,
the owner or leasee shall forthwith causethe site to be closed to
all helicopter operations by publishing such notices and warnings, and
employing such markings as are customary to accomplish this purpose.
Ord,' 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 82- 8, 11/ 1/ 1982, § 1)
124. Modification of Requirements. [ Repealed]. ( Ord. 82- 4,
6/ 7/ 1982; as repealed by Ord. 90- 1, 7/ 16f1990, § 11) 0
268 - Page Revised 10/ 22/ 1991
27, § 125) ( 27, § 125)
125. Interpretation of Regulations. The interpretation of this
Chapter is intended to be such that whenever these requirements are at
variance with Township subdivision and land development regulations or any
other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, deed restrictions,
or covenants, the most restrictive requirement shall govern. ( Ord. 82- 4,
6/ 7/ 1982)
126. Severability. Should any section or provision of this Chapter
be declared by a court to be unconstitutional or invalid for any reason,
such shall not affect the validity of the Chapter as a whole nor the
validity of any other section or provision of this Chapter other than the
one so declared. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
127. Repealer. The Douglass Township Zoning Ordinance of 1968 as
amended, and all other ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent
herewith are hereby repealed. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
128. Rear Lotting. Rear lots, as defined in Part 2 of this Chapter,
upon recommendation of the Township Planning Agency and Engineer, subject
to the following criteria:
1. For each rear lot created, there must be a corresponding road
frontage lot containing the minimum required lot width at the minimum
building setback line, if a majority of the land area of the parent lot is
being lotted off.
2. If only a minor portion of an existing tract is being subdivided,
rear lots may be used under the following conditions:
A. When it serves to preserve existing farmland and rural
appearance by locating building lot areas remote from existing roads.
B. When existing road frontage does not permit creation of a
new, standard -width lot, but does permit use of an access strip which
is reserved for future use as a street for access to the remainder of
the tract.
C. Where future subdivision of a tract is contemplated, and
supported by a tentative overall sketch plan; and when rear lotting
serves to reduce the number of access points from existing, through -
roads by providing for a common access driveway along an access strip
which is reserved for future use as a street right- of- way.
3. Not more than two ( 2) real -lot access strips will be permitted to
abut one another unless some form of guarantee is made for a right- of- way
for future use as a public street, upon recommendation of the Township
Planning Agency and Engineer.
4. In reviewing applications for rear lots, the Board of Supervisors,
Township Planning Agency, and Engineer shall consider the following
factors:
A. The configuration of the property being subdivided.
B. The amount of existing road frontage.
C. The number of lots involved, both the total number and the
amount that would be rear lots.
10 D. The size of the proposed lots.
Page Revised 10/ 22/ 1991 - 269 -
27, § 128( 2)( E)) 27, § 128( 2)( E))
E. The topography, vegetation and other environmental characteristics
of the parcel being divided. 0
F. The type and character of the road the tract abuts.
G. The character of the surrounding area, from two aspects:
1) its physical characteristics, and whether the subdivision
site is distinguishable from it.
2) its planned future character, that is, whether in a
growth area, on the edge of a growth area, or in a rural area.
H. The development status of surrounding sites.
I. Whether multiple rear lots would set a bad precedent for
nearby sites.
J. The visual character desired for the tract; that is, whether
it' s better to see all the houses near the road, or to " hide" some in
back and have less perceivable density.
K. Whether a public road would appear " forced" either on the
plan or on the ground ( considering configuration, alignment, natural
features, etc.)
L. Economics, that is, the number of lots in the rear versus the
cost of the new road.
5. If rear lotting is to be permitted, the following criteria shall
be used for the design of the plan:
A. The access strip should be a fee simple part of the rear lot.
B. The area in the access strip should not be a part of the
minimum lot area calculation.
C. The length of the access strip should be kept to a minimum.
D. There should be no sharp turns ( greater than 45°) in the
access strip.
E. The location of the access strip should be logical relative
to the body of the rear lot, surrounding property configurations, and
environmental features such as woods, steep slopes, streams, flood
plains, etc.
F. When two access strips abut, they should preferably have a
common physical drive constructed using cross -easements.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 82- 8, 11/ 1/ 1982, § 1)
129. On - Lot Sewage Disposal. The use of on -lot sewage disposal,
where permitted by this Chapter, shall comply with the regulations herein,
but shall not be permitted to be used unless a permit has been issued by
the Montgomery County Health Department, which has certified that the
proposal meets or exceeds all applicable State regulations pertaining to
on -lot disposal systems. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 94- 2,
3/ 7/ 1994, § 2)
130. Commercial Vehicles in Residential Districts. Overnight
parking of commercial vehicles over ten thousand ( 10, 000) pounds gross 40
vehicle weight is prohibited in Residential Districts, except in compliance
with the following regulations:
270 - Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994
27, § 130( 1)) 27, § 130( 1))
1. In the R- 1 District one vehicle may be parked on each conforming
lot, provided the vehicle is owned or operated by a person residing on that
lot. Vehicles used for agricultural purposes on the premises where they
are parked are exempt from this regulation.
2. For more than one ( 1) vehicle on a conforming R- 1 lot, or for one
1) or more vehicles on a conforming lot in the R- 1 Alternate, R- 2, R- 3, or
R- 4 Districts, approval as a special exception must be granted by the
Zoning Hearing Board, with the right of review of the Township Planning
Agency and Engineer, in compliance with the following criteria:
A. Sufficient turning area must be provided and used on the lot
so that the vehicle( s) will not have to back onto or off of the
street; this requirement does not apply to residential streets.
B. No such vehicle shall be parked in a front yard area.
C. A minimum setback of ten ( 10') feet shall be required from a
side or rear property line, which area shall be provided with an
opaque fence or screen planting to a height of at least six ( 6') feet.
D. Any such vehicle which creates noise louder than a typical
automobile shall not be left running on the lot for a period exceeding
ten ( 10) minutes. A typical automobile shall not be left running on
the lot for a period exceeding ten ( 10) minutes.
Ord. 90- 11
3. All other Township regulations regarding noise, sanitation, etc.,
shall be strictly enforced.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 82- 8, 11/ 1/ 1982, § 1; and by Ord.
90- 1, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 16)
131. Adult Use Standards and Criteria. Adult uses, as defined in
this Chapter, are permitted in the General Commercial District only when
authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception in compliance
with the standards and criteria of this section and Part 11, General
Commercial District.
1. Any adult use shall not be located within five hundred feet ( 500')
of a residential zone, church, playground, park or any other adult use
unless a waiver is obtained as provided for in subsection 3 hereof.
2. Any adult use shall not be located within one thousand feet
1, 000') of a school unless a waiver is obtained as provided for in subsection
3 hereof.
3. A waiver shall be' granted unon the following conditions:
A. In the case of an adult use to be located within five hundred
feet ( 500') of a residential zone, church, playground, pL- k or any
other adult use;
1) when fifty-one percent ( 51%) of the persons owning real
estate or residing on real estate or operating a business, within
five hundred feet ( 500') of the proposed adult use have approved
of the waiver allowing such use in writing; and
2) when the applicant for the proposed adult use has
complied with § 132 of this Chapter where applicable.
Page Revised 10/ 22/ 1991 - 271 -
27, § 131, cont' d) 27, § 131, cont' d)
B. In the case of an adult use to be located within one thousand
feet ( 1, 000') of a school:
1) when fifty-one percent ( 517) of the persons owning real
estate or residing on real estate or operating a business, within
five hundred feet ( 500') of the proposed adult use have approved
of the waiver allowing such use in writing; and
2) when fifty-one percent ( 517) of the parents of minor
children who attend any school located within one thousand feet
1, 000') of the proposed adult use have approved of the waiver
allowing such use in writing; and
3) when the applicant for the proposed adult use has
complied with § 132 of this Chapter where applicable.
Ord. 82--4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
132. Review by Planning Agency; Approval or Disapproval by Board of
Supervisors.
1. Plans for any institutional, commercial or industrial use shall be
submitted to the Planning Agency prior to the issuance of any zoning permit
and such plans shall include the followings
A. A plot plan of the lot showing the location of gall present
and proposed buildings and other improvements, drives, parking lots,
drainage facilities and sanitary sewage facilities, together with all
buildings, streets, alleys, highways, drainage facilities and other
topographical features located within two hundred feet ( 200') of any
lot line.
B. Architectural plans for the proposed buildings and other
improvements.
C. A description of the commercial operations proposed in
sufficient detail to indicate the effects of those operations in
producing traffic congestion, noise, glare, air pollution, water
pollution, drainage problems, fire hazards or safety hazards.
D. Engineering and architectural plans for the treatment and
disposal of sanitary sewage and surface water drainage.
E. The proposed number of employees and the estimated number of
patrons or customers.
F. Any other pertinent data or information that the Planning
Agency may require.
2. The Planning Agency shall review all plans for institutional,
commercial or industrial uses submitted to them within forty- five ( 45) days
of such submission and shall transmit such plans with recommendations
thereon to the Board of Supervisors for final approval.
3. Upon receipt of plans for any institutional, commercial or industrial
use together with recommendations thereon by the Planning Agency or
without such recommendations if the Planning Agency has failed to act
within forty- five ( 45) days as hereinabove required, the Board of Supervisors
shall have the power to approve or disapprove such plans. The
Secretary of the Board of Supervisors shall notify the Zoning Officer of
272 - Page Revised 10/ 22/ 1991
11
27, § 132, cont' d) ( 27, § 132, cont' d)
its final decision and any special conditions agreed upon in writing
regarding any institutional, commercial or industrial use. The Zoning
Officer shall issue no zoning permit for any institutional, commercial or
industrial use before receiving such written approval from the Board of
Supervisors.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 85- 3, 3/ 4/ 1985)
133. Keeping of Livestock. Except as otherwise regulated by this
Chapter as an Agricultural Use, the keeping of livestock, other than common
domestic house pets, shall require a minimum one acre lot area, provided
that less than fifty percent ( 50%) of the lot area is used for livestock
purposes. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
134. Provisions for Day Care Facilities. Day Care Facilities shall
conform to the following criteria and standards as well as the requirements
of the district in which they are located.
1. Registration. Each operator of a Child or Adult Day Care Center,
Family Day Care Home or Group Day Care Home shall register with Douglass
Township prior to the initiation or modification of such use. The operator
must certify compliance with all aspects of this Chapter as well as all
other applicable Douglass Township requirements and Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania requirements for child and adult care. [ Ord. 94- 2]
2. Inspection. The operator of a Child or Adult Day Care Facility
shall permit authorized agents of Douglass Township to enter the property
to inspect such use for compliance with requirements of this Section and
all other applicable Township ordinances and State statutes and
regulations. [ Ord. 94- 2]
3. Day Care Facilities must hold an approved Pennsylvania Department
of Public Welfare ( child day care) or Department of Aging ( adult day care)
certificate or license, as appropriate and comply with all applicable State
regulations, including those standards governing adequate indoor space,
accessible outdoor play space and any applicable State or local building
and fire safety codes. Administrators providing day care services must
conduct background checks on all job applicants to determine thein
suitability for employment in a day care program. [ Ord. 94- 21
4. Family Day Care Homes shall meet the following requirements;
A. For residences abutting residential streets, permitted on
street parking areas may be used for non- resident employee parking and
passenger dropoff space, provided that the child dropoff is conducted
on the same side of the road as the subject property.
B. For residences abutting semi -controlled access and collector
streets, one ( 1) additional off- street parking space shall be provided
per non- resident employee and one ( 1) safe passenger dropoff space
measuring at least ( 10') feet by twenty ( 20') feet shall be provided.
In addition, the off- street parking area shall be designed so that
vehicles can turn around in the parking area in order to avoid the
danger of backing onto a street.
Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994 - 273 -
27, § 134( 4)( C)) 27, § 134( 4)( C))
C. Each home shall have a minimum of forty ( 40) square feet of
indoor _space for each child, measured wall- to- wall, inclusive of space
occupied by cupboards, shelves, furniture, and equipment, but exclusive
of halls, bathrooms, offices, kitchens, locker rooms, and related
areas. [ Ord. 91- 111
D. Each home shall have a minimum of thirty ( 30) sgaure feet of
outdoor play space for each child, to be located only in the rear yard
of the residence. [ Ord. 91- 11]
E. The outdoor play area shall not be located within ten ( 10')
feet of an adjoining property line. [ Ord. 91- 11]
F. The outdoor play area shall be surrounded by a safety fence
impenetrable by children or small animals, with a minimum height of
four ( 4') feet and constructed of materials suitable to the existing
residential environment. [ Ord. 91- 111
G. Time of operation shall be limited to the hours between 6: 30
A. M. and 7: 00 P. M. [ Ord. 91- 11]
H. Outdoor play shall be limited to the hours between 8: 00 A. M.
and 7: 00 P. M. [ Ord. 91- 11]
5. Group Day Care Homes and Day Care Centers shall meet the following
requirements:
A. The requisite outdoor play area shall only be located in the
rear yard of the subject property.
B. The outdoor play area shall be located within the building
setback lines of the property on which it is located.
C. One ( 1) off- street parking space shall be provided for each
employee, and one ( 1) safe passenger unloading space measuring ten
10') [ feet] by twenty ( 20') feet shall be provided for each ten ( 10)
children that the center is licensed to accommodate. ( Group Day Care
Homes only need one ( 1) passenger unloading space, regardless of the
number of children.) In addition, the off- street parking area shall
be designed so that vehicles can turn around or otherwise avoid
backing onto a street to exit.
D. The outdoor play area shall be surrounded by a safety fence
impenetrable by children or small animals, with a minimum height of
four ( 4') feet. The Board of Supervisors may increase the minimum
height when necessary for safety reasons.
E. Any sign shall comply with standards in this Chapter governing
the use of signs.
F. Outdoor play shall be limited to the hours between 8: 00 A. M.
and 7: 00 P. M.
G. In residential and institutional districts, no Group Day Care
Home or Child Day Care Center shall be established within five hundred
500) feet of another such use, private nursery or kindergarten.
H. For Group Day Care Homes, there shall be no external alteration
of existing buildings, except as may be necessary for reasons
of safety. Fire escapes and outside stairways, where practicable,
shall be located on the rear of the building.
274 -
27, § 134( 5)( 1)) ( 27, § 134( 5)( 1))
1. For Group Day Care Homes, the time of operation shall be
limited to the hours between 6: 30 A. M. and 7: 00 P. M.
6. Adult day care centers shall comply with the requirements of
134( 5)( C) ( parking); § 134( 5)( E) ( signs); and § 134( 5)( 1) ( hours of
operation). [ Ord. 94- 2]
Ord. 90- 1, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 2; as amended by Ord. 91- 11, 10/ 22/ 1991, §§ 1- 3; and
by Ord. 94- 2, 3/ 7/ 1994, §§ 3, 6)
135. Provisions for Home Occupations.
1. All home occupations shall meet the following requirements:
A. The home occupation shall not occupy more than twenty- five
257) percent of the total floor area of the dwelling or five hundred
500) square feet, whichever is less.
B. There shall be no exterior displays of goods visible from the
outside.
C. There shall be no storage of materials of products outside a
principal or accessory building or other structure.
D. There shall be no external alterations which are not customary
in residential buildings.
E. There shall be no impact on abutting properties.
F. There shall be no required deliveries or trash pick- up in
excess of that required normally in residential areas.
G. There shall be no direct retail sales on the premises.
2. Office or studio of a doctor, dentist, teacher, artist, architect,
tutor, landscape architect, musician, lawyer, engineer, or practitioner of
similar character, barber shop, beauty shop, shop of dressmaker or tailor,
and family day care homes shall meet the following additional requirements:
A. There shall be no more than one ( 1) employee who does not
reside in the dwelling.
B. There shall be no more than four ( 4) visitors associated with
the home occupation at any one ( 1) time.
C. Signs must meet the requirements of § 1505.
Ord. 96- 11
3. Family day care homes must also meet the following requirements:
A. They are only permitted in the R- 1, R- 2 and R- 3 Residential
Districts and the LC -Limited Commercial Districts.
B. They must meet the requirements of § 134.
4. Home occupations not specifically listed above shall meet the
following requirements:
A. There shall be no employees other than residents of the
dwelling.
B. There shall be no visitors at any time associated with the
home occupation.
Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996 - 274. 1 -
27, § 135( 4)( C)) 27, § 135( 4)( C))
C. There shall be no parking spaces required in addition to
those required for the residence.
D. There shall be no sign.
Ord. 91- 8, 10/ 22/ 1991, § 2; as amended by Ord. 96- 1, 1/ 15/ 1996)
136. Regulations for Communications Antennae.
1. Purposes.
A. To accommodate the need for communications antennae while
regulating their location and number in the Township.
B. To minimize adverse visual effects of communications antennae
and antenna support structures through proper design, siting and
vegetative screening.
C. To avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from antenna
support structure failure and falling ice through engineering and
proper siting of antenna support structures.
D. To encourage the joint use of any new antenna support
structures to reduce the number of such structures needed in the
future.
2. Use Regulations.
A. An antenna that is attached to an existing communications
tower, smoke stack, water tower or other tall structure is permitted
in all zoning districts. The height of the antenna shall not exceed
the height of the existing structure by more than 15 feet. If the
antenna is to be mounted on an existing structure a full site plan is
not required.
B. An antenna that is either not mounted on an existing
structure, or is more than 15 feet higher than the structure on which
it is mounted, is permitted in all zoning districts, but requires a
special exception in all districts except for the M- 1 Office and Light
Industrial and M- 2 Manufacturing Industrial Districts.
C. All other uses ancillary to the antenna and associated
equipment ( including a business office, maintenance depot, vehicle
storage, etc.) are prohibited, unless otherwise permitted in the
zoning district in which the antenna is located.
3. Standards of Approval of Special Exceptions.
A. The applicant is required to demonstrate, using technological
evidence, that the antenna must go where it is proposed in order to
satisfy its function in the company' s grid system.
B. If the applicant proposes to build a tower ( as opposed to
mounting the antenna on an existing structure), it is required to
demonstrate that it contacted the owners of tall structures within a
one- quarter ( 1/ 4) mile radius of the site proposed, asked for
permission to install -the antenna on those structures, and was denied
for reasons other than economic ones. This would include smoke
stacks, water towers, tall buildings, antenna support structures of
other communications providers, other communications towers,
274. 2 - Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997
27, § 136( 3)( B) cont' d) 27, § 136( 3)( B) cont' d)
fire, police, etc.), and other tall structures. The Township may
deny the application to construct a new tower if the applicant has not
made a good faith effort to mount the antenna on an existing
structure.
4. Standards of Approval of All Communication Antennae.
A. Antenna Height. The applicant shall demonstrate that the
antenna is the minimum height required to function satisfactorily. No
antenna that is taller than this minimum height shall be approved.
B. Setbacks from Base of Antenna Support Structure. The minimum
distance between the base of the support structure and any property
line shall meet the requirements of § 115.
C. Antenna Support Structure Safety. The applicant shall
demonstrate that the proposed antenna and support structure are safe
and the surrounding areas will not be negatively affected by support
structure failure, falling ice or other debris, electromagnetic fields
or radio frequency interference. All support structures shall be
fitted with anti -climbing devices, as approved by the manufacturers.
D. Fencing. A fence shall be required around the antenna
support structure and other equipment, unless the antenna is mounted
on an existing structure. The fence shall be a maximum of 8 feet in
height.
E. Screening/ Softening Buffer. A screening/ softening buffer
shall be provided for the support structure, the fence surrounding the
support structure and any other ground level features ( such as a
building). The applicant may use any combination of existing
vegetation, new vegetation, topography, walls, decorative fences or
other features, provided an effective buffer is created. If the
antenna is mounted on an existing structure, and other equipment is
housed inside an existing structure, buffering is not required.
F. In order to reduce the number of antenna support structures
needed in the community in the future, the proposed support structure
shall be required to accommodate other users, including other
communication companies, and local police, fire and ambulance
companies.
G. The applicant must demonstrate that it is licensed by the
Federal Communications Commission.
H. Parking. If the antenna site is fully automated, adequate
parking shall be required for maintenance workers. If the site is not
automated, the number of required parking spaces shall equal the
number of people on the largest shift.
I. Antenna support structures under two hundred ( 200) feet in
height should be painted silver or have a galvanized finish retained
in order to reduce the visual impact. Support structures may be
painted in order to reduce the visual impact. Support structures may
be painted green up to the height of nearby trees. Support structures
two hundred ( 200) feet in height or taller, or those near airports,
shall meet all Federal Aviation Administration regulations. No
antenna support structure may be artificially lighted except when
required by the FAA.
Page Added 7/ 7/ 1997 - 274. 3 -
27, § 136( 4)( J)) ( 27, § 136( 4)( J))
J. A full site plan submission is required for all antenna sites
except those utilizing existing structures. The plan shall show the
antenna, antenna support structure, building, fencing, buffering,
access and all other applicable items required in the Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance [ Chapter 22].
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as added by Ord. 96- 4, 9/ 16/ 1996)
274. 4 - Page Added 7/ 7/ 1997
27, § 200) ( 27, § 200)
Part 2
Definitions
200. Language Interpretations. For the purpose of this Chapter,
certain words shall have the meaning assigned to them, as follows:
1. Words used in the present tense include the future. The singular
number includes the plural and the plural the singular.
2. The phrase " used for" includes " arranged for", " designed for",
intended for", " maintained for", or " occupied for".
3. The words " person" includes an individual, corporation, partnership,
incorporated association, or any other similar entity.
4. The word " includes" or " including" shall not limit the term to the
specified example, but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
201. Definitions. The following words and phrases shall have the
meaning given in this section, as follows:
ACCESS STRIP - a piece of land which provides physical access to, and
legal road frontage for a lot, but which does not comply with the minimum
lot width regulations of this Chapter. Access strips provide access to
rear" or " interior" lots. The area of an access strip shall not be
included in the minimum lot area required under the provisions of this
Chapter.
ACCESSORY BUILDING - a building subordinate to the principal building
on the lot and used for purposes customarily incidental to those of the
principal building. There shall be no distinction between a permanent or
non -permanent accessory building. [ Ord. 86- 8]
ACCESSORY USE - a use subordinate to the principal use of land or a
building or other structure on a lot and customarily incidental thereto.
ACT 247 - The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, originally
enacted as Act 247 of 1968, which establishes the basic authority for the
exercise of municipal land use controls in Pennsylvania. All subsequent
amendments are included.
ADULT DAY CARE CENTER - a facility in which adult daily living
services are provided for four ( 4) or more adults not related to the
operator. [ Ord. 94- 21
ADULT USES -
A. ADULT BOOK STORE - an establishment which has as a substantial
or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines,
or other periodicals and which excludes minor by virtue of age.
B. ADULT MOVIE HOUSES - an enclosed building with a capacity of
fifty ( 50) or more persons used for presenting motion pictures, films,
movies, slides or similar photographic reproductions for observation
by persons therein and which excludes minors by virtue of age.
Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994 - 275 -
27, § 201, cont' d) 27, § 201, cont' d)
C. ADULT MINI -THEATER - an enclosed building with a capacity for
less than fifty ( 50) persons used for presenting motion pictures,
films, movies, slides or similar photographic reproductions for
observation by persons therein, and which excludes minors by virtue of
age
D. MASSAGE PARLORS any place of business where any person,
partnership, firm, association or corporation engages in or carries on
or permits to be engaged in or carried on any method of pressure on,
friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding,
vibrating or stimulating parts of the body with the hands or with the
aid of any mechanical apparatus or electrical apparatus or appliance,
with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, oil, or
other such items, by a member of the opposite sex.
E. OTHER ADULT USES - any business, activity or use similar to
or of the same general nature as the uses listed above. This section
shall include, but shall not be limited to, rap centers, nude
wrestling studios, sensitivity centers, and escort bureaus, all of
which exclude minors by virtue of age as patrons thereof.
AGRICULTURAL USE - the active use of land for growing and harvesting
of crops, as food for humans or animals, and also including nursery,
horticulture, and - forestry uses; and/ or the raising, consumption and/ or
selling of livestock as a source of meat, poultry, dairy products, hides,
or other animal products. At least fifty percent ( 50%) of a parcel, lot,
or tract must be actively used as described in this definition to qualify
as an agricultural use. Agricultural use and agricultural purpose shall be
interchangeable terms.
AGRICULTURAL SUBDIVISION - the division of land for agricultural
purposes into parcels of more than ten ( 10) acres, not involving any new
street or easement of access, which, according to Act 247, The Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, is exempted from zoning and subdivision
requirements. Land divided for agricultural purposes must be used in
compliance with the definition of Agricultural Use, herein, or the division
shall be considered null and void.
ALLEY - a minor, vehicular right- of- way, public or private, on which
no principal structures front, which serves as the secondary means of
access to two or more properties which otherwise front on a public street.
ANCILLARY USE - a subordinate use that is controlled by a larger
permitted use. Anexampleis a public garage ( tires, batteries and accessories)
or garden shop controlled by a department store.
ANTENNA HEIGHT - The vertical distance measured from the base of the
antenna support structure at grade to the highest point of the structure.
If the support structure is on a sloped grade, then the average between the
highest and lowest grades shall be used in calculating the antenna height.
Ord. 96- 41
ANTENNA SITE - A tract or parcel of land that contains the
communication antenna, its support structure, accessory building( s) and
parking. [ Ord. 96- 41
ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE - Any pole, telescoping mast, tower, tripod,
or any other structure which supports a device used in the transmitting or
receiving of radio frequency energy. [ Ord. 96- 4]
276 - Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997
27, § 201, cont' d) 27, § 201, cont' d)
APPLICANT - the person, persons, or legal business organization of any
Is type responsible for submission of a proposal for subdivision, land development,
zoning amendment, building permit, variance, special exception
or conditional use. For the purposes of this Chapter, " applicant" and
owner" may be used interchangeably.
BUILDING - any structure located on or under the land. [ Ord. 86- 8)
BUILDING ENVELOPE - that area of a lot, circumscribed by the yard
lines, within which a building( s) may be built.
BUILDING FRONTAGE - for calculating maximum total sign area, building
frontage is defined as the maximum horizontal dimension measured along the
Text continued on following page.]
Page Added 7/ 7/ 1997 - 276. 1 -
27, § 201, cont' d) ( 27, § 201, cont' d)
Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994 - 277 -
wall of the building which serves as the principal approach to the
building, excluding eaves, overhangs, buttresses, and other non -occupiable
building extensions. The principal approach to a building shall be that
side which contains the main entrance doors. For corner lots the additional
sign area shall be calculated along the side of the building which
faces the second street.
BUILDING LINE - the line which serves as the rear boundary of the
minimum front yard. For the purposes of measuring lot width at the
building line the following apply:
A. For wedge- shaped lots which are narrower at the street than
at the rear property line, the building line may be moved back from
the minimum front -yard depth to a point where the lot width equals the
minimum required for the district, provided that at least fifty feet
50') of street frontage are provided and the lot complies with all
other dimensional requirements of the district;
B. Where " rear" or " interior" lots are permitted, the building
line shall be oriented as parallel or concentric to the street from
which access is provided as is feasible, and set back from the intervening
property line at least the minimum front yard depth.
CAR WASH - a commercial facility and/ or structures used for the
purposes of cleaning the exterior and/ or interior surfaces of motor vehicles,
whether self- service or operated by attendants or employees.
CEMETERY - land used or intended to be used for the burial of the
deceased, including columbariums, crematories, mausoleums, and mortuaries
when operated in conjunction with the cemetery and within its boundaries.
CENTRALIZED SEWER or WATER - a sewage disposal network and facilities,
or water supply network serving a group or series of property owners in
common; may be publicly or privately owned.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT - an alternative development method wherein
structures are arranged in closely related groups, reducing lot sizes,
preserving land for open space, and permitting more imaginative site design
than may be possible under standard development.
COMMON OPEN SPACE - that land required to be preserved in accordance
with the provisions of § 704 of this Chapter, under the provisions of Parts
5, 6 and 7 of this Chapter, R- 3, R- 4 and Cluster Development, respectively;
also known as Open Space.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN - the Douglass Township Comprehensive Plan, as
updated in 1988. [ Ord. 94- 2]
CONDITIONAL USE - a form of permitted use, authorized by this Chapter,
under the jurisdiction of the Board of Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors
is empowered to grant permission for conditional uses, consistent
with the public interest, in compliance with the standards and procedures
established in this Chapter, following thorough examination of the proposal,
and under any reasonable safeguards necessary to implement the
purposes and intent of this Chapter and to protect the general welfare.
CONSTRUCTION - the construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair,
extension, expansion, alteration or relocation of a building or structure,
including the placement of manufactured homes.
Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994 - 277 -
27, § 201, cont' d) ( 27, § 201, cont' d)
CONVENIENCE COMMERCIAL SHOPPING CENTER - a small- scale shopping center
located in an area of the Township which is not conveniently served by
commercial development in the Gilbertsville core area, and which is designed
to satisfy the routine, daily needs of nearby residents for goods
and services.
CONVERSION - the remodeling or alteration of a structure so as to
accommodate more leasable or salable units or a different use than what had
originally been intended for the structure. Conversions include the
alteration of a nonresidential structure into a dwelling unit( s) for at
least one family, the modification of a single- family structure to accommodate
more units than originally intended, the alteration of existing
dwellings into commercial use, and the alteration of an existing dwelling
into a mixed commercial and residential use.
CORNER LOT - a lot having contiguous frontage on two or more intersecting
roads.
DAY CARE FACILITY - any dwelling or building which provides child or
adult care services. Child day care facilities shall be further
differentiated by the following three ( 3) classifications:
DAY CARE CENTER - a facility in which care is provided for seven
7) or more children at any one ( 1) time, where the child care areas
are not being used as a family residence.
FAMILY DAY CARE HOME - any family residence other than the
child' s own home, in which child day care is provided at any one ( 1)
time to four ( 4), five ( 5) or six ( 6) children, who are not relatives
of the resident caregiver.
GROUP DAY CARE HOME - a facility in which care is provided by a
resident caregiver for more than six ( 6) but less than twelve ( 12)
children at any one ( 1) time, where the child care areas are being
used as a family residence.
Ord. 94- 2]
DENSITY - the number of dwelling units per developable acre.
DEVELOPABLE ACREAGE - for the purpose of calculating density per
developable acre, the developable acreage shall equal the gross land area
of the proposal, minus the following acreage:
A. All land within existing and/ or proposed rights- of- way for
all public and/ or private roads.
B. All overhead and underground utility easements and/ or rightsof-
way.
C. Soils with slopes of fifteen ( 15) percent or greater as
defined by the Soil Survey of Montgomery County, 1967.
D. All alluvial -soil floodplain or the extent of the one hundred
100) year floodplain delineated in the Flood Insurance Study for
Douglass Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, dated November 15,
1983, as prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Federal
Insurance Administration.
Ord. 94- 2]
DEVELOPMENT - any man- made change to improved or unimproved real
estate including but not limited to buildings or other structures, the
278 Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994
27, § 201, cont' d) 27, § 201, cont' d)
placement of manufactured homes, streets and other paving, utilities,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation or drilling operations.
DRIVEWAY - a private cartway providing vehicular access between a
public street and a lot, property or development, and/ or providing vehicular
circulation within a lot, property or development.
DWELLING TYPES - for the purposes of this Chapter, the following are
the definitions of the various types of dwelling units:
A. SINGLE- FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING UNIT - a building designed
for and occupied exclusively as a residence for only one ( 1) family
and not attached to any other building or dwelling units.
B. TWO- FAMILY BUILDING - a residential building containing two
2) dwelling units and which is not attached to any other building. A
two- family building counts as two ( 2) dwelling units for density
purposes.
1) Twin ( Single -Family Semi- detached) - a two family
building with dwelling units placed side- by- side, with each
occupying the total space from ground to roof, and joined to each
other by a vertical, common party wall, but otherwise surrounded
by yard areas. When lotted, each dwelling unit may be on a
separate lot, with the common boundary between the two ( 2) lots
running along the common party wall.
2) Duplex ( Two - Family Detached) - a two- family building
with one dwelling unit placed above the other so that they share
a common horizontal partition. When lotted, a duplex shall be
entirely on one lot.
C. SINGLE- FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLING UNIT - a dwelling unit having
its own independent outside access, with no other dwelling units
located directly and totally above or below it, and having party walls
in common with at least one but not more than three ( 3) adjacent
similar dwelling units, and located in a building comprised of at
least three ( 3) dwelling units. This dwelling type shall include, but
not be limited to dwelling units commonly known as townhouses, row -
houses, triplexes, quadruplexes and multiplexes.
D. MULTI -FAMILY - a detached residential building containing
three or more dwelling units characterized as follows:
1)- Garden Apartment - a multi -family building permitted
only in the R- 4 Zoning District, in which the dwelling units are
generally placed one entirely above or below another. The
dwelling units share the lot or tract in which the building is
located, are oriented towards open yard areas which surround the
building, and often share a common entrance hall and/ or other
common facilities.
2) Apartment - a dwelling unit in a multi -family building
or a mixed- use building permitted in the Limited Commercial
District, or as a conversion of any large residence when permitted
by the Zoning Hearing Board.
E. MANUFACTURED HOME - a mobile home or a transportable, single
family dwelling intended for permanent occupancy, office, or place of
assembly, contained in one ( 1) or more sections, built on a permanent
chassis, which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy
Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994 - 279 -
27, § 201, cont' d) ( 27, § 201, cont' d)
except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and
constructed so that it may be used with or without a permanent
foundation. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, and
other similar vehicles which are placed on a . site for more than one
hundred eighty ( 180) consecutive days. [ Ord. 91- 5]
F. MODULAR HOME - a dwelling unit for permanent occupancy, made
by assembling one or more factory -produced, three- dimensional sections
into one integral building, not capable of easily being separated for
repeated towing, whose construction materials must conform to those of
conventionally -built units, as required by the Township' s building
code, and must be placed on a permanent foundation. A copy of the
Structural Engineering Bulletin( s) must be provided to the Board of
Supervisors, indicating approval of the dwelling or its components by
the U. S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.
DWELLING UNIT - one or more rooms with cooking and sanitary facilities
provided solely for the living purposes of one family.
FACING WALLS - the exterior walls of any two buildings are considered
to be " facing walls" when a straight line drawn perpendicular to, and
extending outward from any point on an exterior wall of one building
intersects an exterior wall of another building.
FAMILY - any number of individuals living together as a single,
non- profit housekeeping unit and doing their cooking on the premises, when
said individuals are related by blood, marriage or adoption, including any
number of foster children under the care of same; or not more than five ( 5)
unrelated individuals living together as a single, non- profit housekeeping
unit and doing their cooking on the premises, except when an application
for a special exception to enable a greater number of unrelated individuals
to occupy a dwelling unit is reviewed and approved by the Zoning Hearing
Board, as provided for in this Chapter. ( This definition shall not apply
to the occupants of a club, fraternity house, lodge, residential club,
boarding house or rooming house.)
FLOOD PLAIN RELATED DEFINITIONS -
A. For the purpose of this Chapter, the definition of flood
plain is that found in Part 16, the Flood Plain Conservation District,
and B. below, whichever is greater.
B. For the regulatory purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program and the " Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act" additional
definitions are found in the Township' s Subdivision and Land Development
Regulations, as amended, and the Township' s Building Code, as
amended, and are hereby made a part of the definitions of this
Chapter, by reference.
FLOOD PROOFING - any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents. [ Ord. 91- 5]
FLOODWAY - the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
a designated height. [ Ord. 91- 5]
GARAGE -
280 - Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994
27, § 201, cont' d) 27, § 201, cont' d)
A. PRIVATE - an accessory building or a part of a principal
building used for the storage of motor vehicles owned or used by the
owner or tenant of the premises. Not more than one ( 1) commercial
vehicle or truck may be stored in a private garage.
B. PUBLIC - a building, other than a private or storage garage,
one or more stories in height, used solely for the commercial parking,
service or repair of motor vehicles.
C. STORAGE - a building, not a private or public garage, one
story in height, used solely for the storage of motor vehicles and for
the service or repair of only the vehicles kept therein, and not for
the sale of fuel, accessories or supplies.
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION - an area of land, together with any structure
thereon, used for:
A. The retail sale of motor fuel and lubricants and ancillary
services, such as lubrication and washing of motor vehicles; and
B. The sale, installation or minor repair of tires, batteries or
other automobile accessories.
C. Routine servicing and mechanical repair of motor vehicles,
excluding major body, upholstery and restoration work.
GROSS ACREAGE - the total acreage of a property, tract, lot or parcel
proposed for subdivision or land development, including lands within
existing street rights- of- way, flood plains and steep slopes.
GROSS LEASABLE AREA - the total floor area designed for owner or
tenant occupancy and exclusive use, including basements, mezzanines and
upper floors, expressed in square feet and measured from the center line of
partitions and from outside wall faces; not including public or common
areas, such as public toilets, corridors, stairwells, elevator lobbies or
enclosed mall spaces. Also known as gross floor area.
HEIGHT OF BUILDING - the vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the existing grade at the location of the building to the
highest point of the roof for flat roofs; to the deck line of mansard
roofs; and to the mean height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and
gambrel roofs; provided that chimneys, spires, towers, mechanical penthouses,
tanks and similar projections of the building not intended for
human occupancy, shall not be included in calculating the height. If there
are two or more separate roofs on a single building, the height of such
building shall be calculated from the highest roof.
HEIGHT OF SIGN - the vertical distance measured from ground level to
the highest point on the sign, or its supporting structure.
HELIPORT -
A. PERSONAL USE HELIPORT - a helicopter landing area ( sometimes
known as a helistop) licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation for the purpose of picking up or discharging passengers
or cargo. No fueling, helicopter repair or storage area( s) are
permitted in conjunction with the operation of a personal use
heliport.
B. COMMERCIAL
includes facilities
which is licensed by
HELIPORT - a landing area for helicopters which
for fueling, repair and storage of helicopters and
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation,
Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994 - 281 -
27, § 201, cont' d) ( 27, § 201, cont' d)
HIGHWAY ACCESS POINT - the point at which vehicular traffic enters or
exits a public right- of- way from an abutting land use.
HISTORIC STRUCTURES - any structure that is: 9
A. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places ( a listing maintained by the Deparment of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register.
B. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.
C. Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places
in States with historic preservation programs which have been approved
by the Secretary of Interior.
D. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places
in communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:
1) By an approved State program as determined by the
Secretary of the Interior; or,
2) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states
without approved programs.
Ord. 91- 5]
HOME OCCUPATION - any lawful occupation or business activity performed
for financial gain which is conducted in whole or in part by a resident( s)
from his/ her primary residence, where the occupation is secondary to the
use of the dwelling for living purposes and the residential character of
the dwelling is maintained. [ Ord. 91- 8]
HOTEL - a building which provides six ( 6) or more rental rooms with
private sleeping facilities for transient guests and which has the following
characteristics:
A. Access to rental rooms via internal, common hallways leading
to and from one central lobby.
B. Parking in a lot( s) convenient to the main building entrance(
s).
C. Two or more stories in height.
D. Few, if any, outdoor recreational facilities.
E. Small landscaped areas.
JUNK YARD - an area of land, with or without buildings, used for
storage of used and discarded materials, including but not limited to,
waste paper, rags, metal, building material, house furnishings, machinery,
vehicles or parts thereof, with or without the dismantling, processing,
salvage, sale or other use or disposition of the same. The deposit or
storage on a lot of one or more unlicensed, wrecked or disabled vehicles,
or the major part thereof, shall be deemed to constitute a " junk yard."
LOT a contiguous tract, parcel or unit of land intended for use,
development, leasehold or transfer of ownership, and for which a deed
description is recorded or is intended to be recorded at the office of the
282 - Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994
27, § 201, cont' d) ( 27, § 201, cont' d)
Recorder of Deeds for Montgomery County, and/ or Berks County if the lot
overlaps the county boundary.
LOT AREA - the total land area lying within the lot lines, excluding
the following:
A. The area lying between the street centerline and the ultimate
right- of- way, as described in the Township Comprehensive Plan.
B. One- half of all land area with slopes of fifteen percent
15%) or greater, as defined by the soil survey or by accurate contour
mapping.
C. The entire surface area of all lakes or ponds.
D. The entire area in the access strip of an interior lot.
LOT, INTERIOR - also known as rear or flag lot. A lot which conforms
in all respects to the dimensional requirements of the district in which it
is located, except that road frontage and access is limited to an access
strip, as defined herein. This definition does not include the commonly -
used, wedge- shaped lots located on a cul- de- sac turnaround.
LOT LINE - any property boundary line of a lot, further defined as
follows:
A. Front lot line is the line identical with the ultimate
right- of- way line. ( Also known as street line).
B. Rear lot line is the line or lines most nearly parallel or
concentric to the front lot line.
C. Side lot lines are the lines most nearly perpendicular or
radial to the front lot line. On a corner lot, the side lot line
shall be the line or lines most nearly perpendicular or radial to the
higher classification of street, where applicable, as described in the
Township Comprehensive Plan. The remaining line shall be considered
the rear lot line.
D. A lot which fronts on more than one street shall have a front
lot line on each street frontage.
LOT LINE DEVELOPMENT - a development alternative, permitted only in
specified districts, which allows a building to be constructed contiguous
with one lot line, thereby increasing the yard area on the opposite side of
the building for useful purposes.
LOT WIDTH - the horizontal distance between side lot lines, measured
at the building line, parallel or concentric to the ultimate right- of- way
line. For a corner lot, lot width shall be measured parallel or concentric
to the ultimate right- of- way line of the higher classification of street,
where applicable.
MANUFACTURED HOME - refer to " dwelling types."
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK - a subdivision or land development planned and
constructed in compliance with the requirements of the Manufactured Home
Park Development Regulations, Part 14 of this Chapter.
MINI WAREHOUSE - a building or group of buildings in a controlled -
access and fenced compound that contains varying sizes of individual,
compartmentalized and controlled -access stalls or lockers for the dead
storage of customer' s goods or wares. [ Ord. 84- 9]
MODULAR HOME - refer to " dwelling types."
Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994 - 283 -
27, § 201, cont' d) 27, § 201, cont' d)
MOTEL - a building or group of buildings which provides rental rooms
with private sleeping and bathroom facilities for transient guests, and
which generally has the following characteristics: 0
A. Access to the rental rooms via independent, exterior doors.
B. Parking adjacent to the individual rental rooms.
C. One or two story construction.
D. Outdoor recreation facilities such as a swimming pool and
playground equipment.
E. Significant landscaped area.
MOTOR HOME - a self -powered recreation vehicle used to provide transi
ent living facilities.
MOTOR VEHICLE SALES AGENCY - a commercial use for the sale and repair
of motor vehicles, including new and used cars, trucks and/ or farm equipment;
having both indoor and outdoor display areas, and providing maintenance
and repair services for vehicle owners.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE - any lawful building or other
structure which does not conform to one or more of the applicable area and
bulk regulations of the district in which it is located either on the
effective date of this Chapter or as a result of a subsequent amendment
thereto. They shall be governed by the provisions of Part 17.
NONCONFORMING LOT - any lawful lot which does not conform to one or
more of the applicable dimensional regulations of the district in which it
is located either on the effective date of this Chapter or as a result of a
subsequent amendment thereto. They shall be governed by the provisions of
Part 17.
NONCONFORMING USE - any lawful use that does not conform to one or
more of the applicable use regulations of the district in which it is
located wither on the effective date of this Chapter or as a result of a
subsequent amendment thereto. They shall be governed by the provisions of
Part 17.
OUTDOOR LIVING AREA - any improved outdoor area extending from or
attached to a dwelling unit and designed for the exclusive use of the
residents of that dwelling unit; including balconies, patios, porches or
similar areas, but not including structures such as porticos, which simply
provide sheltered access to a dwelling unit.
PARKING SPACE - an open or covered area with a dust -free all-weather
surface which shall be at least ten by twenty feet ( 10' x 20') in size for
the storage of one automobile, accessible via a driveway.
PLAYFIELD - a common area within a subdivision or land development for
neighborhood residents to use for informal, active recreation purposes such
as " sand -lot" ball games, and other activities requiring a large lawn area,
away from homes or other buildings, for their proper conduct. Playfields
are not intended for formalized programs such as little league baseball or
midget football, which should be conducted on more appropriate facilities.
Standards for a playfield shall be:
A. Minimum area: fifteen thousand ( 15, 000) square feet.
284 -
27, § 201, cont' d) 27, § 201, cont' d)
B. Minimum horizontal dimension: one hundred twenty- five feet
125').
C. Maximum grade: three percent ( 3%).
D. Location: Reasonably centralized on the tract.
RECREATION VEHICLE - a vehicle which is ( 1) built on a single chassis;
ii) four hundred ( 400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection; ( iii) designed to be self- propelled or permanently
towable by a light duty truck; and ( iv) designed primarily not for use as a
permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping, travel, or seasonal use. Recreational vehicles also shall include
tent trailers, travel trailers, motorhomes, mini- motorhomes and any similar
self- propelled or trailered vehicle used mainly to provide easily transportable
living accommodations. Also included are snow mobiles, all -terrain
vehicles, and four- wheel drive vehicles meant for rugged, off -the -road use.
Ord. 91- 51
RECREATION VEHICLE SALES AGENCY - a commercial use for the sale and
repair, and/ or rental of new and/ or used recreation vehicles, having both
indoor and outdoor display areas, and providing maintenance and repair
services.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE- IN - a commercial use which dispenses food and drink
ready for consumption, to customers who place and receive their orders
without leaving their cars or other motor vehicles. Also included are
restaurants in which a drive- in facility provides only a portion of the
sales.
RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD - any restaurant which is characterized by one
or more of the following features:
A. Orders are placed and received at a central counter.
B. Orders are frequently packaged for takeout.
C. Orders may be consumed at tables or booths within the
facility, which must be cleared by the customers.
D. Waiter/ Waitress service is not provided.
E. Menu selections are limited.
F. Disposable containers and utensils are used rather than
reusable dishes and table service.
RIGHT- OF- WAY - a strip of land, over which are provided access rights
for various purposes, including vehicular travel, storm drainage and
utility lines. Rights- of- way are further defined as follows:
A. LEGAL RIGHT- OF- WAY - the road or street right- of- way legally
in the public domain. Generally, an old, legal right- of- way will be
substandard by comparison with current requirements, may overlap the
lot as described by deed description and shall be superseded by the
ultimate right- of- way.
B. ULTIMATE RIGHT- OF- WAY - the road or street right- of- way
projected as necessary for adequate handling of current or future
traffic volumes, as defined in the Township' s Comprehensive Plan.
Upon approval of a plan in compliance with this Chapter and the
Page Revised 10/ 22/ 1991 - 285 -
27, § 201, cont' d) 27, § 201, cont' d)
Douglass Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, the
ultimate right- of- way shall become the legal right- of- way.
C. EQUIVALENT RIGHT- OF- WAY - a road or street right- of- way
required to be reserved where private streets are permitted. The
width shall be determined by the street' s function, in accordance with
the Douglass Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
ROOMING HOUSE - a single- family detached dwelling which is used, in
addition, to provide rental rooms for not more than six ( 6) non -transient
persons.
SANITARY LANDFILL - any site used to dump, bury or deposit, store or
treat any waste material constituting " solid waste" as defined in the Solid
Waste Management Act ( Act of July 7, 1980, P. L. 380, 35 P. S. 6018. 101 et
seq.) enacted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as amended to the date
of this Chapter, and any regulations promulgated pursuant thereto. [ Ord.
85- 3]
SATELLITE USE a commercial establishment in a shopping center,
located independent of other buildings, and frequently near the road
frontage of the center. These uses are often ancillary to large stores in
the center, but may also include highway -oriented or other commercial uses
such as gasoline stations and fast food restaurants.
SEWAGE FACILITIES, CENTRAL - a sewage disposal system in compliance
with all State and local regulations, approved by the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Resources and applicable sewer authority, and providing
service to multiple customers. Public sewer systems are included in
this definition.
SHOPPING CENTER - a group of commercial establishments, planned and
developed as an integrated architectural and functional unit, providing
convenient on- site parking and controlled, common vehicular and pedestrian
access.
SIGHT DISTANCE the distance required by a driver travelling at a
given speed to stop the vehicle after an object on the roadway becomes
visible to the driver ( Pennsylvania Code, Title 67, Chapter 441, " Access to
and Occupancy of Highways by Driveways and Local Roads," as amended).
Ord. 96- 1]
SINGLE AND SEPARATE OWNERSHIP - the ownership of a contiguous land
area as one or more lots by one owner, whether a person, partnership,
corporation, or other legal entity, irrespective of the fact that parts of
the land may have been acquired at different times or that the area may
have been divided into parts on any plan or plat.
SOIL SURVEY - the Montgomery County Soil Survey of 1967, prepared by
the Soil Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture.
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITY - a sanitary landfill, solid waste
transfer station, solid waste incinerator or other facility for treating,
including recycling, storing or disposition of " solid waste" as defined in
the Solid Waste Management Act ( Act of July 7, 1980, P. L. 380, 35 P. S.
6018. 101 et seq.) enacted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as amended
to the date of this Chapter, and any regulations promulgated pursuant
thereto. [ Ord. 85- 31
286 - Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996
27, $ 201, cont' d) ( 27, § 201, cont' d)
SPECIAL EXCEPTION - a form of permitted use, authorized by this
Chapter, under the jurisdiction of the Zoning Hearing Board. The Zoning
Hearing Board is empowered to grant permission for special exceptions,
consistent with the public interest, in compliance with standards and
procedures established in this Chapter.
STEEP SLOPE - a grade of fifteen percent ( 157) or greater as determined
by the soil survey or accurate contour mapping.
STREET OR ROAD - a public or private right- of- way serving primarily as
a means of vehicular and pedestrian travel, furnishing access to abutting
properties, and which may also be used for utilities, shade trees and
stormwater control.
STREET LINE - a line identical with the front lot line and ultimate
right- of- way line.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE - damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition
would equal or exceed fifty ( 507) percent of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred. [ Ord. 91- 5]
SUPERVISORS - the duly -elected governing body of Douglass Township.
Also known as the Board of Supervisors.
TEMPORARY - a building, trailer or sign that is not expected to remain
in place longer than one ( 1) year is considered temporary. If the building
or trailer is intended to be retained after one ( 1) year, the building or
trailer must be made permanent; or application made, in writing, to the
Board of Supervisors to extend the length of time allowed for the building
or trailer to remain temporary. [ Ord. 96- 11
TOT LOT - a confined, developed, neighborhood play area primarily for
use by pre- school children. Low -maintenance play equipment and structures
shall be used and confined by a gated fence, a minimum of three feet ( 3')
high. Sitting areas shall be provided for parents' convenience while
supervising children. Shade trees shall be provided for sitting and play
areas. When a tot lot is placed abutting a playfield, practical measures,
such as fencing and orientation of facilities, shall be used to reduce
conflicts, especially from flying objects such as balls and frisbees. Tot
lot dimensions shall be:
A. Minimum area: two thousand five hundred ( 2, 500) square feet.
B. Minimum horizontal dimension: fifty feet ( 50').
C. Location: At convenient, centralized intervals.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER - a professional engineer licensed as such in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the engineer or assistant
engineer for Douglass Township. [ Ord. 90- 11
TOURIST HOME - a single- family detached dwelling which is used, in
addition, to provide sleeping accommodations for not more than ten ( 10)
transient persons, for compensation.
ULTIMATE RIGHT- OF- WAY LINE - the dividing line between a lot and the
outside limit of the ultimate right- of- way of a public street. Identical
10 with front lot line and street line.
Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996 - 287 -
27, § 201, cont' d) 27, § 201, cont' d)
USED CAR LOT or LOT FOR SALE OF RECREATION VEHICLES - a commercial use
for the sale and/ or rental of used cars, trucks, and/ or recreation
vehicles, which has only outdoor display areas, a small building for office
purposes, and . generally not providing repair or maintenance services for
vehicle purchasers beyond preparation for sale.
VEGETATIVE COVER the land area devoted to vegetative coverage,
including, but not limited to lawns, trees, shrubs, flowers and gardens.
WATER SURVEY - an inventory of the source, quantity, yield and use of
groundwater and surface water resources within Douglass Township. [ Ord.
90- 1]
YARD - the area( s) of a lot which must remain free of, buildings or
other structures, and may be used as lawn or planted area, parking or
driveway space, in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. Yard is
further defined as follows:
A. FRONT YARD - a yard which extends across the full width of a
lot, for a depth equal to the minimum front yard setback distance
required by the specific regulations of this Chapter, measured from
the ultimate right- of- way line.
B. REAR YARD - a yard which extends across the full width of a
lot, for a depth equal to the minimum rear yard setback distance
required by the specific regulations of this Chapter, measured from
the rear lot line.
C. SIDE YARD - a yard which extends along a side lot line from
the required front yard to the required rear yard, the minimum width
of which shall be the minimum specified by the regulations of this
Chapter, measured from the side lot line.
YARD LINE - a line which locates and delineates the minimum yard
setback requirements, measured from the front, rear, and side lot lines.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 84- 9, 7/ 9/ 1984; by Ord. 85- 3,
3/ 4/ 1985; by Ord. 85- 5, 8/ 19/ 1985; and by Ord. 86- 8, 7/ 21/ 1986; by Ord.
87- 5, 12/ 7/ 1987, § 11; by Ord. 90- 1, 7/ 16/ 1990, §§ 3, 18; by Ord. 91- 5,
8/ 5/ 1991, § 1, 2; by Ord. 91- 8, 10/ 22/ 1991, § 3; by Ord. 94- 2, 3/ 7/ 1994,
7- 10; Ord. 96- 1, 1/ 15/ 1996; and by Ord. 96- 4, 9/ 16/ 1996)
288 - Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997
27, § 201, cont' d)
ILLUSTRATION OF SELECTED ZONING
ORDINANCE DEFINITIONS
REAR LOT LINE
j flEAfi YAflD
BUILDING
ENVELOPE
a i
Y
Y
W0 BUILDING H
COVERAGE m
AREA OF BLDG.)
27, § 201, cont' d)
REAR YARD
LINE
BIDE YARD
LINE
SIDE LOT
LINE
FRONT YARD
LINE
BLDG LINE)
r
ULTIMATE RIGHT- OF- WAY LINE--
CARTWAY _ CENTTERLINE
ULTIMATE RIGHT- OF- WAY LINE
Page Added 6/ 17/ 1996 — 288. 1 —
27, § 300) ( 27, § 300)
Part 3
R- 1 Agricultural - Residential District
300. Declaration of Legislative Intent. The following is an expansion
of the statement of Community Development Objectives contained in Part
1, § 101( 1), of this Chapter. It is the intent of the R- 1 Agricultural -
Residential District to establish reasonable standards that control and
promote the continuation of agricultural uses and limited single- family
detached dwelling unit development in Douglass Township. The district will
direct low- density residential uses into areas of Douglass Township that
are not now served and are not intended to be served by future extension of
public sewer and water facilities. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by
Ord. 91- 6, 8/ 5/ 1991)
301. Permitted Uses. The following are the permitted uses in the
R- 1 Agricultural - Residential District:
1. Agricultural use provided that the tract is at least five ( 5)
acres and that buildings used as kennels or in the keeping or raising of
livestock or poultry shall be setback a minimum of one hundred feet ( 100')
from an ultimate right- of- way line and fifty feet ( 50') from any other
property line.
2. Single- family detached dwelling units.
3. Any of the following purposes when authorized as a special exception:
A. Commercial greenhouse.
B. Passenger stations for public transportation, telephone
central office, any other public utility uses directly relating to and
necessary for services within the Township.
C. Stand, for sale of products of the farm on which it is
located.
D. Commercial recreation uses that are substantially open in
character. Examples are riding academies, golf courses.
E. Group Day Care Home and Adult Day Care Center, provided the
proposed Group Day Care Home or Adult Day Care Center complies with
the standards of § 134 of this Chapter. [ Ord. 94- 21
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended Ord. 82- 8, 11/ 1/ 1982, § 1; by Ord. 85- 5,
8/ 19/ 1985; by Ord. 90- 1, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 4; and by Ord. 94- 2, 3/ 7/ 1994, § 11)
302. Area, Width, Yard and Building Coverage Regulations for Single -
Family Detached Dwellings.
1. Minimum Lot Area and Width - A net lot area of not less the one
acre (43,560 square feet) with a minimum lot width at the building line of
one hundred fifty feet ( 150'). ( See definition of lot area).
2. Front Yards - A front yard depth of not less than fifty feet ( 50')
measured from the ultimate right- of- way line.
3. Side Yards - There shall be two ( 2) side yards, each having a
minimum width of twenty feet ( 20').
Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994 - 289 -
27, § 302, cont' d) ( 27, § 302, cont' d)
4. Rear Yard - A rear yard depth of not less than twenty- five feet
25,). 0 5. Deleted by Ordinance 87- 4.
6. Building Coverage - Not more than ten percent ( 107) of the area of
any lot may be occupied by buildings.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 87- 4, 11/ 16/ 1987)
3.03. Height Regulations. The maximum height of buildings or structures,
erected in the R- 1 Agricultural - Residential District shall be:
1. For any principal building: thirty- five feet ( 35').
2. Accessory farm buildings as a special exception: seventy- five
feet ( 75'), provided it is located at least one hundred feet ( 100') from
any property line.
3. Non- farm accessory buildings: twenty feet ( 20').
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
304. Signs. Signs shall be permitted subject to the requirements of
Part 15 of this Chapter. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
305. Parking. A minimum of two off- street automobile parking spaces
shall be required for each dwelling unit. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
Is
MM11M
27, § 400) ( 27, § 400)
Part 4
R- 2 Residential District
400. Declaration of Legislative Intent. The following is an expansion
of the statement of Community Development Objectives contained in Part
1 § 101. 1 of this Chapter. The intent of the R- 2 District is to promote and
control single- family detached dwelling unit development in areas of the
Township that are served or planned for public sewer and water service.
The district will provide for differing lot sizes for provision of sewer
and water facilities. In addition, the district allows for a transition of
residential densities surrounding the Gilbertsville core. ( Ord. 82- 4,
6/ 7/ 1982)
401. Permitted Uses. The following are the permitted uses in the
R- 2 Residential District:
1. Any uses permitted in the R- 1 District, provided that agricultural
uses shall comply with the R- 1 District regulations.
2. Cluster Development in accordance with Part 7 of this Chapter.
3. Accessory buildings or uses as defined herein.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
402. Area, Width, Yard and Building Coverage Regulations.
1. Minimum Lot Area - Lot area for single- family detached dwellings
shall be in accordance with the following table:
Lot Area ( See definitions) Facilities
40, 000 sq. ft. with no sewer; no water
30, 000 sq. ft. with central water; no sewer
20, 000 sq. ft. with central sewer; no central water
15, 000 sq. ft. with central sewer; and central water
2. Width and Yard Regulations - The following table applies with
respect to the lot areas specified in §402( 1) above:
3. Deleted by Ordinance 87- 4.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 87- 4, 11/ 16/ 1987)
403. Height Regulations. The maximum height for buildings in the
R- 2 Residential District shall be:
1. For any principal building: thirty- five feet ( 35')
Page revised 12/ 7/ 1987 - 291 -
Building Lot Front Side Rear
Lot Size Coverage % Width Yard Yard Yard
40, 000 sq. ft. 10% 150 ft. 50 ft. 20 ft. 25 ft.
30, 000 sq. ft. 10% 125 ft. 45 ft. 20 ft. 25 ft.
20, 000 sq. ft. 15% 100 ft. 40 ft. 20 ft. 25 ft.
15, 000 sq. ft. 15% 100 ft. 35 ft. 20 ft. 25 ft.
3. Deleted by Ordinance 87- 4.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 87- 4, 11/ 16/ 1987)
403. Height Regulations. The maximum height for buildings in the
R- 2 Residential District shall be:
1. For any principal building: thirty- five feet ( 35')
Page revised 12/ 7/ 1987 - 291 -
27, § 403, cont' d) ( 27, § 403, cont' d)
2. For any accessory building: twenty feet ( 20')
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
404. Sewer and Water Facilities. Development in the R- 2 District
which is served by non- public sewer and/ or water facilities shall have
these central systems subject to approval of the Board of Supervisors,
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources, and appropriate sewer
or water authority. Central water facilities shall conform with § 705 of
this Chapter. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
405. Signs. Signs shall be permitted subject to the requirements of
Part 15 of this Chapter. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
406. Parking. A minimum of two ( 2) off- street automobile parking
spaces shall be required for each dwelling unit. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
292 - Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996
7
27, § 500)
Part 5
R- 3 Residential District
27, § 500)
500. Declaration of Legislative Intent. The following is an expansion
of the Statement of Community Development Objectives contained in Part
1, § 101. 1 of this Part. It is the intent of this Chapter to establish
reasonable controls in appropriate locations for single- family detached,
two- family and single- family attached dwellings, as well as mixes of the
above dwelling types. Furthermore, it is the intent of this Part to:
1. Encourage an appropriate mix of dwelling types and densities in
Douglass Township.
2. Promote a variety of income levels, age groups, and life- styles
within the Township.
3. Protect the Township from challenges to the Zoning ordinance and
map by providing for a diversity of housing types.
4. Encourage compact development thereby reducing the cost of provision
of public services.
5. Encourage innovative residential development and use of a variety
of building configurations.
6. Create visual interest and relate development more sensitively to
environmental features.
7. Provide for more recreational facilities than would otherwise be
provided.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
501. Permitted Uses. The following are the permitted uses in the
R- 3 Residential District:
1. Single- family detached dwelling units.
2. Two- family dwelling units.
3. Parks, playgrounds, tot lots and open space.
4. The following uses when in compliance with the applicable additional
criteria of §§ 503, 504, 505 and 507, as well as the other regulations
pertaining to all R- 3 uses:
A. Single- family attached dwelling units, including but not
limited to townhouses, quadruplexes and triplexes.
B. Mixed dwelling type developments.
C. Mobile home parks as a conditional use authorized by the
Supervisors, and in compliance with the provisions of Part 14, Mobile
Home Parks, of this Chapter.
D. An indoor recreational facility, which is intended solely for
residents of the development.
5. Group Day Care Home or Adult Day Care Center, when authorized as a
special exception; provided, that the proposed Group Day Care Home or Adult
Day Care Center complies with the standards of § 134 of this Chapter. [ Ord.
94- 2j
Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994 - 293 -
27, § 501( 6)) ( 27, § 501( 6))
6. Garage and storage shed located within the building envelope.
Ord. 94- 21
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 82- 8, 11/ 1/ 1982, § 1; by Ord. 87- 4,
11/ 16/ 1987; by Ord. 90- 1, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 5; and by Ord. 94- 2, 3/ 7/ 1994, § 12,
13)
502. Minimum Tract Size. The minimum tract size for R- 3 Development
proposals shall be five ( 5) acres, except lots of record containing less
than five ( 5) developable acres at time of enactment of Phis Chapter. Said
property shall abide by all other applicable provisions of this district.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
503. Density. In the R- 3 Residential District, the maximum permitted
densities shall be:
Dwelling Units per
Development Type Developable Acre
1. 100% single- family detached 3
2. 100% two- family 4
3. Mix of single- family detached and
two- family 4
4. 1007 single- family attached 5
5. Other mixed development, not including
3) above 5
Provided however, in addition to the maximum permitted densities set forth
above, the development in all respects must conform to all other requirements
of this Chapter including, but not limited to, dimensional standards
set forth in § 504, other standards set forth in § 505, general regulations
set forth in § 506, parking regulations set forth in § 507 and open space
requirements set forth in §508 so that the choice of dwelling types, mixing
percentages or other factors may require a lower density than the maximum
indicated in the table above.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
504. Dimensional Standards. The minimum dimensional standards are
included on the tables below. It is emphasized that these standards are
minimal and that they are intended to permit maximum flexibility in the
design of the development plan.
1. Area, Width, Yard and Building Coverage Regulations -
Lot Area
see definition)
Single -Family
7, 500 sq. ft.
per
Lot Width at 60 feet
Building Line
1. " portions" in original.
Two - Family Dwellings
Twin" Duplex"
4, 500 4, 500
sq. ft. sq. ft.
per du per du
35 ft. 70 ft.
Single -Family Attached
when lotted)
2, 000 sq. ft.
per du
20 ft.
294 - Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994
27, § 504, cont' d) 27, § 504, cont' d)
Single Family
1. Front yard setback shall be measured from the Ultimate
Right - of - Way of residential streets, equivalent right- of- way of
private streets, or edge of paving of parking access driveways and
parking areas.
2. For Single - Family Attached Dwelling Units any yard which is
not clearly a front or rear yard shall be considered a side yard.
2. Building Setbacks from Nonresidential Streets -
Single Two -Family Dwellings Attached
Dwelling Type
Family Twin" Duplex" ( when lotted)
Front Yardl 25 feet 25 ft. 25 ft. 25 ft.
Sid2 Yard 25 ft. aggregate 15 ft. 25 ft. aggregate 15
ft.
50 feet 50 feet
Feeder 30 feet 30 feet
10 ft. minimum one side) 10 ft. minimum
Rear Yard 25 feet 25 ft. 25 ft. 25 ft.
Building 25% 30% 30% 40%
Coverage
1. Front yard setback shall be measured from the Ultimate
Right - of - Way of residential streets, equivalent right- of- way of
private streets, or edge of paving of parking access driveways and
parking areas.
2. For Single - Family Attached Dwelling Units any yard which is
not clearly a front or rear yard shall be considered a side yard.
2. Building Setbacks from Nonresidential Streets -
Street Single- family Dwelling Type Single -Family
Classification Detached Two -Family Attached
Semi -controlled 75 feet 75 feet 75 feet
Access
Collector 50 feet 50 feet 50 feet
Feeder 30 feet 30 feet 30 feet
measured from ultimate right- of- way)
3. Additional Standards for Single Family Attached Development - The
minimum distance between buildings when lotting is not used shall be:
A. For buildings with less than three percent ( 3%) window or
other transparent surface on facing walls ( see definition in Part 2
the minimum distance between buildings shall be thirty feet ( 30').
B. For buildings with more than three percent ( 3%) window area
or other transparent surface on facing walls the minimum distance
between buildings shall be fifty feet ( 50').
4. Building Height - The maximum height of all new or enlarged
buildings within the R- 3 District shall be thirty- five feet ( 35').
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
505. Attachment of Dwelling Units and Buildings. The following
standards are intended to regulate the attachment of dwelling, units and
buildings to one another:
1. A maximum of eight ( 8) single- family attached dwelling units may
be joined in a linear row to form a single- family attached building.
295 -
27, § 505, cont' d) ( 27, § 505, cont' d)
2. Single- family attached buildings in compliance with § 505( 1), above
may be attached to one another ( not in a linear fashion) to form court
areas provided that: 0
A. Not more than twenty- four ( 24) dwelling units may be so
attached to form any one court area, and;
B. Access for emergency equipment, satisfactory to the Board of
Supervisors is provided.
3. Single family attached buildings may be attached to one another to
form building configurations other than court areas, ( such as " L", " Y",
curved, or free -form arrangements) provided that:
A. Not more than twenty- four ( 24) dwelling units may be so
attached, and;
B. A distinct change in direction between the axes of the
buildings so attached shall occur no more than eight ( 8) dwelling
units apart; and
C. Access for emergency equipment satisfactory to the Board of
Supervisors is provided.
4. Six or more single- family attached dwelling units may be attached
in a " back- to- back" manner provided that:
A. Not more than twenty- five percent ( 25%) of all single family
attached buildings are so formed; and
B. Not more than sixteen ( 16) dwelling units may be located in
each building; and
C. " Back- to- back" buildings may not be joined to any other
structure.
D. This subsection shall not be interpreted as a prohibition or
restrictions on placing four ( 4) single family attached units in a
back- to- back" fashion, as one form of quadruplex dwelling types.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
506. General Regulations. The following general regulations shall
apply to all developmental proposals within the R- 3 Residential District:
1. Ownership - The tract of land proposed for subdivision or land
development shall be in single ownership, or ownership shall be such that
the tract will be developed under a single direction in accordance with an
approved plan.
2. Development Plan - The application for development shall be
accompanied by a plan or plans showing detailed use of the entire tract.
These plans shall comply with the Douglass Township Subdivision and Land
Development Regulations and all other applicable Township ordinances. The
plan or plans shall clearly designate the proposed use( s) of each area of
the tract.
3. Development Stages and Permits - The development of the tract may
be carried out in either a single phase or in stages. If carried out in
stages the development shall be in accordance with a development agreement
which shall:
296 -
27, § 506, cont' d) ( 27, § 506, cont' d)
A. Be binding to the overall tract and it' s development;
B. Be recorded with the final plan; and
C. Be acceptable to the Township Solicitor and governing body.
4. Sewer and Water Facilities - All development in the R- 3 District
shall be served by central water facilities and central sewer facilities
acceptable to the Board of Supervisors, subject to approval of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources, appropriate sewer authority,
and water authority. Central water facilities shall conform with § 705 of
this Chapter. When central water and/ or sewer are not available, development
of single- family detached dwelling units may be done on lots conforming
to the standards of § 402. 1 of this Chapter.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996 - 297 -
507. Parking Regulations.
1. Number of Spaces and Eligibility - A minimum of two ( 2) off- street
automobile parking spaces shall be required for each dwelling unit.
Garages will not be counted as parking spaces. Driveways leading to the
garages may be considered, when appropriate.
2. Parking Standards for Single -Family Attached Dwelling Units -
A. Parking for single- family attached dwelling units may be
provided as privately -owned space on the individual property containing
the dwelling unit, or as commonly -owned space, conveniently
located among the dwelling units.
B. Where required parking is provided as private space on
individual lots, additional guest parking facilities shall be provided
in the form of commonly -owned, conveniently -located parking areas, at
a minimum standard of two- tenths ( 2/ 10) of a space per dwelling unit.
C. Any common parking facilities shall be owned and maintained
by some form of corporate ownership, homeowners' association, trust,
etc., acceptable to the Township Supervisors upon recommendation of
the Township Solicitor.
D. Parking areas shall be designed to discourage through traffic
flow of vehicles which to not park within the area.
E. Not more than fifteen ( 15) parking spaces shall be located in
an uninterrupted row. If more than fifteen ( 15) parking spaces are
located in a row, curbed planted areas, with a minimum size of ten
feet by twenty feet ( 10 x 20) shall be located at appropriate intervals
to break up the monotonous effect and provide visual interest.
Ord. 96- 1j
F. A permanent paved turnaround area large enough to accommodate
passenger cars shall be provided at the closed end of any parking area
with a capacity of fifty ( 50) or more spaces, and which would otherwise
function as a dead- end parking lot. Parking shall be prohibited
within the turnaround area. Acceptable configurations include circular,
" T", and " Y" shaped facilities.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 96- 1, 1/ 15/ 1996)
Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996 - 297 -
27, § 508) ( 27, § 508)
508. Open Space Requirements. A minimum of fifteen percent ( 15%) of
the gross area of any tract proposed for R- 3 District Development must be
permanently preserved as open space, in compliance with § 704, Open Space
Regulations, of Part 7 of this Chapter. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
509. Signs. Signs shall be permitted subject to the requirements of
Part 15 of this Chapter. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
510. Lighting Facilities. Lighting facilities shall be provided as
needed and shall:
1. Not produce unreasonable direct glare on the abutting roads or
neighboring properties; and
2. Be installed by the developer at his expense.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
511. Buffer Requirements. Screening and softening buffers shall be
provided in compliance with the following regulations:
1. Screening Buffers. Screening buffers shall be provided when R- 3
Residential developments abut single- family detached residential uses or
districts. They shall also be provided when R- 3 developments abut existing
commercial, industrial or institutional properties that do not have
existing buffers. The screening buffer shall be a minimum of twenty- five
25') feet in width along the property line and must be developed in
accordance with the provisions of § 420( 4) of the Township Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance [ Chapter 22]. Whenever possible, the owner shall
make every effort to retain existing natural screening, such as vegetation
and topography.
2. Softening Buffers. Softening buffers shall be provided along all
side and rear property lines that are not required to have a screening
buffer. Softening buffers must be developed in accordance with the pro
visions .of § 420( 5) of the Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
[ Chapter 221.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 90- 1, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 29)
298 - Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996
27, § 601) ( 27, § 601)
Part 6
R- 4 Residential District
600. Declaration of Legislative Intent. The following is an expansion
of the Statement of Community Development Objectives contained in
101( 1) of this Chapter. It is the intent of this Part to establish reasonable
controls and standards of performance for garden apartment dwellings
in those areas of Douglass Township where the existing community
character, superior road access ( to feeder or higher classification roads),
proximity to commercial and employment centers, and the presence or planned
extension of sewer and water facilities would most readily accommodate the
highest intensity of residential dwelling type permitted in the Township.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
601. Permitted Uses. The following are the permitted uses in the
R- 4 Residential District:
1. Garden apartments.
2. Parks, playgrounds, tot lots and open space.
3. An indoor recreational facility that is intended solely for the
residents of the development.
4. Uses permitted in R- 2 and R- 3 Residential Districts on tracts of
less than ten ( 10) acres existing in single and separate ownership at the
time of the enactment of the amendment of this Section. Provided, however,
that such uses shall comply with the regulations and standards applicable
to the R- 2 Residential District and R- 3 Residential District, respectively,
rather than the regulations and standards of the R- 4 Residential District.
Ord. 90- 1J
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 87- 4, 11/ 16/ 1987; and by Ord.
90- 1, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 12)
602. Minimum Tract Size. The minimum tract size for development in
an R- 4 Residential District, except as otherwise provided in §601, shall be
ten ( 10) acres. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 90- 1, 7/ 16/ 1990,
12)
603. Density. Density in R- 4 Developments shall be a maximum of ten
10) dwelling units per developable acre. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
604. Dimensional Standards.
1. Building Lente - Maximum permitted building length shall be two
hundred feet ( 200').
2. Building Setbacks - Minimum building setback from streets, parking,
driveways and property lines shall be in compliance with the following
table:
Street Classification
or Other Feature Setbacks
A. Controlled access or 75 feet from ultimate
semi -controlled access right- of- way
streets
Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990 - 299 -
27, § 604, cont' d)
Street Classification
or Other Feature
B. Collector streets
C. Feeder and residential
streets
D. Private streets
E. Parking areas and parking
access drives
F. Property lines
27, § 604, cont' d)
Setback
60 feet from ultimate
right- of- way
50 feet from ultimate
right- of- way
50 feet from equivalent
right- of- way
25 feet from edge of
paving
50 feet
3. Building Spacing - Minimum building spacing shall be in compliance
with the following regulations:
A. Minimum distance between buildings with less than three
percent ( 3%) window or other transparent surface on facing walls:
twenty feet ( 201) ( see definition of facing walls in Part 2).
B. Minimum distance between buildings with more than three
percent ( 3%) window or other transparent surface on facing walls:
forty feet ( 40').
C. Minimum distance between buildings where one or both facing
wall( s) contains an outdoor living area: sixty feet ( 60').
4. Building Height - The maximum height of all new or enlarged
buildings within the R- 4 District shall be thirty- five feet ( 351).
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
605. General Regulations. The following general regulations shall
apply to all development proposal within the R- 4 Residential District:
1. Ownership - The tract of land proposed for subdivision or land
development shall be in single ownership, or ownership shall be such that
the tract will be developed under a single direction in accordance with an
approved plan.
2. Development Plan - The application for development shall be
accompanied by a plan or plans showing detailed use of the entire . tract.
These plans shall comply with the Douglass Township Subdivision and Land
Development Regulations and all other applicable Township ordinances. The
plan or plans shall clearly designate the proposed use( s) of each area of
the tract.
3. Development Stages and Permits - The development of the tract may
be carried out in either a single phase or in stages. If carried out in
stages the development shall be in accordance with a development agreement
which shall:
A. Be binding to the overall tract and its development;
B. Be recorded with the final plan; and
C. Be acceptable to the Township Solicitor and governing body.
300 - Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990
is
27, § 605, cont' d) ( 27, § 605, cont' d)
4. Sewer and Water Facilities - All development in the R- 4 District
shall be served by central water facilities and central sewer facilities
acceptable to the Board of Supervisors, and subject to approval by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources, appropriate sewer
authority, and water authority. Central water facilities shall conform
with § 705 of this Chapter.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
606. Parking Requirements.
1. Number of Spaces and Eligibility - A minimum of two ( 2) off- street
automobile parking spaces shall be required for each dwelling unit.
Garages will not be counted as parking spaces. Driveways leading to the
garages may be considered, where appropriate.
2. Minimum Setbacks for Parking Areas -
From Distance in Feet
Tract Boundary Line 20
Ultimate Right -of -Way 10
Edge of paving of a private
street or another parking area 10
Any building 25
3. Design Standards -
A. Parking areas shall be designed to discourage through traffic
flow of vehicles which do not park within the area.
B. Not more than fifteen ( 15) parking spaces shall be located in
an uninterrupted row. If more than fifteen ( 15) parking spaces are
located in a row, curbed planted areas, with a minimum size of ten
feet by twenty feet ( 10 x 20) shall be located at appropriate intervals
to break up the monotonous effect and provide visual interest.
Ord. 96- 11
C. A permanent paved turnaround area large enough to accommodate
passenger cars shall be provided at the closed end of any parking area
with a capacity of fifty ( 50) or more spaces, and which would otherwise
function as a dead- end parking lot. Parking shall be prohibited
within the turn -around area. Acceptable configurations include
circular, " T" and " Y" shaped facilities.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 96- 1, 1/ 15/ 1996)
607. Open Space Requirements. A minimum of fifteen percent ( 15%) of
the gross area of any tract proposed for R- 4 District Development must be
permanently preserved as open space, in compliance with § 704, Open Space
Regulations, of Part 7 of this Chapter. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
608. Signs. Signs shall be permitted subject to the requirements of
Part 15 of this Chapter. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
609. Lighting Facilities. Lighting facilities shall be provided as
needed and shall:
Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996 - 301 -
27, § 609, cont' d) 27, § 609, cont' d)
1. Not produce unreasonable direct glare on the abutting roads or
neighboring properties; and Ia
2. Be installed by the developer at his expense.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
610. Buffer Requirements. Screening and softening buffers shall be
provided in compliance with the following regulations:
1. Screening Buffers. Screening buffers shall be provided when R- 4
Residential developments abut residential uses or districts. They shall
also be provided when R- 4 developments abut existing commercial, industrial,
or institutional properties that do not have existing buffers. The
screening buffer shall be a minimum of twenty- five ( 25') feet in width
along the property line and must be developed in accordance with the
provisions of § 420( 4) of the Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance [ Chapter 221. Whenever possible, the owner shall make every
effort to retain existing natural screening, such as vegetation and
topography.
2. Softening Buffers. Softening buffers shall be provided along all
side and rear property lines that are not required to have a screening
buffer. Softening buffers must be developed in accordance with the provisions
of § 420( 5) of the Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
[ Chapter 22j.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 90- 1, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 30)
C]
302 - Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996
27, § 700) ( 27, § 700)
Part 7
Cluster Development Regulations
700. Declaration of Legislative Intent. The following is an expansion
of the Statement of Community Development Objectives contained in
101( 1) of this Chapter. The intent of this Part is to establish standards
and criteria which permit Cluster Development of lands in the R- 2 Residential
District, in return for the preservation of usable and environmentally
sensitive open space, and the development of recreational facilities which
can serve Township residents. In addition, the Open Space Regulations of
this Part also govern the preservation and use of Common Open Space in the
R- 3 and R- 4 Residential Districts, Parts 5 and 6 of this Chapter. Furthermore,
it is the intent of this Part to encourage:
1. A more creative approach to the use of land.
2. More efficient development patterns for roads and utilities.
3. More usable and suitably located open space and recreation facilities
than would be provided under conventional subdivisions.
4. Preservation of environmentally sensitive areas including woods,
stream valleys, historic sites and scenic vistas.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
701. Prerequisite for Cluster Development. To be eligible for
Cluster Development, the following conditions must be met:
is 1. Tract Location - The land shall be located in the R- 2 Residential
District.
2. Tract Size - The minimum tract size shall be twenty- five ( 25)
acres; excluding the rights- of- way of existing public roads.
3. Open Space Suitability - At least fifteen percent ( 15%) of the
gross area of the tract must be suitable for use as open space, in conformance
with the standards of § 704 of this Part, and shall be permanently
reserved for open space uses.
4. Water Supply - All Cluster Development requires public water
supply, except that when public water supply is not practical, a private
centralized water supply system may be used, in conformance with § 705 of
this Part.
5. Sewer Facilities - All Cluster Development shall be served by
central sanitary sewers, acceptable to the Board of Supervisors, and
subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources
and appropriate sewer authority.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
702. Density/ Number of Lots. The total number of lots permitted in
a Cluster Development shall be similar to the number permitted under
conventional R- 2 subdivision, and shall be calculated by dividing the
developable acreage by fifteen thousand ( 15, 000) square feet ( the
conventional minimum permitted lot size) to determine the total number of
lots permitted under Cluster Development regulations. ( Ord. 82- 4,
6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 94- 2, 3/ 7/ 1994, § 14)
Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994 - 303 -
27, § 703) ( 27, § 703)
703. Dimensional Standards. The following are the dimensional
standards for Cluster Development:
1. Minimum Standards -
A. Lot Area ( see definitions) 12, 000 square feet
B. Lot width at the building line 80 feet
C. Front Yard ( residential street) 30 feet
D. Side yards 35 feet aggregate
15 feet minimum
E. Rear yard 30 feet
2. Building coverage shall not exceed eighteen percent ( 18%).
3. The following building setbacks are required from higher classification
streets, regardless of which yard classification would otherwise
be applicable:
A. Feeder 30 feet
B. Collector 50 feet
C. Controlled, Semi -Controlled, or 75 feet
or Limited Access
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
704. Open Space Regulations. Common open space, required to be
permanently preserved under the provisions of Parts 5, 6 and 7 of this
Chapter, R - 3,' R- 4 and Cluster Development, respectively, shall comply with
the regulations contained in this section. This common open space must be
usable for recreation, pedestrian and bicycle circulation, environmental
and/ or aesthetic purposes, and it must be conveniently located for use by
residents and preserve and protect environmentally sensitive features
wherever applicable.
1. Open Space Characteristics - To be considered acceptable for use
as open space, the land must contain one or more of the following characteristics:
A. Areas suitable for active recreational uses such as baseball
or football, without interfering with adjacent dwelling units,
parking, driveways and/ or roads.
B. Flood plain areas as defined by Part 16 of this Chapter.
C. Lakes or ponds.
304 - Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994
27, § 704, cont' d) 27, § 704, cont' d)
D. Slopes exceeding fifteen percent ( 15%) as delineated by the
Montgomery County Soil Survey or by contour lines accurately delineated
on the applicant' s plan.
E. Woodlands.
F. Lands comprising the " landscape entity" of historic sites, as
determined by the Board of Supervisors, upon recommendation of the
Township Planning Agency and appropriate historical experts, if any.
2. Design Requirements - Open space permanently preserved in fulfillment
of the requirements of this section shall:
A. Be designed as a continuous system of usable areas, interspersed
among groupings of residential dwelling units.
B. Be interconnected with common open space areas on abutting
parcels wherever possible.
C. Be provided with safe and convenient access by adjoining
public road frontage or other rights- of- way or easements capable of
accommodating pedestrian, bicycle, and maintenance vehicle traffic and
containing appropriate access improvements.
D. Be provided with sufficient perimeter parking when necessary.
E. Be comprised of areas not less than seventy- five feet ( 75')
in width and not less than eleven thousand ( 11, 000) square feet of
contiguous area.
F. Be comprised of not more than fifty percent ( 50%) flood plain
and/ or steep -slope areas.
G. Not be divided by crossings of public or private roads except
where necessary for proper traffic circulation, upon recommendation of
the Township Engineer and Planning Agency.
3. Recreation Facilities - The developer shall provide space and
install the following recreational facilities or an equivalent acceptable
to Douglass Township:
Number of Dwelling Units Recreational Requirements
0 - 99 1 playfield, 1 tot lot or the equivalent
100 - 199 2 playfields, 1 basketball or tennis
court, two tot lots or the equivalent
200 - 400 3 playfields, 2 basketball or tennis
courts, 3 tot lots or the equivalent
over 400 swimming pool minimum ( 40' x 75') 3
basketball or tennis courts, 4 tot lots,
4 playfields or the equivalent.
4. Offer of Dedication - All common open space and recreation facilities
required by this Chapter shall be offered for dedication to the
Township, although the Township need not accept any such offers.
5. Private Ownership and Maintenance - A form of ownership and
maintenance acceptable to the Board of Supervisors, upon recommendation of
305 -
27, § 704, cont' d) 27, § 704, cont' d)
the Township Solicitor, must be provided for open space, recreation, sewer,
water and stormwater management facilities which will not be public owned.
Corporate ownership ( homeowner' s association) or individual ownership
landlord or developer) of open space and facilities shall be governed by
the following:
A. Access to, and use of open space, when held in private
ownership, may be restricted to the following:
1) property owners or renters within the development.
2) nearby property owners who wish to join.
B. Perpetual maintenance shall be guaranteed by trust indenture
or similar instrument, approved by the Board of Supervisors, upon
recommendation of the Township Solicitor, which instrument:
1) shall be held with the Recorder of Deeds of Montgomery
County simultaneously with the recording of the final subdivision
plan.
2) shall restrict the open space by deed restrictions for
a minimum period of ninety- nine ( 99) years.
3) may include provisions for:
a) bonds posted by the developer to cover expenses
incurred before formation of a homeowners' association.
b) adjustment of association fees to account for
inflation.
c) a reserve fund to cover capital improvements
and/ or unforeseen major maintenance requirements.
d) funds for professional management.
4) shall authorize the Township to maintain the common
elements and assess the private ownership accordingly if private
ownership fails to function and permits a hazard to health and
safety. This shall include but need not be limited to:
a) failure to clear streets and parking areas of
snow.
b) failure to maintain stormwater control facilities.
c) failure to correct other hazardous conditions.
6. Fee in Lieu of Provision of Open Space and Recreation Facilities -
Where the Board of Supervisors determine that it is impractical to set
aside the required open space area or provide required recreational facilities,
a fee in lieu of such land and recreational facilities shall be
required to help the Township defray the eventual costs of providing open
space and recreation facilities to serve the residents of the development.
The fee shall be payable to the Township prior to approval of the final
plan by the Board of Supervisors.
A. The amount of the fee shall be equal to the value of the land
and recreational facilities required by this Part. The cost of
306 -
Op
27, § 705) 27, § 705)
determining the value of the land and recreational facilities shall be
borne by the developer, and shall result in a reasonable value acceptable
to the Board of Supervisors.
B. All monies collected in liew of land or facilities shall be
kept in a Township Open Space Capital Reserve Fund, which shall only
be used for the acquisition of open space land or capital improvements
for open space and park and recreation purposes at a location within
the Township selected by the Board of Supervisors upon recommendation
of the Planning Agency.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 87- 4, 11/ 16/ 1987)
705. Water Facilities. When connection to the public water supply
system ( Boyertown Water Authority) is not practical, the Board of Supervisors
may permit the use of a private, centralized water supply system,
which system shall be:
1. designed to be compatible with the requirements of the Boyertown
Water Authority ( hereafter referred to as B. W. A.)
2. capable of eventual tie- in with the existing B. W. A. system.
3. constructed to the specifications of the B. W. A.
4. owned, operated and maintained by:
A. the B. W. A.
B. the developer, or
IsC.a homeowners' association in compliance with § 704( 5).
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
706. General Regulations. The following regulations shall apply to
any Cluster Development proposal:
1. Ownership - The tract of land proposed for subdivision or land
development shall be in single ownership, or ownership shall be such that
the tract will be developed under a single direction in accordance with an
approved plan.
2. Development Plan - The application for development shall be
accompanied by a plan or plans showing detailed use of the entire tract.
These plans shall comply with the Douglass Township Subdivision and Land
Development Regulations and all other applicable Township ordinances. The
plan or plans shall clearly designate the proposed use( s) of each area of
the tract.
3. Development Stages and Permits - The development of the tract may
be carried out in either a single phase or in stages. If carried out in
stages the development shall be in accordance with a development agreement
which shall:
A. Be binding to the overall tract and it' s development;
B. Be recorded with the final plan; and
C. Be acceptable to the Township Solicitor and governing body.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
Page Revised 12/ 7/ 1987 - 307 -
27, § 707) ( 27, § 707)
707. Signs. Signs shall be permitted subject to the requirements of
Part 15 of this Chapter. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
708. Lighting Facilities. Lighting facilities shall be provided as
needed and shall:
1. Not produce unreasonable direct glare on the abutting roads or
neighboring properties; and
2. Be installed by the developer at his expense.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
709. Parking. A minimum of two ( 2) off- street automobile parking
spaces shall be required for each dwelling unit ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as
amended by Ord. 90- 1, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 32)
r
308 - Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996
27, § 800)
Part 8
IN - Institutional District
27, § 800)
800. Declaration of Legislative Intent. The following is an expansion
of the Statement of Community Development Objectives contained in
101( 5) of this Chapter. It is the intent of the Institutional District to
permit the development of land for institutional purposes. Further, it is
the intent of this Part to:
1. Ensure that institutional uses are appropriately located within
the Township, in relation to population and infrastructure.
2. Minimize any adverse impacts of institutional uses on surrounding
residential areas and traffic flow and safety.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
801. Permitted Uses. Permitted uses are grouped into three ( 3)
classifications according to the minimum lot size required for each classification.
Minimum lot sizes are two, four or ten acres depending on the
type of use. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
802. Class One Permitted Uses. Institutions on lots with a minimum area of two
2) acres and a minimum lot width at the building line of two hundred feet
200'), the following uses are permitted:
1. Churches or other places of worship and adjunct residential uses,
but not including associated schools or cemeteries.
2. Day care centers, pre- school facilities or Adult Day Care Centers,
which do not use the operator' s residence for these purposes, provided the
Day Care Center or Adult Day Care Center complies with the standards of
134 of this Chapter. [ Ord. 94- 21
3. Libraries.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 90- 1, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 6; and by Ord.
94- 2, 3/ 7/ 1994, §§ 15, 16)
803. Class Two Permitted Uses. On lots with a minimum area of four
4) acres and a minimum width at the building line of three hundred feet
300'), the following uses are permitted:
1. Medical and surgical hospitals, clinics, sanitaria, rehabilitation
clinics and nursing and convalescent homes.
2. Retirement homes or similar institutions which provide housing for
health, elderly residents.
3. Convents, monasteries or similar religious facilities as a primary
use.
4. Institutional headquarters for nonprofit organizations.
5. Sewage treatment plants and facilities.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ I982)
Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994 - 309 -
27, § 804) ( 27, § 804)
804. Class Three Permitted Uses. On lots with a minimum area of ten
10) acres and a minimum width at the building line of four hundred feet
400'), the following uses are permitted:
1. Schools, including elementary through college level, including
theological schools, whether publicly or privately owned or operated.
2. Cemeteries or similar uses.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
805. Additional Use Regulations.
1. Accessory uses, or buildings, as defined herein, are permitted in
conjunction with the appropriate use.
2. When two ( 2) or more uses , of differing classifications are proposed
for one lot or development, the larger minimum lot size and dimensional
standards shall apply.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
806. Dimensional Standards. The following table lists the minimum
dimensional standards required of institutional uses in accordance with the
classification of permitted use:
maximum height of the structure. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
310 - Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996
Class One Class Two Class Three
1. Lot Size Two acres Four acres Ten acres
2. Lot Width 200 ft. 300 ft. 400 ft.
3. Building Setbacks
A. from streets 75 ft. 75 ft. 100 ft.
B. from property lines 50 ft. 75 ft. 100 ft.
4. Parking and Driveway
Setbacks
A. from streets 25 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft.
B. from property lines 25 ft. 50 ft. 75 ft.
C. from buildings 15 ft. 15 ft. 25 ft.
5. Accessory buildings
or use
A. from streets 50 ft. 50 ft. 75 ft.
B. from property lines 50 ft. 50 ft. 75 ft.
C. from driveways 50 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft.
Driveway distances shall be measured center line to center line of
the street intersection. For Class One, the driveway distance shall
be fifty ( 50) feet. [ Ord. 96- 1]
Ord., 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 96- 1, 1/ 5/ 1996)
807. Maximum Building Height. The maximum permitted building height
shall be thirty- five feet ( 3 5) ) except that spires, steeples or similar
non -occupied, decorative and/ or symbolic architectural features may be
permitted up to a height of seventy- five feet ( 75'), provided that the
setback of any such structure from property lines must equal or exceed the
maximum height of the structure. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
310 - Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996
27, § 808) 27, § 808)
808. Building Size and Spacing and Impervious Coverage.
1. The minimum spacing between any two buildings on one lot shall be
equal to the height of the taller building, exclusive of spires, steeples,
and other similar non -occupied projections.
2. Maximum permitted impervious coverage of any lot shall be fifty
percent ( 507), including buildings, roads, driveways, parking lots, walks,
patios and terraces.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
809. Parking and Service Areas.
1. Parking capacity shall be determined by the following standards:
A. Churches or other places or worship: one space per three
seats of seating capacity.
B. Institutional headquarters for nonprofit organizations; other
permitted offices: one space per two hundred fifty ( 250) square feet
of gross floor area.
C. The following uses require one space for each employee and
volunteer during most heavily -staffed periods, plus the number listed
for each use:
1) libraries: one space per three hundred ( 300) square
feet of public floor area.
2) hospitals, clinics, sanitaria, nursing and convalescent
homes: one space per four ( 4) patient beds.
3) retirement homes or similar facilities: one space per
two residents at maximum capacity.
4) convents, monasteries, or similar facilities as a
primary use: one space per four ( 4) residents at maximum capacity.
5) pre- school, day care and schools permitted by § 804( 1):
additional capacity to be evaluated on a case- by- case basis.
2. Design Standards -
A. Parking areas shall be designed to discourage through traffic
flow of vehicles which do not park within the area.
B. Not more than fifteen ( 15) parking spaces shall be located in
an uninterrupted row. If more than fifteen ( 15) parking spaces are
located in a row, curbed planted areas with a minimum size of ten feet
by twenty feet ( 10 x 20) shall be located at appropriate intervals to
break up the monotonous effect and provide visual interest. [ Ord.
96- 1]
C. A permanent paved turnaround area large enough to accommodate
passenger cars shall be provided at the closed end of any parking area
with a capacity of fifty ( 50) or more spaces, and which would otherwise
function as a dead- end parking lot. Parking shall be prohibited
within the turnaround area. Acceptable configurations include circular,
" T", and " Y" shaped facilities.
Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996 - 311 -
27, § 809, cont' d) ( 27, § 809, cont' d)
3. Parking Held in Reserve - If the number of spaces required by
809( l. A) through ( C), above , is substantially larger than the number
anticipated by the applicant, the reserve parking concept may be utilized
to avoid unnecessary paving, in accordance with the following criteria:
A. The total number of spaces which must be paved initially may
be reduced up to fifty percent ( 50%) by the Township Supervisors, upon
recommendation of the Township Planning Agency and Engineer.
B. Suitable area must be available and reserved for construction
of the balance of the total number of spaces otherwise required by
809( 1) above, if and when they are deemed necessary by the Township
Supervisors, upon recommendation of the Township Planning Agency and
Engineer. In addition, a re- evaluation of parking capacity shall be
required upon a change in status ( use, building additions, ownership,
number of residents, employees, students, congregation). Following
re- evaluation, the Supervisors may require installation of additional
parking spaces, upon recommendation of the Township Planning Agency
and Engineer.
C. To qualify for use of the reserve parking concept, the
applicant shall provide evidence supporting reduced parking needs to
the Township Planning Agency and Engineer for their review and recommendation.
4. Service are for loading, unloading, trash removal, etc., shall be
provided when deemed necessary by the Supervisors, and shall be located to
the rear or side of the proposed use whichever is least objectionable, and
screened from abutting residential uses.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 96- 1, 1/ 15/ 1996)
810. Additional Controls.
I. A planned, efficient system of ingress, egress and interior
circulation shall be provided, and shall cause minimal interference with
nearby traffic.
2. Lighting shall be provided and arranged in a manner which will
protect adjacent streets and properties from unreasonable direct glare.
3. Signs shall be permitted in compliance with Part 15 of this
Chapter.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
811. Criteria for Considering Rezoning Applications. Applications
for rezoning of a parcel of land to the Institutional District shall be
considered by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the following
criteria:
1. Character of the Surrounding Area - The impact of the proposed
institution on the surrounding properties shall be considered. If the
proposal is adjacent to a residential district, the scale of the institution
shall relate to and complement the surrounding area.
312 Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996
r11
27, § 811, cont' d) ( 27, § 811, cont' d)
2. Sewage Disposal - All institutional uses shall be capable of being
served by central sewer. A small- scale institution may be permitted to be
served by an on -lot sanitary system only if deemed acceptable by the Board
of Supervisors, upon recommendation of the Township Engineer, and approval
of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources.
3. Water Supply - Sufficient water must be available to accommodate
all the needs of the proposed institution. If public water is not available,
a non -system well will be permitted only if the applicant can demonstrate
to the satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors that it would not
adversely affect existing water supply systems in the area.
4. Traffic - The existing road system must be able to accommodate the
peak traffic generated by the institution in a safe and efficient manner.
Existing residential areas shall not be infringed upon by significant
volumes of traffic from the proposed facility. In order to fully evaluate
this, the Board of Supervisors may request a traffic impact statement, as
described below:
A. A traffic impact study shall present enough information to
enable the Township to assess the impact of the proposed institution
on the roads within the Township. The study must demonstrate that the
proposed use will not adversely affect surrounding areas or traffic
circulation generally in the Township; or else identify any traffic
problems that might be caused or aggravated by the proposed use and
delineate solutions to those problems. Based upon the findings of the
study the Township may require other improvements both on- site and
off- site, which would alleviate hazardous or congested situations
directly attributable to the proposed development, as a condition of
approval.
B. The traffic impact study shall be prepared for a study area
extending a minimum of one ( 1) mile on all abutting roads from the
boundaries of the proposed institution. This area may be modified at
the discretion of the Board of Supervisors.
C. The traffic impact study shall be prepared by a qualified
traffic engineer who possesses the credentials outlined for a Municipal
Traffic Engineer defined in Pennsylvania Code Chapter 612,
entitled " Municipal Traffic Engineering Certification."
5. Applications for any institutional use or modifications to any
existing institutional use shall be submitted to the Township, accompanied
by a plan or plans which shall include the following:
A. A plot plan of the lot showing the location of all present
and proposed buildings, drives, parking lots, and other constructional
features on the lot; and all buildings, streets, alleys, highways,
streams and other topographical features of the lot and within two
hundred feet ( 200') of any lot line.
B. Architectural renderings or sketches for any proposed
buildings.
C. A description of the institutional operations proposed in
sufficient detail to indicate the effects of these operations in
producing traffic congestion noise, glare or safety hazards: 0
313 -
27, § 811, cont' d) 27, § 811, cont' d)
D. Engineering and architectural plans for the treatment and
disposal of sewage.
E. Engineering and architectural plans for the handling of any
excess traffic congestion, noise, glare or safety hazard.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
812. Buffer Requirements. Screening and softening buffers shall be
provided in compliance with the following regulations:
1. Screening Buffers. Screening buffers shall be provided when
institutional properties abut residential uses or districts. The screening
buffer shall be a minimum of twenty- five ( 25') feet in width along the
property line and must be developed in accordance with the provisions of
420( 4) of the Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance [ Chapter
221. Whenever possible, the owner shall make every effort to retain
existing natural screening, such as vegetation and topography.
2. Softening Buffers. Softening buffers shall be provided along all
side and rear property lines that are not required to have a screening
buffer. Softening buffers must be developed in accordance with the provisions
of § 420( 5) of the Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
Chapter 22].
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 90- 1, 7/ 16/ 1990, 533)
813. Landscape Planting. Shade trees and other plant materials
satisfactory to the Board of Supervisors shall be provided along the street
frontage occupied by institutional development, in other non -paved areas of
the site, and within traffic -barrier islands installed in the parking lots.
Emphasis shall be placed on the use of shade trees. No shrubs shall be
used that will interfere with driver' s sight distances at driveway intersection.
( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
j
314 - Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990
27, § 900)
Part 9
LC - Limited Commercial District
27, § 900)
900. Declaration of Legislative Intent. The following is an expansion
of the community development objectives in § 101( 3) of this Chapter.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the LC - Limited Commercial
District to establish reasonable standards that permit and control limited
commercial and office uses in the Township. Furthermore, it is the intent
of this Part to:
1. Encourage commercial and office uses which do not attract large
volumes of traffic and continuous customer turnover.
2. Limit and discourage development of strip -type, highway -oriented
commercial uses which create traffic hazards and congestion because they
require numerous, individual curb cuts and generate higher traffic volumes.
3. Permit uses which promote conversion of existing buildings in a
manner which maintains the visual character and architectural scale of
existing development within the district.
4. Minimize visual and functional conflicts between residential and
nonresidential uses within and abutting the district.
5. Encourage consolidation of curb cuts for vehicular access and
promote more efficient and economical parking facilities.
6. Encourage uses which minimize noise and congestion.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
901. Permitted Uses. The following are the permitted uses in the LC
Limited Commercial District:
1. Retail specialty shops including, but not limited to, the sale of
gifts, antiques, flowers, books, jewelry, wearing apparel, tobacco and
related supplies, or craft shops making articles exclusively for sale at
retail on the premises.
2. Personal service shops including, but not limited to, tailor,
barber, beauty salon, shoe repair, dressmaking or similar service uses.
3. Business offices including, but not limited to, security and
commodity brokerage, real estate sales, travel agency, employment counseling,
insurance sales, advertising, mailing and stenographic services,
and other services of a similar nature.
4. Studios for dance, art, music, photography, radio or television.
5. Professional offices for lawyers, engineers, architects, landscape
architects, urban planners, accountants, economic, consultants, doctors,
dentists, chiropractors or other practitioners of the healing arts for
humans; or other professionals similar to those listed above.
6. Single- family, two family, and multi -family apartment residences.
7. Mixed- use structures containing dwelling units and other permitted
uses.
315 -
27, § 901( 8)) 27, § 901( 8))
8. Telephone, telegraph or other public utility office.
9. Any use of a nature similar to the above when approved by the
Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception, subject to the criteria of
903 of this Chapter.
10. Accessory buildings or uses as defined herein.
11. Group Day Care Home or Adult Day Care Center, provided the Group
Day Care Home or Adult Day Care Center complies with the standards of § 134
of this Chapter. [ Ord. 94- 2]
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 90- 1, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 7; and by Ord.
94- 2, 3/ 7/ 1994, §§ 17, 18)
902. Special Exception. The following uses may be permitted by the
Zoning Hearing Board as special exceptions in accordance with the standards
in §903 and in conformance with Part 18, § 1813.
1. Television and appliance repair service.
2. Confectionery or bakery for production of articles to be sold at
retail only on the premises.
3. Funeral home.
4. Nursery schools or day care centers, provided the day care center
complies with the standards of § 134 of this Chapter. [ Ord. 90- 1]
5. Club, lodge or other fraternal organizations.
6. Uses permitted by § 901 or 902, when located on a lot less than the
minimum required sixty foot ( 60`) lot width, but greater than fifty feet
50`) in width.
7. Conversion of single- family houses to multi -family use provided
there are no more than five ( 5) dwelling units in any one building.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 90- 1, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 8)
903. Standards and Criteria for Special Exceptions and Conditional
Uses. The Zoning Hearing Board may authorize a use as a special exception
or the Supervisors may approve a use as a conditional use if it conforms
with the following standards and criteria:
1. The proposed use will not attract large volumes of vehicular
traffic, nor require more than one curb cut for vehicular access.
2. The proposed use is of a similar architectural scale to existing
development in the district, or will utilize an existing building for its
purposes.
3. Minimum visual and functional conflict will be created between the
proposed use and nearby uses.
4. The proposed use will share an access driveway and/ or parking with
another abutting use, or is designed to permit such sharing when and if it
becomes feasible.
316 - Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994
11
27, § 903, cont' d)
5. Anticipated noise
comparable to the levels
Part.
27, § 903, cont' d)
and congestion created by the use will be
created by the uses permitted in § 901 of this
6. The use shall not require servicing or deliveries of materials,
stocks, or supplies by trucks having more than two ( 2) axles.
7. Authorization of a special exception for use of a lot between
fifty ( 50') and sixty feet ( 60') in width shall be granted only to uses
which will be located in an existing building, and which otherwise comply
with the requirements of this district.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
904. Dimensional Standards.
1. Minimum Lot Area and Widths - A minimum lot area of seven thousand
five hundred feet (7,500) square feet shall be provided for each and every
building used in accordance with §§ 901 and 902 of this Part, except for
accessory uses. In addition, a minimum lot area of three thousand ( 3, 000)
square feet per dwelling unit must be provided for each dwelling unit more
than one on any lot. Minimum lot width shall be sixty feet ( 60') at the
building setback line, except when the Zoning Hearing Board authorizes the
use of a lot between fifty ( 50') and sixty feet ( 60') in width as a special
exception, in accordance with § 903. 7 of this Part.
2. Percent of Coverage - Not more than eighty ( 80%) percent of any
lot area may be covered by buildings and/ or impervious paving materials,
and not more than forty ( 40%) percent of any lot area may be occupied by
buildings. A minimum of twenty ( 20%) percent of each lot shall be
landscaped. [ Ord. 90- 1J
3. Front Yard -
A. The minimum required front yard shall be not less than the
smaller of the front yards of the two buildings immediately adjacent
on either side) of the proposed use, or ten feet ( 10') from the
ultimate right- of- way of the street, whichever is greater.
B. For corner lots, a front yard shall be required on each
street, equal to the front yard of the adjacent building on each
street frontage, or twenty- five feet ( 25'), whichever is greater, to
ensure adequate visibility at intersections.
4. Side Yards - For every building used, two ( 2) side yards are
required which shall not be less than twenty feet ( 20') in aggregate width,
nor less than eight feet ( 8') in minimum width.
5. Rear Yard - There shall be a rear yard on each lot which shall be
not less than twenty feet ( 201) in depth.
6. Maximum Building Dimension - In no instance shall the greatest
dimension of a building exceed one hundred feet ( 100'), measured parallel
to exterior building walls.
7. Maximum Height - No building shall exceed three and one- half ( 3h)
stories or forty feet ( 40') in height.
8. Minimum Distance Between Buildings - The minimum distance between
any two ( 2) buildings, or portions thereof, shall be sixteen feet ( 16').
Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990 - 317 -
27, § 904, cont' d) ( 27, 6904, cont' d)
9. Accessory Use Setback - No accessory use shall be permitted within
the front yard. Setback from side or rear property lines shall be a
minimum of five feet ( 51).
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 85- 3, 3/ 4/ 1985, § 1107; and by Ord.
90- 1, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 19)
905. Parking Capacity Regulations.
1. Minimum Number of Spaces - The minimum number of off- street
parking spaces required shall be the sum -total number determined by application
of the following standards:
A. Two ( 2) spaces per residential dwelling unit.
B. Three ( 3) spaces per person performing a personal service
barber, tailor, etc.)
C. Seven ( 7) spaces, per patient -oriented professional ( doctor,
dentist, etc.)
D. One ( 1) space per every two ( 2) employees, not including
persons covered by B. and C. above.
E. One ( 1) space per two hundred ( 200) square feet of floor
space devoted to active nonresidential uses not included in B. and C.
above. Inactive use areas such as storage space or non -used basement
areas need not be included.
F. In no case shall less than three ( 3) off- street parking
spaces be provided for each individual nonresidential use. The number
of uses in a building shall equal the number of leasable units in the
building, including owner -occupied units.
2. Parking Held in Reserve - If the number of spaces required by 905( 1. A) through E. above, is substantially larger than the number
anticipated by the applicant, the reserve parking concept may be utilized
to avoid unnecessary paving, in accordance with the following criteria:
A. The total number of spaces which must be paved initially may
be reduced up to fifty percent ( 50X) by the Township Supervisors, upon
recommendation of the Township Planning Agency and Engineer.
B. Suitable area must be available and reserved for construction
of the balance of the total number of spaces otherwise required by
905( 1), above, if and when they are deemed necessary by the Township
Supervisors upon recommendation of the Township Planning Agency and
Engineer. In addition, a re- evaluation of parking capacity shall be
required upon a change in status ( use, building additions, ownership,
number of employees). Following re- evaluation, the Supervisors may
require installation of additional parking spaces, upon recommendation
of the Township Planning Agency and Engineer.
C. A financial guaranty must be provided by the applicant to
cover the cost of installation of the reserved parking spaces, for a
period of one year following installation of the initially constructed
parking spaces. The type and dollar value of the guaranty must be
approved by the Township Supervisors upon recommendation of the
Township Solicitor and Engineer.
1. " of" deleted from original.
318 - Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990
27, § 905, cont' d) 27, § 905, cont' d)
D. To qualify for use of the reserve parking concept, the
applicant shall provide evidence supporting reduced parking needs to
the Township Planning Agency and Engineer for their review and recommendation.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
906. Parking and Vehicular Access Design Standards.
1. All parking spaces shall be:
A. Located behind the building setback line or twenty- five feet
25') from the ultimate right- of- way of streets, whichever is greater.
B. Setback a minimum of ten feet ( 10') from the edge of paving
of alleys.
C. Setback a minimum of eight feet ( 8') from all buildings.
D. Setback a minimum of twenty- five feet ( 25') from the boundary
line of a more restrictive zoning district.
E. Setback a minimum of five feet ( 5') from property lines
except that parking shared by the uses located on two ( 2) or more
adjacent lots may extend to and over the boundary lines of the lots it
serves.
2. The following setbacks from intersections shall apply for all
access driveways where feasible, measured between centerlines:
A. Semi - controlled access roads: seventy- five feet ( 75')
B. Other roads: fifty feet ( 50')
3. Common parking areas and/ or accessways shall be permitted and
encouraged provided that:
A. Access easements and maintenance agreements or other suitable
legal mechanisms shall be provided where necessary.
B. Liability safeguards for all property owners and lessees
served by the common parking areas and/ or accessways shall be guaranteed
to the satisfaction of the Township Solicitor.
4. All required parking shall be paved in accordance with the Township'
s Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
5. No parking is permitted within the front yard area.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
907. Standards for Conversions. Any proposal which constitutes a
conversion under the provisions of this Chapter shall comply with all the
regulations contained herein, as if it were a proposal for new development.
Exceptions to this requirement may be made by the Township Supervisors only
for major existing conditions which cannot reasonably be expected to be
brought into compliance, including but not limited to existing buildings.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
908. Sewer and Water Facilities. All new development and conversions
shall be served by public sewer facilities; public water service
shall be provided where it is available. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990 - 319 -
27, § 909) 27, § 909)
909. Other Development Regulations.
1. Utilities - All utility lines ( electrical, telephone, etc.) shall
be placed underground, whenever feasible.
2. Signs - All signs in the Limited Commercial District shall comply
with Part 15 of this Chapter.
3. Lighting Facilities - Shall not produce unreasonable glare or
hazardous interference on abutting properties or highways.
4. Landscape Planting - Shade trees and other plant materials satisfactory
to the Board of Supervisors shall be provided along the street
frontage occupied by developments in the Limited Commercial District, in
other non -paved areas of the site, and within traffic -barrier islands
installed in the parking lot. Emphasis shall be placed on the use of shade
trees. No shrubs shall be used that will interfere with drivers' sight
distances at driveway intersections.
5. Trash and Refuse Area - Trash and refuse shall either be stored
inside the building or within an opaque screened area, which shall be. at
least six feet ( 6') high.
6. Service Areas - Loading and unloading areas shall be provided
which do not conflict with pedestrian or vehicular movement.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7% 1982)
910. Buffer Requirements. Screening and softening buffers shall be
provided in compliance with the following regulations:
1. Screening Buffers. Screening buffers shall be a minimum of eight
8') feet in width along the property line and shall contain a row of
evergreen trees spaced seven ( 7') feet apart on center. Screening buffers
shall be placed and maintained in:
A. Non- residential properties that abut residential properties.
The buffer shall be provided along each property line which is adjacent
to a residential property.
B. Residential properties that have at least three ( 3) times as
many dwelling units as an abutting residential property. The buffer
shall be provided along each property line which is shared by these
residential properties.
2. Softening Buffers. Softening buffers shall be provided along all
side and rear property lines that are not required to have a screening
buffer. Softening buffers must be developed in accordance with the provisions
of § 420( 5) of the Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
Chaprter 221.
3. All materials used for the buffers shall meet the following
criteria:
A. All evergreen trees shall be at least six ( 6') feet in height
at the time of planting and shall be of such species that expected
height at maturity shall be at least fifteen ( 15') feet.
B. All deciduous trees shall be at least eight ( 8') feet in
height and two and one- half ( 2'y") inches in caliper at the time of
planting.
320 - Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990
27, § 910, cont' d) 27, § 910, cont' d)
C. All plant material shall be guaranteed for two ( 2) years.
All plant material which dies within that time shall be replaced by
the applicant at his or her cost.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 87- 4, 11/ 16/ 1987; and by Ord.
90- 1, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 34)
Page Added 7/ 16/ 1990 - 320. 1 -
27, § 1000) ( 27, § 1000)
Part 10
CC - Convenience Commercial District
1000. Declaration of Legislative Intent. The following is an
expansion of the Statement of Community Development Objectives contained in
101( 3) of this Chapter. It is hereby declared to be the intent of this
Part to allow the development of convenience commercial shopping centers,
as defined in Part 2 of this Chapter, in locations removed from the Gilbertsville
core. Furthermore, it is the intent of this Part to:
1. Allow planned, integrated centers for convenience commercial and
professional office use, which are attractive and well designed.
2. Provide essential commercial services in areas that are developing
and/ or where the population is more dispersed.
3. Encourage commercial uses which supplement commercial development
in the Gilbertsville core and adjacent municipalities.
4. Provide regulations to minimize conflict between commercial uses
and abutting residential neighborhoods.
5. Regulate access to minimize traffic congestion and hazards,
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
1001. Permitted Uses. The following, and no others, are permitted
uses in the Convenience Commercial District. However, no single use shall
exceed twelve thousand ( 12, 000) square feet in gross leasable area:
1. Retail Establishments for Sale of - dry goods, variety merchan
dise, clothing, food, beverages, flowers and plants, drugs, furnishings or
other household supplies and similar uses.
2. Retail Establishment for Sale and Repair of - jewelry, clocks,
optical goods, cameras, home appliances and similar goods, provided at
least thirty percent ( 30%) of the gross floor area is devoted to sales
and/ or customer service.
3. Personal Service Shop, including but not limited to - barber shop
and/ or hairdresser, shoe repair, tailor, dry cleaning; provided that at
least thirty percent ( 30%) of the gross floor area is devoted to customer
service, and provided that the use creates no excessive fire hazards.
4. Retail Bakery provided that at least thirty percent ( 30%) of the
gross floor area is devoted to sales and/ or customer service.
5. Business or Professional Office, Studio for dance, art, music or
photography.
6. Bank or Other Financial Institution, not including drive- in banks
or drive- in facilities.
7. Restaurant excluding drive- in or fast- food establishments.
8. Gasoline Service Station or fuel service islands as accessory to
another permitted use.
321 -
27, § 1001( 9)) ( 27, § 1001( 9))
9. Any use of a nature similar to the above when approved by the
Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception, subject to the Condition that
the use shall provide goods or services of interest to nearby residents,
rather than attract patrons from distant areas, thereby serving a local
market rather than a regional market. The Supervisors may require the
applicant to provide a market study.
10. Child or Adult Day Care Centers, provided it complies with the
standards of § 134 of this Chapter. [ Ord. 94- 2]
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 82- 8, 11/ 1/ 1982, § 1; by Ord. 90- 1,
7/ 16/ 1990, § 9; and by Ord. 94- 2, 3/ 7/ 1994, § 19)
1002. Planned Development. All development under the Convenience
Commercial Zoning District shall be part of an integrated plan for development
of the entire tract. However, the tract may be developed in stages
provided each stage is in accordance with the approved plan. ( Ord. 82- 4,
6/ 7/ 1982)
1003. Dimensional Standards.
1. Minimum tract size 3 acres
2. Minimum road frontage ( at the
ultimate right- of- way) 250 feet
3. Minimum building setbacks from:
A. the ultimate right- of- way 100 feet
B. abutting residential or
institutional district 50 feet
C. Abutting Commercial or
Industrial Zoning districts
and any other
property line not abutting
a zoning district
boundary or street. [ Ord. 90- 11 40 feet
4. Minimum parking setback from
property lines and ultimate
right- of- way line 20 feet
5. Minimum planted buffer area 15 feet
6. Maximum building coverage 15 percent
7. Minimum area of vegetative cover 20 percent
8. Maximum height 35 feet
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 2982; as amended by Ord. 90- 1, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 28)
1004. Vehicular Access Standards. The following standards shall
apply to driveways providing vehicular access to each tract developed for
Convenience Commercial purposes:
1. The maximum number of driveways from any one road shall not exceed
two ( 2).
322 - Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994
C
27, § 1004, cont' d) ( 27, § 1004, cont' d)
2. The minimum distance from the nearest ultimate right- of- way line
of a street intersection shall be one hundred feet ( 100') to the. driveway
centerline.
3. The minimum distance from the tract boundary line shall be fifty
feet ( 50') to the driveway centerline.
4. The minimum spacing between centerlines shall be one hundred feet
100').
5. Driveway pavement widths shall be a minimum of twenty- two feet
22'), but not greater than thirty feet ( 30').
6. On a corner lot, the Township Supervisors may prohibit vehicular
access to and from one of the streets if, in the opinion of the Township
Engineer and/ or Planning Agency, access to that street would:
A. Create a traffic hazard because of limited sight distances or
the sharpness of a curve or curves in the road; or
B. Unduly impact existing residential development.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
1005. Additional Standards for Gasoline Stations. Gasoline stations
or other uses with fuel service islands must meet the following standards:
1. All automobile servicing activities except those performed at fuel
pumps, shall be performed within a completely enclosed building.
2. Minimum setback of fuel pumps from the ultimate right- of- way:
twenty- five feet ( 25').
3. Minimum setback of parking ( any portion) from fuel pumps: thirty
feet ( 30').
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
1006. General Regulations.
1. Ownership - The tract of land shall be in single ownership, or
ownership shall be such that the tract will be developed under a single
direction in accordance with an approved plan.
2. Development Plan - The application for development shall be
accompanied by:
A. A plan or plans showing detailed use of the entire tract,
which shall:
1) comply with the Douglass Township Subdivision and Land
Development Regulations.
2) comply with all other applicable ordinances.
B. The plan shall clearly designate the proposed use( s) of each
area of the tract.
3. Development Stages and Permits - The development of the tract can
be carried out in either a single phase or in stages. If carried out in
stages the development shall be in accordance with a development agreement
which shall:
Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990 - 323 -
27, § 1006, cont' d) 27, § 1006, cont' d)
A. Be binding to the overall tract and it' s development.
B. Be recorded with the final plan. 0
C. Be acceptable to the Township Solicitor and governing body.
4. Other Development Regulations -
A. Utilities - All utility lines ( electrical, telephone, etc.)
shall be placed; underground.
B. Sins - All signs in the CC — Convenience Commercial District
shall comply with Part 15 of this Chapter.
C. Lighting Facilities - Shall not produce unreasonable glare or
hazardous interference on abutting properties or highways.
D. Landscape Planting - Shade trees and other plant materials
satisfactory to the Board of Supervisors shall be provided along the
street frontage occupied by a CC - Commercial Development, in other
non -paved areas of the site, and within traffic -barrier islands installed
in the parking lot. Emphasis shall be placed on the use of
shade trees. No shrubs shall be used that will interfere with
driver' s sight distance at driveway intersections.
E. Trash and Refuse Area - Trash and refuse shall either be
stored inside the building or within an opaque screened area, which
shall be at least six feet ( 6') high.
F. Service Areas - Loading and unloading areas shall be provided
which do not conflict with pedestrian or vehicular movement.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
1007. Parking Requirements. Parking shall be provided in the amount
specified below, in compliance with the Parking Area Design Standards and
other applicable regulations of the Township' s Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.
1. Capacity - Five ( 5) spaces per one thousand ( 1, 000) square feet of
gross leasable floor area is required.
2. Design Standards -
A. When feasible, entrance, exit and internal circulation
driveways shall be separated from parking aisle driveways.
B. Parking aisle driveways shall provide immediate access to
parking spaces, and are intended to permit through traffic flow only
as a convenience to parkers.
C. Where through -traffic circulation patterns are not feasible,
a permanent paved turnaround area large enough to accommodate passenger
cars shall be provided at the closed end of any parking area
with a capacity of thirty ( 30) or more spaces, and which would otherwise
function as a dead- end parking lot. Parking shall be prohibited
within the turnaround area. Acceptable configurations include circular,
" t", and " Y" shaped facilities.
D. Not more than fifteen ( 15) parking spaces shall be located in
an uninterrupted row. If more than fifteen ( 15) parking spaces are
324 Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996
27, § 1007, cont' d) 27, § 1007, cont' d)
located in a row, curbed planted areas with a minimum size of ten feet
by twenty feet ( 10 x 20) shall be located at appropriate intervals to
break up the monotonous effect and provide visual interest. [ Ord.
96- 11
3. Parking Held in Reserve - If the number of spaces required by
1007( 1) above, is substantially larger than the number anticipated by the
applicant the reserve parking concept may be utilized to avoid unnecessary
paving, in accordance with the following criteria:
A. The total number of spaces which must be paved initially may
be reduced up to fifty percent ( 507) by the Township Supervisors, upon
recommendation of the Township Planning Agency and Engineer.
B. Suitable area must be available and reserved for construction
of the balance of the total number of spaces otherwise required by
1007( 1) above, if and when they are deemed necessary by the Township
Supervisors, upon recommendation of the Township Planning Agency and
Engineer. In addition, a re- evaluation of parking capacity shall be
required upon a change in status ( use, building additions, ownership,
number of employees). Following re- evaluation, the Supervisors may
require installation of additional parking spaces, upon recommendation
of the Township Planning Agency and Engineer.
C. A financial guaranty must be provided by the applicant to
cover the cost of installation of the reserved parking spaces, for a
period of one year following installation of the initially constructed
parking spaces. The type and dollar value of the guaranty must be
approved by the Township Supervisors upon recommendation of the
Township Solicitor and Engineer.
D. To qualify for use of the reserve parking concept, the
applicant shall provide evidence supporting reduced parking needs to
the Township Planning Agency and Engineer for their review and recommendations.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 96- 1, 1/ 15/ 1996)
1008. Sewer and Water Facilities. Convenience Commercial Development
shall be connected to public sewer and water facilities if and when
they are available. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
1009. Buffer Requirements. Screening buffers shall be provided
along all side and rear. yards of convenience commercial properties. The
screening buffer shall be a minimum of twenty- five ( 25') feet in width
along the property line and must be developed in accordance with the
provisions of § 420( 4) of the Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance [ Chapter 221. Whenever possible, the owner shall make every
effort to retain existing natural screening, such as vegetation and
topography. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 90- 1, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 35)
Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996 - 325 -
27, § 1100) ( 27, § 1100)
Part 11
GC - General Commercial District
1100. Declaration of Legislative Intent. The following is an
expansion of the Statement of Community Development Objectives contained in
101( 3), of this Chapter. It is the intent of this Part to allow the
Gilbertsville Commercial Core Area to function as the commercial center of
the Township. Further, it is the intent of this Part to:
1. Provide the broadcast range of commercial use in the Township.
2. Encourage sensitive development of new commercial uses that are
compatible with existing development in the Gilbertsville core area.
3. Control reuse and/ or conversions of existing properties within the
district in an appropriate manner.
4. Provide regulations to minimize conflicts between commercial uses
and abutting residential uses.
5. Regulate access to minimize traffic congestion and hazards.
6. Regulate parking to provide sufficient capacity and encourage well
designed and functional parking areas.
7. Encourage highway oriented uses which attract large volumes of
traffic and continuous customer turnover to located in shopping centers as
satellite uses.
8. Serve the needs of the Township' s growing population.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
51101. Use Regulations. Permitted uses are grouped into five ( 5)
classifications according to the minimum lot size required for each classification.

Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
61102. Class One Permitted Uses. On lots with a minimum area of
seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet but less than ten thousand
10, 000) square feet the use regulations in 5901 of this Chapter shall
apply. In no instances shall new building construction be permitted for
lots between seven thousand five hundred (7,500) and ten thousand ( 10, 000)
square feet, except to convert and/ or expand existing structures in accordance
with the provisions of Part 9, Limited Commercial District. ( Ord.
82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
1103. Class Two Permitted Uses. On lots with a minimum area of ten
thousand ( 10, 000) square feet and a minimum width at the building line of
seventy- five feet ( 75'), the following uses are permitted:
1. Retail establishments for sale of: dry goods, variety merchandise,
clothing, food, beverages, flowers and plants, drugs, furnishings or
other household supplies and similar uses.
327 -
27, § 1103, cont' d) ( 27, § 1103, cont' d)
2. Retail establishments for sale and repair of: jewelry, clocks,
optical goods, cameras, home appliances, scientific and professional
instruments and similar goods.
3. Personal service shop, including but not limited to: barber shop
and/ or hairdresser, shoe repair, tailor, dry cleaning; provided that at
least thirty percent ( 30%) of the gross floor area is devoted to customer
service, and provided that the use creates no excessive fire hazards.
4. Retail bakery or similar food product operation, provided at least
thirty percent ( 30%) of the gross floor area is devoted to sales and/ or
customer service.
5. Business or professional office, studio for dance, art, music or
photography.
6. Bank or other financial institution, not including drive- in banks
or drive=in facilities.
7. Restaurant excluding drive- in or fast- food establishments.
8. Wholesale business which is compatible with retail uses.
9. Post office.
10. Any uses of the same general character as those listed in this
section, when approved by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception.
11. Adult uses, when approved by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special
exception, in accordance with the standards and criteria of § 131 of this
Chapter.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
1104. Class Three Permitted Uses. On lots with a minimum area . of
twenty- five thousand ( 25, 000) square feet and a minimum width at the
building line of one hundred twenty- five feet ( 125') the following uses are
permitted.
1. Any use permitted in § 1103 above.
2. A bank or financial institution with drive- in facilities provided
that:
A. A minimum of six ( 6) automobile waiting spaces are provided
for each bank teller or remote teller window.
B. These spaces shall not interfere with parking spaces or
internal circulation of the site.
3. Automatic or self- service car wash.
4. Self- service laundry.
5. Ancillary indoor storage building or warehouse.
6. Indoor place of amusement, excluding theaters and indoor court
sports such as tennis and raquetball.
7. Shop for motor vehicle body, upholstery or restoration work.
8. Used car lot or lot for sale of recreation vehicles, provided
that:
328 -
27, § 1104( 8), cont' d) 27, § 1104( 8), cont' d)
A. No temporary storage of these vehicles is provided on the
abutting roadway.
B. No parking or storage of vehicles or supplies may be located
within twenty- five feet ( 25') of the ultimate right- of- way of any
street.
C. Clear sight triangles, as required in § 109 are provided.
9. Public garage, storage garage.
10. Drive- in or fast food restaurant - Drive through areas shall
comply with the following requirements:
A. Ten thousand ( 10, 000) square feet of lot area shall be
provided in addition to the twenty- five thousand ( 25, 000) square feet
otherwise required under the provisions of this section.
B. A minimum of six ( 6) automobile waiting spaces are required.
C. A minimum of three ( 3) waiting spaces shall be provided in
addition to B., above, if a separate area for ordering food is
included.
D. These spaces shall not interfere with parking spaces or
internal circulation of the site.
11. Hotel, tourist home or rooming house for transient purposes only.
12. Any uses of the same general character as those listed above, when
approved by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception.
13. Gasoline service stations or fuel service islands shall be permitted
as a special exception provided they meet the following additional
standards:
A. All automobile servicing activities except those normally
performed at fuel or air pumps shall be performed within a completely
enclosed building.
B. Minimum setback of fuel pumps from the ultimate right- of- way
line shall be twenty- five feet.
C. Minimum setback of parking ( any portion) from fuel pumps
shall be thirty feet ( 301).
D. The fuel pumps shall not interfere with parking spaces or
internal circulation.
E. If fuel service islands are provided in addition to any
non -gasoline station use ( e. g. convenience food store) five thousand
5, 000 square feet of lot area must be provided in addition to the
twenty- five thousand ( 25, 000) square feet otherwise required under the
provisions of this section.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 82- 8, 11/ 1/ 1982, § 1)
1105. Class Four Permitted Uses. Fuel pumps on lots with a minimum area of two
2) acres and a minimum width at the building line of one hundred seventyfive
feet ( 175'); the following are the permitted uses:
329 -
27, § 1105, cont' d) 27, § 1105, cont' d)
1. Any use permitted in § 1104 above.
2. Farm and garden supply center, provided that no outdoor storage
area be located less than twenty feet ( 20') from a property line, or
twenty- five feet ( 251) from the ultimate right- of- way line of any street.
3. Outdoor place of amusement or recreation.
4. Indoor theater.
5. Indoor court sports such as tennis and racquetball.
6. Motor vehicle or recreation vehicle sales" agency, subject to the
requirements of § 1104( 8. A, B and C).
7. Motel, hotel, tourist home, rooming house.
8. Any use of the same general character as those listed above, when
approved by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 82- 8, 11/ 1/ 1981, § 1)
1106. Class Five Permitted Uses. On lots with a minimum area of
five ( 5) acres and a minimum width at the building line of three hundred
fifty feet ( 350'), the following are the permitted uses:
1. Shopping center, comprised of two ( 2) or more permitted uses
selected from §§ 1102, 1103, 1104 and/ or 1105, above, subject to the
Shopping Center Regulations of this Chapter.
2. Satellite uses in a shopping center, subject to § 1109, " Satellite
Use Regulations" of this Chapter, including the following uses:
A. Drive -In Banking Facilities.
B. Ancillary tires, batteries and accessories store ( TBA) for
motor vehicles.
C. Photographic film processing outlet.
D. Drive- in or fast food restaurant.
E. Farm and garden supply center.
F. Indoor theater for motion pictures.
G. Gasoline service station.
H. Any use of the - same general character as those listed in
subsections ( A) through ( F) above, when approved by the Zoning Hearing
Board as a special exception.
Ord. 90- 11
3. Motor vehicle or recreation vehicle sales agency, subject to the
requirements of §§104( 8. A, B and C).
4. Any one permitted use selected from §§ 1102, 1103 and 1104 or 1105,
above, subject to the Shopping Center Regulations of this Part.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 82- 8, 11/ 1/ 1982, § 1; and by Ord.
90- 1, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 20)
330 - Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990
27, § 1107) 27, § 1107)
1107. Dimensional Standards for Class One Through Four Permitted
Uses.
1. Development or use of lots between seven thousand five hundred
7,500) and ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area shall be subject to
the requirements and regulations of the LC - Limited Commercial District,
Part 9 of this Chapter.
2. For lots with an area greater than ten thousand ( 10, 000) square
feet, but less than five ( 5) acres, the following standards shall apply
regardless of the type of use proposed:
Lot Size
A. Minimum front yard
measured from the
ultimate right- ofway
line.)
B. Minimum side yard
C. Minimum rear yard
D. Maximum Building
Height
E. Maximum Building
Coverage
F. Minimum Vegetative
Coverage
G. Maximum Building
Dimension
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
Class 2
Between 10, 000
sq. ft. and
25, 000 sq. ft.
15 feet for
buildings up
to 15 feet in
height or
25 feet for
buildings
exceeding 15
feet in height
25 feet ( one
side only
required)
15 feet
35 feet
35%
20%
100 feet
Class 3
Between 25, 000
sq. ft. and
two ( 2) acres
25 feet for
buildings up
to 15 feet in
height or
35 feet for
buildings
exceeding 15
feet in height
25 feet ( one
side only
required)
15 feet
35 feet
30%
20%
150 feet
Class 4
Between two ( 2)
acres and five
5) acres
100 feet
60 feet aggregate,
minimum 20 feet ( 2
side yards required)
75 feet
35 feet
30%
20%
300 feet
1108. Dimensional Standards for Class Five Permitted Uses. All
Class Five Permitted Uses and any other development on lots of five ( 5)
acres or larger must comply with the dimensional standards of this section,
as listed below:
1. Minimum setbacks for buildings or ancillary outdoor sales and
storage areas:
A. From the ultimate right- of- way of streets:
1) when a primary building' s width exceeds its depth: 200
feet
Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990 331 -
27, § 1108, cont' d) 27, § 1108, cont' d)
2) when a primary building' s depth exceeds its width: 100
feet
3) when a primary building' s width and depth are equal or
cannot be compared because of the building' s odd shape: 150 feet
4) for satellite buildings or outdoor sales and storage
areas ancillary to a primary building, not including motor
vehicle or recreation vehicle sales agencies: 75 feet.
B. From an abutting residential or institutional use or
district: seventy- five feet ( 75') for all buildings, sales or storage
areas.
C. From an abutting commercial or industrial use or district:
thirty feet ( 301) for all buildings, sales or storage areas.
2. Minimum Parking and Service Area Setbacks -
A. From the ultimate right- of- way of streets: twenty feet ( 20')
B. An abutting residential or institutional use or district:
forty feet ( 401)
C. An abutting commercial or industrial use or district: twenty
feet ( 20')
3. Maximum building coverage, including both major and satellite
buildings: thirty percent ( 30%)
4. Minimum vegetative coverage: twenty percent ( 20X)
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
1109. Satellite Use Regulations. Satellite uses may be proposed in
the initial shopping center plan approval process, or be added to a shopping
center following initial plan approval in compliance with the following
regulations:
1. The permitted number of satellite uses shall be determined by
multiplying the tract size in acres by . 40. However, in no case shall the
maximum number of satellite uses exceed five ( 5) regardless of tract size.
2. Not more than ten percent ( 10X) of the total allowable building
coverage for shopping centers shall be devoted to satellite uses.
3. Total building coverage of the shopping center, including satellite
uses, shall not exceed the maximum coverage permitted by § 1108( 3) of
this Chapter ( thirty percent ( 30%)). [ Ord. 90- 1]
4. Access to parking and service areas intended for satellite uses
shall be taken only from driveways within the shopping center, and shall
not connect directly to an abutting street.
5. Parking and service areas intended for satellite uses shall be
separated from primary shopping center parking area by landscaped barrier
islands to direct and control traffic flow. Such landscaped islands shall
adhere to the applicable regulations of the Township' s Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.
6. The number of parking spaces required for each satellite use:
332 - Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990
11
27, § 1109, cont' d) 27, § 1109, cont' d)
A. Shall be determined by the requirements of § 1114( 2) of this
Chapter, for each type of use proposed.
B. Shall be provided within one hundred fifty feet ( 150') of the
particular use.
C. Shall not require patrons to walk across major shopping
center driveways.
7. The sum - total of parking provided for satellite uses and the other
uses in a shopping center shall equal or exceed the total parking capacity
requirement for shopping centers in § 1114 of this Chapter. Five ( 5) spaces
per one thousand ( 1, 000) square feet of gross leasable area.)
8. The reserve -parking concept may be used for satellite uses, in
accordance with § 1109( 6), above, and § 1114( 4) Reserve Parking Regulations,
of this Chapter.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 90- 1, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 13)
1110. Vehicular Access Standards. The following regulations shall
pertain to all lots to be developed in the General Commercial District, and
shall govern lots to be redeveloped in the district to the maximum extent
possible:
1. Number and Spacing of Driveways - The following table shall govern
the number of access driveways permitted and the minimum driveway spacing
requirements:
Lot Widths at the Building Line
For lots less than For lots more than
150 feet wide at the 150 feet wide at the
ultimate right- of- way ultimate right- of- way
A. Maximum number of 1 2
driveways per
street frontage
B. Minimum distance 22' ( not shared) 35' ( not shared)
from property 0' ( shared) 0' ( shared)
line to drive-*
way centerline
C. Minimum distance 50' 75'
from U. R. O. W. of
street intersection
to driveway centerline
D. Minimum spacing Not Applicable 75'
between driveway
centerlines on one
lot.
Shared and not shared refer to the use of a driveway for access to two or
more abutting properties ( shared) versus use of a driveway to serve only
one property ( not shared), as regulated by § 1110( 4) of this Part.
2. Access to Corner Lots - The Township Supervisors may prohibit
access to and/ or from one of the streets abutting a corner lot if, in the
Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990 - 333 -
27, § 1111, cont' d) ( 27, § 1111, cont' d)
opinion of the Township Engineer and/ or Planning Agency, access to that
street would: 9
A. Create a traffic hazard because of high traffic volume,
congestion, limited sight distance or the sharpness of a curve or
curves in the road; or
B. Unduly impact existing residential development.
3. Driveway Specifications - Vehicular access driveways leading onto
a public street shall be built to the dimensional requirements specified in
the Douglass Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
4. Shared Access - In order to minimize the number of driveway
intersections with public streets, the use of shared access driveways is
hereby encouraged. Under this concept, an access driveway to one lot would
also provide physical and legal access to one or more abutting lots. The
following regulations apply to shared access driveways:
A. Access easements and maintenance agreements or other suitable
legal mechanisms shall be provided where necessary.
B. Liability safeguards for all property owners and lessees
served by the shared facilities shall be guaranteed to the satisfaction
of the Supervisors upon recommendation of the Township Solicitor.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
1111. Lot Line Developments. If a building is proposed to be
constructed on the lot line with only one ( 1) side yard it is required to
conform to the following provisions: 0
1. Building walls situated on lot lines shall not contain windows,
doors or other openings, and shall be designed and constructed in a manner
which shall minimize fire hazards and the need for maintenance.
2. The roof shall not be drained toward a wall situated on a lot
line.
3. No building wall shall be placed on a side lot line, unless access
is provided onto the abutting property to allow for inspection, maintenance
and repair of the building wall and foundation. Provision for access shall
be guaranteed by irrevocable easement or other legal mechanism to the
satisfaction of the Supervisors upon recommendation of the Township Solicitor.
4. Structures on abutting lots may be built along their common lot
line creating a party wall between the abutting uses.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
1112. General Regulations. The following General Regulations shall
apply for any development proposal within the General Commercial District:
1. Ownership - The tract of land shall be in single ownership, or
ownership shall be such that the tract will be developed under a single
direction in accordance with an approved plan.
2. Development Plan - The application for development shall be
accompanied by: 10
334 - Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990
27, § 1112, cont' d) 27, § 1112, cont' d)
A. Plan or plans showing detailed use of the entire tract, which
shall:
1) comply with the Douglass Township Subdivision and Land
Development Regulations.
2) comply with all other applicable ordinances.
B. The plan shall clearly designate the proposed use( s) of each
area of the tract.
3. Development Stages and Permits - The development of the tract may
be carried out in either a single phase or in stages. If carried out in
stages the development shall be in accordance with a development agreement
which shall:
A. Be binding to the overall tract and it' s development.
B. Be recorded with the final plans.
C. Be acceptable to the Township Solicitor, and governing body.
4. Other Development Regulations -
A. Utilities - All utility lines ( electrical, telephone, etc.)
shall be placed underground.
B. Signs - A11 signs in the General Commercial District shall
comply with Part 15 of this Chapter.
C. Lighting Facilities - Shall not produce unreasonable glare or
hazardous interference on abutting properties or highways.
D. Landscape Planting - Shade trees and other plant materials
satisfactory to the Board of Supervisors shall be provided along the
street frontage occupied by developments in the General Commercial
District, in other non -paved areas of the site, and within traffic -
barrier islands installed in the parking lot. Emphasis shall be
placed on the use of shade trees. No shrubs shall be used that will
interfere with driver' s sight distances at driveway intersections.
E. Trash and Refuse Area - Trash and refuse shall either be
stored inside the building or within an opaque screened area, which
shall be at least six feet ( 6') high.
F. Service Areas - Loading and unloading areas shall be provided
which do not conflict with pedestrian or vehicular movement.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
1113. Sewer and Water Facilities. All development in the General
Commercial District shall be served by public sewer and water facilities.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
1114. Parking Requirements.
1. For Class One Permitted Uses, parking shall be required in compliance
with § 905 of this Chapter.
2. Individual establishments of Classes Two, Three or Four, and
satellite uses in shopping centers shall be governed by the following
requirements:
Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990 - 335 -
27, § 1114, cont' d) 27, § 1114, cont' d)
A. Retail sales and repair: One ( 1) space per one hundred ( 100)
square feet of gross floor area, not including basements unless used
as sales area.
B. Business or professional office: One ( 1) space per two
hundred seventy- five ( 275) square feet of gross floor area.
C. Theater: One ( 1) space per three ( 3) seats.
D. Tourist home, rooming house: Two ( 2) spaces plus one ( 1)
space per rental room or suite.
E. Self- service laundry: One ( 1) space per two ( 2) washing
machines.
F. Indoor place of amusement: One ( 1) space per one hundred
100) square feet of gross floor area.
G. Personal service shop: Three ( 3) spaces per person performing
a personal service ( barber, tailor, etc.) provided that a
minimum of six ( 6) spaces shall be required for each shop.
H. Restaurant, excluding fast- food and drive- in: One ( 1) space
per fifty ( 50) square feet of gross floor area.
I. The following uses shall provide one ( 1) space per employee
on the largest shift or during peak periods, plus the requirements
listed below:
1) motor vehicle repair shop: three ( 3) spaces per
vehicle service bay.
2) vehicle sales: one ( 1) space per five hundred ( 500)
square feet of indoor sales area plus one ( 1) space per five -
thousand ( 5, 000) square feet of outdoor sales area.
3) drive- in or fast- food restaurant: one and. one- half
lig) spaces per table or booth, or one ( 1) space per fifty ( 50)
square feet of gross floor area, whichever is larger; minimum of
twenty- five ( 25) spaces.
4) hotel, motel: one ( 1) space per rental unit.
5) bank, financial institution: without drive- in service,
six ( 6) spaces per teller window; with drive- in service, three
3) spaces per indoor teller window; plus three ( 3) spaces per
self- service facility.
6) post office or wholesale business: ten ( 10) spaces.
7) indoor sports facility: one and one- half ( 1; 1) spaces
per person for maximum court and exercise equipment capacity.
8) studio for dance, art, music or photography: one ( 1)
space per five ( 5) students, and/ or one ( 1) space per three
hundred ( 300) square feet of gross floor area for non -student
patrons.
3. For Class Five Permitted Uses:
A. Shopping centers shall be provided with a total of five ( 5)
parking spaces per one thousand ( 1, 000) square feet of gross leasable
336 - Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990
27, § 1114( 3), cont` d) 27, § 1114( 3), cont' d)
Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990 - 337 -
area, including the individual parking requirements for satellite
uses. (§ 1114( 2))
B. Individual uses ( one use on one lot) shall comply with the
requirements of § 1114( 2) above.
4. Parking Held in Reserve - If the number of spaces required by
1114( 1- 3), above, is substantially larger than the number anticipated by
the applicant, the reserve parking concept may be utilized to avoid unnecessary
paving, in accordance with the following criteria:
A. The total number of spaces which must be paved initially may
be reduced up to fifty percent ( 507) by the Township Supervisors, upon
recommendation of the Township Planning Agency and Engineer.
B. Suitable area must be available and reserved for construction
of the balance of the total number of spaces otherwise required by
1114( 1- 3), above, if and when they are deemed necessary by the
Township Supervisors upon recommendation of the Township Planning
Agency and Engineer. In addition, a re- evaluation of parking capacity
shall be required upon a change in status ( use, building additions,
ownership, number of residents, employees). Following re- evaluation,
the Supervisors may require installation of additional parking spaces
upon recommendation of the Township Planning Agency and Engineer.
C. A financial guaranty must be provided by the applicant to
cover the cost of installation of the reserved parking spaces, for a
period of one year following installation of the initially constructed
parking spaces. The type and dollar value of the guaranty must be
approved by the Township Supervisors upon recommendation of the
Township Solicitor and Engineer.
D. To qualify for use of the reserve parking concept, the
applicant shall provide evidence supporting reduced parking needs to
the Township Planning Agency and Engineer for their review and recommendation.
5. Design Standards -
A. For Class One Permitted Uses, the Design Standards of § 906 of
this Chapter shall apply.
B. For Class Two, Three and Four Permitted Uses, entrance, exit,
and internal circulation driveways shall be separated from parking
aisle driveways, when feasible and deemed necessary by the Supervisors,
upon recommendation of the Township Planning Agency and
Engineer.
C. For Class Five Permitted Uses, ' entrance, exit and internal
circulation driveways shall be separated from parking aisle driveways.
D. Parking aisle driveways shall provide immediate access to
parking spaces, and are intended to provide through traffic flow
mainly as a convenience to Parkers. For Class One through Four
permitted uses, parking aisle driveways may serve a multiple role by
accommodating entrance, exit and internal circulation movements, when
approved by the Supervisors upon recommendation of the Township
Planning Agency and Engineer.
Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990 - 337 -
27, § 1114, cont' d) 27, § 1114, cont` d)
E. Where through traffic flow is not feasible, a permanent paved
turnaround area large enough to accommodate passenger cars shall be
provided at the closed end of any parking area with a capacity of
thirty ( 30) or more spaces, and which otherwise function as a dead- end
parking lot. Parking shall be prohibited within the turnaround area.
Acceptable configurations include circular, " T" and " Y" shaped
facilities.
F. Not more than fifteen ( 15) parking spaces shall be located in
an uninterrupted row. If more than fifteen ( 15) parking spaces are
located in 'a row, curbed planted areas with a minimum size of ten feet
by twenty feet ( 10 x 20) shall be located at appropriate intervals to
break up the monotonous effect and provide visual interest. [ Ord.
96- 1]
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 96- 1, 1/ 15/ 1996)
1115. Buffer Requirements. Screening and softening buffer shall be
provided in compliance with the following regulations:
I. Screening Buffers. Screening buffers shall be provided when
general commercial properties abut residential or institutional uses or
districts. The screening buffer shall be a minimum of twenty- five ( 25`)
feet in width along the property line and must be developed in accordance
with the provisions of § 420( 4) of the Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance [ Chapter 22]. Whenever possible, the owner shall
make every effort to retain existing natural screening, such as vegetation
and topography.
2. Softening Buffers. Softening buffers shall be provided along all
side and rear property lines that are not required to have a screening buffer. Softening buffers must be developed in accordance with the
provisions of § 420( 5) of the Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 90- 1, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 36)
338 - Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996
27, § 1200)
Part 12
M- 1 Office and Light Industrial District
27, § 1200)
1200. Declaration of Legislative Intent. The following is an
expansion of the Statement of Community Development Objectives contained in
101( 2) of this Chapter. It is the intent of this Part to provide for
non- polluting light industry, research and development and office uses.
Furthermore, it is the intent of this Part to:
1. Take advantage of the highway access and visibility from Route
100.
2. Provide employment centers in close proximity to existing and
future higher density residential development to reduce commuting distance
for the work force.
3. Prohibit polluting or noxious uses by providing strict industrial
performance standards.
4. Establish standards which encourage integrated development of
industrial parks.
5. Provide for flexible lotting practices which permit a diversity of
development types and sizes.
6. Ensure that residential and institutional development will be
buffered against industrial encroachment.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
1201. Permitted Uses. In the M- 1 Office and Industrial District,
permitted uses are grouped into two ( 2) classifications according to the
character of the use. A building or group of buildings may be erected,
altered or used, and a lot may be used or occupied for any of the following
uses and no others:
1. Class I Uses.
A. Scientific or industrial research, engineering, testing or
experimental laboratory or similar establishment for research, training
or product development.
B. Office, corporate headquarters and administrative buildings
or centers.
2. Class II Uses.
A. Wholesale, warehouse, storage or distribution center, provided
that satisfactory provisions are made to prevent traffic congestion
and hazards and that all loading or unloading operations shall be
carried on within or contiguous to the facade of any building( s) used
for such purposes.
B. Printing, publishing, lithographing and similar processes.
C. Light manufacturing of beverages, confections, food products
exclusive of meat and fish packing, and the rendering or refining of
fats and oils), cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, ceramics, clothing,
Page revised 10/ 3/ 1988 - 339 -
27, § 1201, cont' d) ( 27, § 1201, cont' d)
plastics, electrical goods, furniture, hardware, tools, dies, patterns,
professional and scientific instruments, jewelry, time pieces,
optical goods, musical instruments and toys; electronic and small
parts assembly and/ or manufacture.
D. Any uses of the same general character as those listed under
Class II uses, when approved by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special
exception.
3. Accessory uses on the same lot and customarily incidental to any
of the above permitted uses, which may include:
A. For Class I uses, storage within a completely enclosed
building.
B. For Class II uses, storage within a completely enclosed
building and/ or storage outside enclosed by a fence that will conceal
stored items from view at a five ( 5) foot level when standing at the
street or property line. Outdoor storage must be kept within the
building setback lines and may not infringe on the minimum vegetative
area. The maximum outdoor storage area shall be ( 4. 5%) percent of the
lot area.
C. Repair shop or maintenance facility normally required for the
conduct of industrial operations, excluding commercial repair -facilities.
D. A cafeteria, recreation facility or other service for the use
of industrial district employees.
E. Restaurant.
4. The following uses, when authorized as a special exception by the
Zoning Hearing Board:
A. Personal use heliport, subject, in addition, to the specific
requirements of § 122 and § 123 of this Chapter.
B. Nursery or day care center, provided the day care center
complies with the standards of 5134 of this Chapter. [ Ord. 90- 1]
C. Branch bank or similar financial institution.
D. Passenger station for public transportation.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 88- 1, 4/ 18/ 1988; and by* Ord. 90- 1,
7/ 16/ 1990, 610)
1202. Performance Standards. Notwithstanding the applicable laws
and regulations of the U. S. Environmental Protection Agency and the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources, the following performance
standards shall be used by the Board of Supervisors, Township Planning
Agency and Township Engineer in determining the suitability and possible
hazardous impacts of a proposed use within the M- 1 Office and Light Industrial
District.
1. In determining whether a proposed use is or may become noxious,
hazardous or offensive, the following standards shall apply. The proposed
use shall not:
340 - Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990
27, § 1202, cont' d) 27, § 1202, cont' d)
A. Constitute a nuisance or cause damage to health or property
by reason of dissemination of noxious, toxic, or corrosive fumes,
smoke, odor, or dust in the immediately surrounding area, or beyond
the district boundary line.
B. Result in noise or vibration clearly exceeding the average
intensity of noise or vibration occurring from other causes, measured
at the property line.
C. Endanger surrounding areas by reason of radiation, fire or
explosion.
D. Produce objectionable heat or glare beyond the property line.
E. Result in off -lot electrical disturbance or adversely affect
the operation of equipment other than on the property on which the
disturbance is located.
F. Require storage of materials and supplies outside the building,
except in permanent containment structures or a fenced area that
meets the requirements of § 1201( 3)( B). [ Ord. 90- 1]
G. Discharge any untreated or incompletely treated sewage or
industrial waste into any stream or otherwise contribute to the
pollution of surface or underground waters.
H. Dump or store waste products, scrap or similar materials
outside the building, except in a properly designed and screened
pickup area served by frequent, periodic removal.
I. Endanger the underground water level or supply for other
properties.
J. Create an objectionable traffic condition on the highway or
in an adjacent area; or generate a nuisance to surrounding property by
reason of traffic.
K. Create any other objectionable condition in an adjoining area
which will endanger public health and safety or be detrimental to the
environmental quality of the surrounding area.
2. The applicant shall demonstrate to the Township Engineer and the
Township Planning Agency that:
A. The proposed use( s) will comply with the standards contained
in $1202( 1), herein.
B. Adequate provisions will be made to reduce and minimize any
objectionable elements to the degree necessary to insure that the
proposed use( s) will not be noxious, hazardous or offensive as defined
in 51202( 1), herein.
C. The Township Engineer or Planning Agency may require, in
order to determine that adequate safeguards are provided, that:
1) the applicant submit necessary information, impartial
expert judgments and written assurances.
2) the applicant obtain the advice of appropriate local,
State and Federal agencies and of private consultants.
Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990 - 341 -
27, § 1202, cont' d) ( 27, § 1202, cont' d)
3) the applicant' s proposed use( s) comply with such tests
or provide such safeguards as are deemed necessary by the Board
of Supervisors, upon the advice of' the Township Engineer.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord 88- 1, 4/ 18/ 1988; and by Ord. 90- 2,
7/ 16/ 1990, § 27)
1203. Conditional Use Criteria. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; repealed by
Ord. 88- 1, 4/ 18/ 1988)
1204. Dimensional Standards. The following table contains the two
2) categories of dimensional standards applicable to the M- 1 District:
Integrated Industrial
Park Develop -
Standard Subdivi- ment containing a
sion or development minimum of 3 uses on
of tracts of less a total tract of 25
Dimensional Standards than 25 acres acres or more
Class I Class II Class I Class II
A. Minimum Lot Size 4 acres 4 acres 2 acres minimum lot
4 acres average lot
B. Minimum Width at Building 250 ft. 250 ft. 200 ft. 200 £ t.
Line
C. Minimum Building Setback
measured from:
1) Ultimate ROW 75 ft. 75 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft.
2) Abutting Residential or
Institutional Zoning
District Boundary
Line 100 ft. 100 ft. 100 ft. 100 ft.
3) Abutting Commercial or
Industrial Zoning
District 50 ft. 50 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft.
4) Any other property line
not abutting a zoning
district boundary or
street 35 ft. 35 ft. 25 ft. 25 ft.
D. Minimum Driveway, Parking
and Loading Setbacks
measured from:
1) Ultimate ROW
a) Parking or parallel
drive 20 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft.
b) Loading 100 ft. 100 ft. 100 ft. 100 ft.
2) Abutting Residential or
Institutional Zoning
District Boundary
Line 50 ft. 50 ft.. 25 ft. 25 ft.
342 - Page revised 7/ 16/ 1990
11
27, § 1204, cont' d) 27, § 1204, cont' d)
1205. General Regulations. The following general regulations shall
apply for any development proposal within the M- 1 Office and Light Industrial
District:
1. Ownership - The tract of land to be in single ownership, or
ownership shall be such that the tract will be developed under a single
direction in accordance with an approved plan.
2. Sewer and Water Facilities - All development in the M- 1 District
shall be served by public sewer and water facilities, subject to approval
by the Board of Supervisors, Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources, and appropriate sewer and water authorities. [ Ord. 86- 8]
3. Development Plan - The application for subdivision or land development
shall be accompanied by a plan or plans which shall:
A. Show detailed use of the entire tract;
B. Comply with the Subdivision and Land Development Regulations
as well as other applicable ordinances of Douglass Township.
C. Clearly designate the proposed use( s) of each area of the
tract proposed for land development.
Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994 - 343 -
Class I Class II Class I Class II
3) Abutting Commercial or
Industrial Zoning
District 25 ft. 25 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft.
4) Any other property line
not abutting a zoning
district boundary or
street 20 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft.
Ord. 94- 21
5) With shared parking and
loading 0 ft. 0 ft. 0 ft. 0 ft.
6) Street Intersection
applies only to
driveways, measured
between centerlines)
100 ft. 100 ft. 100 ft. 100 ft.
E. Other Standards
1) Maximum Building
Coverage 34% 45% 34% 45%
2) Minimum Vegetative
Area 25% 25% 25% 252
3) Maximum height 50 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft.
4) Maximum driveway width
a) Not divided by
medial island 30 ft. 30 ft. 30 ft. 30 ft.
b) Divided by medial
island 45 ft. 45 ft. 45 ft. 45 ft.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 88- 1, 4/ 18/ 1988; and by Ord. 94- 2,
3/ 7/ 1994, § 20)
1205. General Regulations. The following general regulations shall
apply for any development proposal within the M- Office and Light Industrial
District:
1. Ownership - The tract of land to be in single ownership, or
ownership shall be such that the tract will be developed under a single
direction in accordance with an approved plan.
2. Sewer and Water Facilities - All development in the M- 1 District
shall be served by public sewer and water facilities, subject to approval
by the Board of Supervisors, Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources, and appropriate sewer and water authorities. [ Ord. 86- 8]
3. Development Plan - The application for subdivision or land development
shall be accompanied by a plan or plans which shall:
A. Show detailed use of the entire tract;
B. Comply with the Subdivision and Land Development Regulations
as well as other applicable ordinances of Douglass Township.
C. Clearly designate the proposed use( s) of each area of the
tract proposed for land development.
Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994 - 343 -
27, § 1205( 4)) ( 27, § 1205( 4))
4. _ Development Stages and Permits - The development of the tract may
be carried out in either a single phase or in stages. If carried out in
stages the development shall be in accordance with a development agreement
which shall:
A. Be binding to the overall tract and its development;
B. Be recorded with the Final Plan;
C. Be acceptable to the Board of Supervisors upon recommendation
of the Township Solicitor.
5. Other Development Regulations
A. Utilities - All utility lines ( electrical, telephone, etc.)
shall be placed underground.
B. Signs - All signs in the M- 1 Office and Light Industrial
District shall comply with Part 15 of this Chapter, including traffic
control, directional and street signs.
C. Lighting Facilities - Lighting facilities shall be arranged
in a manner which will protect streets and neighboring properties from
unreasonable glare or hazardous interference of any kind.
D. Trash and Refuse Areas - Trash and refuse shall either be
stored inside the building or within an opaque screened area, which
shall be at least six feet ( 6') high.
E. Landscape Planting - Shade trees and other plant materials
satisfactory to the Board of Supervisors shall be provided along the
street frontage occupied by M- 1 Office and Light Industrial Development,
in other non -paved areas of the site, and within traffic -barrier
islands installed in the parking lot. Emphasis shall be placed on the
use of shade trees. No shrubs shall be used that will interfere with
driver' s sight distance at driveway intersections.
6. Buffer Requirements Screening and softening buffers shall be
provided in compliance with the following regulations:
A. Screening Buffers. Screening buffers shall be provided when
M- 1 office and industrial properties abut residential or institutional
uses or districts. The screening buffer shall be a minimum of twentyfive
( 25') feet in width along the property line and must be developed
in accordance with the provisions of § 420( 4) of the Township Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance [ Chapter 22]. Whenever possible,
the owner shall make every effort to retain existing natural screening,
such as vegetation and topography.
B. Softening Buffers. Softening buffers shall be provided along
all side and rear property lines that are not required to have a
screening buffer. Softening buffers must be developed in accordance
with the provisions of 6420( 5) of the Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance [ Chapter 22].
Ord. 90- 1]
7. Access - Provision shall be made for safe and efficient ingress
and egress to and from public streets and highways serving the M- 1 Office
and Light Industrial District Development without causing undue congestion
or interference with the normal traffic flow. The Township Planning Agency
344 -
27, § 1205, cont' d) 27, § 1205, cont' d)
with the advice of the Township Engineer, shall satisfy itself as to the
adequacy of the thoroughfares and access points intended to accommodate the
traffic generated by the proposed development.
8. Minimum Distance Between Buildings on One Lot - The minimum
distance between buildings on one lot shall be twenty- five feet ( 25'),
except that all structures connected by common roof lines or covered
walkways shall be considered as one building.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 86- 8, 7/ 21/ 1986; and by Ord. 90- 1,
7/ 16/ 1990, § 37)
1206. Parking. Off- street parking and loading facilities serving a
proposed M- 1 Office and Light Industrial District development shall be
provided as follows:
1. Class I Uses.
A. One ( 1) space per one ( 1) employee on the largest shift, or
one ( 1) space per two hundred fifty ( 250) square feet of gross floor
area, whichever is greater.
B. One ( 1) unloading area/ dock for each building complex.
2. Class II Uses.
A. One ( 1) space per one ( 1) employee on the largest shift, or
one ( 1) space per five hundred ( 500) square feet of gross floor area,
whichever is greater.
B. One ( 1) unloading area/ dock for each building complex.
3. Parking Held in Reserve. If the number of spaces required by
1205( 1) and ( 2), above, is substantially larger than the number anticipated
by the applicant, the reserve parking concept may be utilized to avoid
unnecessary paving, in accordance with the following criteria:
A. The total number of spaces which must be paved initially may
be reduced by the Township Supervisors, upon recommendation of the
Township Planning Agency and Engineer, in accordance with the following
standards:
1) For one - shift operations, one ( 1) space per employee.
2) For multi -shift operations, one and one- quater ( 1)
spaces per employee on the largest shift.
B. Suitable area must be available and reserved for construction
of the balance of the total number of spaces otherwise required by
1206( 1) and ( 2), above, if and when they are deemed necessary by the
Township Supervisors, upon recommendation of the Township Planning
Agency and Engineer. In addition, a re- evaluation of parking capacity
shall be required upon a change in status ( use, building additions,
ownership, number of employees). Following re- evaluation, the Supervisors
may require installation of additional parking spaces, upon
recommendation of the Township Planning Agency and Engineer.
C. To qualify for use of the reserve parking concept, the applicant
shall provide evidence supporting reduced parking needs to the Township
Planning Agency and Engineer for their review and recommendation.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 88- 1, 4/ 18/ 1988)
Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990 - 345 -
27, § 1207) ( 27, § 1207)
1207. Plan Submission Requirements. All proposals for development
within the M- 1 Office and Light Industrial District shall comply with the
pertinent requirements of the Douglass Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, concerning nonresidential developments. ( Ord. 82- 4,
6/ 7/ 1982)
346 - Page revised 10/ 3/ 1988
27, § 1300) ( 27, § 1300)
Part 13
M- 2 Manufacturing Industrial District
1300. Declaration of Legislative Intent. The following is an
expansion of the Statement of Community Development Objectives contained in
101( 2) of this Chapter. It is the intent of this Part to provide for
manufacturing and heavy industrial uses in the Township. Furthermore, it
is the intent of this Part to:
1. Permit a broad range of manufacturing and heavy industrial uses.
2. Establish reasonable standards of performance to control the
adverse environmental effects resulting from development within this
district.
3. Provide for Township review of all proposals for development to
determine compliance with the performance standards.
4. Provide buffering requirements, building and parking setbacks, and
other regulations to minimize the negative impacts on surrounding nonindustrial
areas.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
1301. Permitted Uses. In an M- 2 Manufacturing Industrial District a
building or group of buildings may be erected, altered or used and a lot
may be used or occupied for any of the following uses and no other:
1. Any use permitted in the M- 1 Office and Light Industrial District.
2. Manufacturing, fabrication, assembly, processing and packaging of
natural and man- made materials, chemicals, synthetics and other organic and
inorganic products, except those uses specifically prohibited in 51301( 5),
herein.
3. Public or governmental utility building or use, including storage
yard, repair shop or similar use.
4. Warehouse or materials storage area, either open or enclosed,
including junk yard, with appropriate screening as required herein.
5. Any use of the same general - character as the above may be permitted
uses, except that in no case shall the following uses or any use
substantially similar thereto be permitted: abattoir; bulk storage of
explosives; fat rendering operation; wood or wood pulp processing; petroleum
refining; leather processing; manufacture of asphalt, explosives,
fertilizer, linoleum or rubber. [ Ord. 85- 3]
6. Commercial or Personal Use heliport when authorized as a special
exception by the Zoning Hearing Board, subject, in addition, to the specific
requirements of §§ 122 and 123 of this Chapter.
7. Accessory uses as defined herein, subject to the dimensional
standards of § 1304.
8. Sanitary landfills when permitted by Conditional Use. [ Ord. 86- 9]
347 -
27, § 1301, cont' d) ( 27, § 1301, cont' d)
9. Solid Waste Management Facilities when permitted by Conditional
Use. [ Ord. 86- 9]
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 86- 9, 7/ 21/ 1986)
51302. Performance Standards. Notwithstanding the laws and regulations
of the U. S. Environmental Protection Agency and the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources and other applicable Federal and
State regulations, the following performance standards shall be used by the
Board of Supervisors, Township Planning Agency and Township Engineer in
determining the suitability and possible hazardous impacts of a proposed
use within an M- 2 Manufacturing -Industrial District:
1. In determining whether a proposed use is or may become noxious,
hazardous, or offensive, the following general standards shall apply. The
proposed use shall not:
A. Constitute a nuisance or damage to health or any property by
reason of dissemination of noxious, toxic or corrosive fumes, smoke,
odor or dust in the immediately surrounding area or beyond the district
boundary line;
B. Result in noise or vibration clearly exceeding the average
intensity of noise or vibration occurring from other causes, measured
at the property -line;
C. Endanger surrounding areas by reason of radiation, fire or
explosion;
D. Produce objectionable heat or glare beyond the property line;
E. Result in off -lot electrical disturbance or adversely affect
the operation of equipment other than on the property on which the
disturbance is located;
F. Discharge any untreated or incompletely treated sewage or
industrial waste into any stream; or otherwise contribute to the
pollution of surface or underground waters;
G. Endanger the underground water level or supply for other
properties;
H. Create an objectionable traffic condition on the highways or
in an adjacent area; or generate a nuisance to surrounding property by
reason of traffic;
I. Create any other objectionable condition in an adjoining area
which will endanger public health and safety or be detrimental to the
environmental quality of the surrounding area.
2. In addition to the general standards listed above, the following
measures shall be applied to any use in the M- 2 Manufacturing Industrial
District:
A. Control of Air Pollution - The Air Pollution Control Act of
January 8, 1960, P. L. 2119 of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
together with " Chapter 131 Ambient Air Quality Criteria" and " Chapter
123 Standards for Contaminants: of " Title 25 Rules and Regulations"
348 -
27, § 1302, cont' d) 27, § 1302, cont' d)
1971, and as amended) shall be considered minimum standards for the
control of smoke, dust, fumes and other emissions within the District.
B. Control of Noise - At no point on the boundary of the M- 2
Manufacturing -Industrial District shall the sound pressure level of
any operation exceed the described levels in the designated octave
bands shown below.
SOUND LEVELS
C. Control of Odors - There shall be no emission of odorous
gases or other odorous matter in such quantities - as to be offensive
along a lot boundary line. Any process which may involve the creation
or emission of any odors shall be provided with a secondary safeguard
system, so that control will be maintained if the primary safeguard
system shall fail. As a guide in determining such quantities of
offensive odors, Table II ( Odor Thresholds) in Chapter 5 " Air Pollution
Abatement Manual" copyright 1951 by the Manufacturing Chemists'
Association, Inc., Washington, D. C. or the latest revised edition of
same, shall be used.
D. Control of Glare or Heat - Any operation producing intense
glare or heat shall be performed within an enclosed building or behind
a solid fence or wall in such manner as to be competely imperceptible
from any point beyond the lot lines.
E. Control of Vibration - No vibration which is discernible to
the human sense of feeling shall be perceptible without instruments at
any point beyond the lot line.
F. Control of Radioactivity or Electrical Disturbances - There
shall be no activities which emit dangerous or harmful radioactivity.
There shall be no electrical disturbance adversely affecting the
operation of any equipment located beyond the property of the creator
of such disturbances.
G. Outdoor Storage and Waste Disposal -
1) no flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases
shall be stored in bulk above ground; provided, however, that
349 -
Along Residential or Along Any Other
Institutional District District
Boundaries Maximum Boundary Maximum
Octave Band in Permitted Sound Permitted Sound
Cycles per Second Level in Decibels Level in Decibels
0 to 75 72 79
75 to 150 67 74
150 to 300 59 66
300 to 600 52 59
600 to 1200 46 53
1200 to 2400 40 47
2400 to 4800 34 41
Above 4800 32 39
C. Control of Odors - There shall be no emission of odorous
gases or other odorous matter in such quantities - as to be offensive
along a lot boundary line. Any process which may involve the creation
or emission of any odors shall be provided with a secondary safeguard
system, so that control will be maintained if the primary safeguard
system shall fail. As a guide in determining such quantities of
offensive odors, Table II ( Odor Thresholds) in Chapter 5 " Air Pollution
Abatement Manual" copyright 1951 by the Manufacturing Chemists'
Association, Inc., Washington, D. C. or the latest revised edition of
same, shall be used.
D. Control of Glare or Heat - Any operation producing intense
glare or heat shall be performed within an enclosed building or behind
a solid fence or wall in such manner as to be competely imperceptible
from any point beyond the lot lines.
E. Control of Vibration - No vibration which is discernible to
the human sense of feeling shall be perceptible without instruments at
any point beyond the lot line.
F. Control of Radioactivity or Electrical Disturbances - There
shall be no activities which emit dangerous or harmful radioactivity.
There shall be no electrical disturbance adversely affecting the
operation of any equipment located beyond the property of the creator
of such disturbances.
G. Outdoor Storage and Waste Disposal -
1) no flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases
shall be stored in bulk above ground; provided, however, that
349 -
27, § 1302( 2), cont' d) 27, § 1302( 2), cont' d)
tanks or drums of fuel directly connecting with energy devices,
heating devices, or appliances located on the same lot as the
tanks or drums of fuel are excluded from this provision.
2) all outdoor storage facilities for fuel, raw materials
and products, and all raw materials and products stored outdoors
shall be enclosed by a fence, wall or planting screen adequate to
conceal the facilities from abutting properties.
3) no materials or waste shall be deposited upon the lot
in such form or manner that they may be transferred off_ the lot
by natural causes of forces.
4) all materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust
or which constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible or
otherwise be attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored
outdoors only in closed containers.
H. Electric, Diesel, Gas or Other Power - Every use requiring
power shall be so operated that the service lines, substation, etc.,
shall conform to the safety requirements recognized by the Pennsylvania
Department of Labor and Industry and shall be so constructed and
installed so as to be an integral part of the architectural features
of the plant, or if visible from abutting residential properties shall
be concealed by coniferous planting.
I. Industrial Waste or Sewage - No use shall be conducted in
such a way as to discharge any treated or untreated sewage or industrial
waste except as shall be approved by the Department of Environmental
Resources.
3. The applicant shall demonstrate to the Township Engineer and
Township Planning Agency that:
A. Adequate provisions will be made to reduce and minimize any
objectionable elements to the degree necessary to insure that the
proposed use( s) will not be noxious, hazardous or offensive as defined
in subsection 1. herein.
B. The proposed use( s) will comply with the standards contained
in subsection 2. herein.
C. The Township Engineer or Planning Agency may require, in
order to determine that adequate safeguards are provided, that:
1) the applicant submit necessary information, impartial
expert judgments and written assurances.
2) the applicant obtain the advice of appropriate local,
State and Federal agencies and of private consultants.
3) the applicant' s proposed use( s) comply with such tests
or provide such safeguards in addition to those listed in subsection
2. herein, as deemed necessary by the Supervisors, upon
the advice of the Township Engineer.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 711982)
350 -
0
27, § 1303) ( 27, § 1303)
1303. Conditional Use Criteria and Requirements. Except as otherwise
specifically provided in this section, a Sanitary Landfill or a Solid
Waste Management Facility shall be permitted as a Conditional Use under
1301 only if the application and the use proposed thereby comply with all
applicable requirements set forth in this Chapter and any other Ordinance
of Douglass Township, and specifically with this Part and in addition, with
the following requirements:
1. The applicant shall pay at the time of submission of the Conditional
Use application an application fee of one thousand five hundred
dollars ($ 1, 500. 00) and shall deposit with the Township an amount equal to
five percent ( 57) of the estimated construction cost of the proposed
facility, the minimum deposit being ten thousand dollars ($ 10, 000. 00) and
the maximum deposit being one hundred thousand dollars ($ 100, 000. 00), to be
applied to the reasonable legal and engineering costs to the Township for
review of the application and for preparation of studies and agreements in
connection therewith, which shall include all such costs incurred by the
Township until final approval and issuance of occupancy permit and beginning
of lawful operation. The applicant may elect to pay one- half ( z) of
the deposit at the time of submission of the application and the balance at
the time of approval of conditional use. In place of a deposit the -applicant
may elect to produce an irrevocable letter of credit issued by a bank
or savings and loan association doing business in Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania, satisfactory to the Board of Supervisors. A refund of the
excess of the deposit over such costs will be made to the applicant.
2. The following conditions as well as any other reasonable conditions
may be imposed by the Board of Supervisors as conditions of approval
of any solid waste management facility at the discretion of the Board:
A. The applicant shall be required to pay a user fee of one
dollar ($ 1. 00) per ton based upon the quantity of solid waste processed
at the solid waste management facility. Such user fee may be
subject to adjustment from time to time by reference to the Consumer
Price Index - U. S. All items as compiled by the United States Department
of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, or similar index, provided
the minimum user fee shall be one dollar ($ 1. 00) per ton. The user
fee shall apply to each solid waste management facility. Thus, the
user fee is applicable in regard to disposal of incinerator ash at a
landfill in Douglass Township even though the user fee already has
been paid for processing at an incinerator.
B. The applicant may be required to permit access to its operational
and financial records for the purpose of periodic review by a
Governmental Advisory Board consisting of three ( 3) Supervisors of
Douglass Township, one ( 1) member appointed by the Board of Supervisors
of Douglass Township, and one ( 1) member appointed by Montgomery
County.
C. The applicant may be required to offer unconditionally to
purchase properties containing residential buildings at the time of
the application located within five hundred feet ( 500') of the boundary
line of the tract on which the Sanitary Landfill and/ or Solid
Waste Management Facility is proposed. The offer to purchase such
Page revised 10/ 3/ 1988 - 351 -
27, § 1303( 2), cont' d) 27, § 1303( 2), cont' d)
residential properties shall include the residential structures,
together with the minimum lot size permitted by the Douglass Township
Zoning Ordinance [ this Chapter 271 for a single family detached
residence. To determine the amount to be offered to each property
owner, a panel of three ( 3) qualified appraisers shall be retained.
One appraiser shall be selected by the owner of the property in
question, and a second appraiser selected by the applicant for Conditional
Use approval. The two appraisers so selected shall together
select a third appraiser. The reasonable cost of the appraisals shall
be paid by the applicant. The applicant may be required to offer
unconditionally an amount equal to the mean appraised value of the
property based on the three ( 3) appraisal reports, plus twenty- five
percent ( 25%) of such mean value. Such properties when purchased
shall remain part of the tract on which the sanitary landfill and/ or
solid waste management facility is located and owned by the owner
thereof so long. as such landfill or facility continues to operate.
The value shall be determined as the value existed immediately preceding
the application and as unaffected by it.
D. The applicant at its expense may be required to improve the
road network to Route 100 in accordance with a plan approved by - the
Township. Reference shall be made to § 1303( 7) hereinafter set forth.
3. The applicant shall provide satisfactory documentation to indicate
that the proposed application has been approved by Montgomery County as
consistent with its Municipal Waste Management Plan.
4. The applicant shall comply with all applicable Federal and State
regulations. 0 5. Dimensional Standards -
A. Minimum lot size ( exclusive of existing rights of way of
public roads) - 8 acres. Provided, however, that the minimum lot size
for a sanitary landfill shall be fifty ( 50) acres.
B. Minimum lot width at building line - five hundred feet
500'). ( Applicable to sanitary landfill only.)
C. Minimum building setbacks measured from:
1) the ultimate right- of- way line - 200 feet.
2) an abutting district boundary line - 200 feet.
3) any other property line - 200 feet.
Applicable to sanitary landfill only.)
D. Maximum Building Height - 120 feet, provided, however, that
this height limitation shall not apply to the height of the stack.
For Sanitary Landfills see § 1303. 14, below.)
6. A solid waste management facility for municipal waste shall not
allow dumping, burying, depositing, storing, incinerating, treating or
disposition of solid waste other than municipal waste as defined in the
Solid Waste Management Act ( Act of July 7, 1980, P. L. 380, 35 P. S. 6018. 101
et seq.) enacted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as amended to the
date of this Chapter, and the ash, residue, reject material and other
352 - Page revised 10/ 3/ 1988
27, § 1303( 6), cont' d) ( 27, § 1303( 6), cont' d)
material generated from such municipal waste. A solid waste management
facility for municipal waste permitted as conditional use hereunder shall
not dispose of any ash, residue, reject material and other material generated
from such municipal waste at a landfill within Douglass Township
unless such landfill conforms to the criteria and requirements set forth in
this section and accepts such waste from the solid waste management facility
exclusively and no other waste. Reject material and other material
generated from such municipal waste shall be limited to municipal waste
delivered to the solid waste management facility which cannot be processed
because of its nature or because of a temporary operational failure at the
solid waste management facility. In no event shall the ash, residue,
reject material and other material generated from such municipal waste
disposed in such landfill exceed twenty- five percent ( 25%) of the material
processed at the solid waste management facility during any given period of
thirty ( 30) days.
7. Vehicular Access.
A. Any Township road used to provide access to a solid waste
management facility shall be paved and maintained in good condition in
accordance with the standards of Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
relating to the type of heavy truck traffic resulting from such
facility.
B. The Board of Supervisors may designate safe and adequate
access roads and prohibit the use of other roads, except for local
trash collection purposes.
C. Applicant at its expense may be required to upgrade access
roads to the facility in accordance with a plan approved by the Board
of Supervisors.
D. The costs of upgrading and maintaining access roads to the
solid waste management facility shall be paid by the solid waste
management facility operation in a manner suitable to the Supervisors.
E. When acquisition of private property is necessitated by the
plan approved by the Board of Supervisors, the Township may use its
power of condemnation to obtain the land at the expense of the applicant.
8. The site shall be fenced and secured by gates which can be locked.
In addition, appropriate precautions shall be taken to prevent waste from
escaping the site because of wind or otherwise. Fencing, walls, and other
enclosures may be required for this purpose. Any such escaping waste shall
be collected daily and properly disposed.
9. The solid waste management facility site shall be graded and
provided with appropriate drainage facilities to minimize runoff, prevent
erosion, and to prevent collection of stagnant water.
10. There shall be no dumping, depositing, storage, incineration,
treatment or disposition of waste within fifty feet ( 50') of any public
road or any property line of the solid waste management facility and
reasonable visual screening composed of trees and so forth shall be provided.
Such visual screening shall include evergreen trees in a solid
double row with a minimum height of nine feet ( 9') and, in addition, shade
trees with a two- inch ( 2") caliper and a minimum height of nine feet ( 9')
Page revised 10/ 3/ 1988 - 353 -
27, § 1303( 10), cont' d) 27, § 1303( 10), cont' d)
in a number equivalent to one tree for every fifty ( 50) linear feet of
buffer. In addition, there shall be no dumping, depositing, storage,
incineration, treatment or disposition of waste within fifty feet ( 50') of
any dwelling, church, school or other occupied building.
11. The highest elevation of a landfill shall not exceed thirty- five
feet ( 35') above the highest point of natural elevation within the landfill
area of the site before the disposal operation began. Final grading of the
landfill area shall be done in a manner which leaves the site potentially
useful. New landscaping shall be planted to protect against erosion and
improve the appearance of the land after final grading.
12. Buildings shall be constructed on the site to house equipment
other than motor vehicles when not in use.
13. All buildings shall be equipped with fire and smoke detection and
extinguishing facilities in accordance with regulations of the Pennsylvania
Department of Labor and Industry, the National Fire Protection Association,
and/ or other more stringent regulations, if determined appropriate by the
Board of Supervisors.
14. An on- site scale shall be used to weigh all solid waste delivered
to the site and complete records shall be maintained by the operator, which
records shall be available for inspection by the Board of Supervisors upon
request.
15. A certified copy of all reports, data, plans and othr material or
information required to be submitted to the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources also shall be submitted to the Board of Supervisors.
16. A tire cleaning area shall be provided on the access road within
the solid waste management facility site. All tires on all trucks leaving
the solid waste management facility site shall be cleaned.
17. An environmental assessment statement shall be submitted to the
Board of Supervisors, and shall include the following:
A. A description of all proposed facilities;
B. A physical description of the environment affected including
summary technical data and maps and diagrams adequate to permit an
assessment of potential environmental impact by commenting agencies
and the public. Highly technical and specialized analysis and data
should be attached as appendices or footnoted with adequate bibliographic
references;
C. The interrelationship and cumulative environmental and
economic impacts of the proposed solid waste management facility when
coupled with other solid waste processing or disposal facilities shall
be stated and supported by adequate technical analysis;
D. The sources of data used to identify, quantify or evaluate
any and all environmental consequences must be expressly noted;
E. The relationship of the proposed solid waste management
facility to land use plans, policies and controls for the affected
area, including a statement as to how the proposed solid waste management
facility may conform or conflict with the objectives and specific
terms of existing or proposed Federal, State, county or township land
use plans, policies and controls;
354 - Page revised 10/ 3/ 1488
27, § 1303( 17), cont' d) ( 27, § 1303( 17), cont' d)
F. An analysis of:
1) the primary and secondary effects of the solid waste
management facility and its capacity to stimulate or induce
changes in patterns of social and/ or economic activities;
2) the impact on existing community facilities and activities,
changes in natural conditions, and so forth; and
3) the effect on natural and cultural features such as
streams, mountains, historic sites, landmarks, principal roads,
lakes and towns;
G. Specific data relating to the impact of the solid waste
management facility on local vehicular traffic, and designating the
routes to be utilized by vehicles seeking access to that proposed
facility;
H. Specific data relating to the impact of the solid waste
management facility on local water supplies, streams and rivers;
I. Specific data relating to the impact of the solid waste
management facility on natural and man- made local storm drainage
facilities and areas;
J. Specific data relating to the impact of the solid waste
management facility on the existing flood hazard areas of the Township,
including details of any measures or precautions which may have
to be taken in order to provide adequate flood control in the Township;
K. A statement of any probable adverse environmental effects
which cannot be avoided ( such as water or air pollution, undesirable
land use patterns, damage to life systems, congestion, threats to
health or other consequences adverse to the environment). Included
for purposes of contrast should be a clear statement of - how other
avoidable adverse effects will be mitigated;
L. The relationship between local short- term uses of the environment
and the maintenance and enhancement of long- term productivity.
This section should contain a brief discussion of the extent
to which the proposed action involves short- term environmental gains
at the expense of long- term losses, or the converse, and a discussion
of the extent to which the proposed action forecloses future options.
In this context, the words " short- term" and " long- term" should be
viewed in terms of the environmentally significant consequences of the
proposed action;
M. The aesthetic impact of the proposed action including its
impact upon visual quality of the surrounding community;
N. An analysis of the success and/ or failure of similar projects;
0. A statement of any adverse effects on employment, taxes and
property values;
P. A statement of any effects on desirable community growth; and
Q. A statement describing the location and impact of the project
on nearby recreation areas.
Page revised 10/ 3/ 1988 - 355 -
27, § 1303( 17)( R)) 27, § 1303( 17)( R))
R. Such other information as reasonably required by the Board of
Supervisors, Planning Agency, Township Engineer, and/ or Solicitor.
18. Contents of Application. An application for a conditional use for
a solid waste management facility shall contain the following:
A. A topographical drawing, prepared by a professional engineer,
registered in the State of Pennsylvania, to a scale no greater than 1"
100 feet, showing:
1) location of site relative to public roads;
2) owners of adjacent properties;
3) proposed fencing and improvements;
4) proposed screening and buffering;
5) cross sections showing the existing grades and the
proposed grades upon completion and closure;
6) location of equipment cleaning and tire cleaning areas;
and
7) location of weighing scales, fire fighting equipment
and all facilities, including buildings;
B. The names and current addresses of any and all persons who
own any interest, real or equitable, in the real estate which is the
subject of the application;
C. The names and current addresses of any and all persons having
any ownership interest in any corporations or other business entities
which may be set forth in answers to ( B) above, where such persons
possess an ownership interest of ten percent ( 107) or more ( ownership
shall include constructive ownership as defined by Internal Revenue
Code, Section 318 as now in effect);
D. The names and current addresses of any and all persons having
any ownership interest in the operation or proposed operation, maintenance
and use of the solid waste management facility in question;
E. The names and current addresses of any and all persons having
any ownership interest in any corporations or other business entities
which may be set forth in answer ( D) above, where such persons possess
an ownership interest of ten percent ( 107) or more ( ownership shall
include constructive ownership as defined by Internal Revenue Code,
Section 318 as now in effect);
F. The identities and qualifications of personnel designated to
manage and operate the proposed facility, together with their intended
responsibilities;
G. All requirements of the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management
Act and regulations and standards of the Department of Environmental
Resources relating to solid waste processing and disposal system are
incorporated herein by reference, and the applicant shall be required
to submit any and all plans, applications, data, materials, studies
and information to the Board of Supervisors as is required to be
356 - Page revised 10/ 3/ 1988
27, § 1303( 18), cont' d) 27, § 1303( 18), cont' d)
submitted to the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources
pursuant to said Act, regulations and standards. All such materials
shall be certified by the applicant to be true and correct copies of
original materials filed with that department;
H. Statements indicating expected useful life of the solid waste
management facility and the condition and proposed uses of said site
upon termination of operation, and any limitations on future uses due
to proposed use;
I. An access road survey, which shall include the following:
1) statements as to the estimated number of vehicles which
are expected to use the site on a daily basis during the first
two ( 2) years of operations and as to the estimated weight
thereof; and
2) a plan indicating all roads anticipated to be used as
access roads;
J. Statement of applicant' s prior experience, if any, in operating
solid waste management facilities;
K. An environmental assessment statement as required by subsection
( 20), above.
19. Permits, Inspections, Operations.
A. The application fee heretofore specified in subsection 1.
shall be in place of the license fee required by Section 6 of the
Douglass Township Ordinance for Licensing and Regulation of Solid
Waste Management Facilities, Ordinance No. 85- 2 enacted February 4,
1985, for the first year of operation. Thereafter, the application
for renewal on a year to year basis and the license fee shall be in
accordance with such Ordinance.
B. The Board of Supervisors and/ or its authorized representatives,
from time to time, shall inspect the solid waste management
facility and operation to assure continued compliance with this
Chapter. The solid waste management operator shall make the site
available for inspection when requested to do so. All inspection
expenses shall be borne by the operator.
C. For the purposes of this Chapter, the terms " applicant" and
operator" shall be synonymous and shall mean those individuals,
authorities, private firms, or others who are responsible for making
application( s) to the Board of Supervisors and for operating the solid
waste management facilities.
20. Transfer of Permit. No permit issued hereunder may be transferred
or assigned unless and until an application is received from the proposed
transferee setting forth the information required by subsection 21, above.
21. Denial of Access to Certain Vehicles. The operator of any solid
waste management facility shall be required to deny access to the facility
for a period of thirty ( 30) days to any person or business entity whose
vehicles used in delivering solid waste thereto:
A. Do not have loads fully enclosed within the truck body or
which are not covered by appropriate covering and restraining devices;
Page revised 10/ 3/ 1988 - 357 -
27, § 1303( 21)( B)) 27, § 1303( 21)( B))
B. Are discovered by the Township to be utilizing routes other
than those designated in the operating permit.
22. Cleaning of Litter Required. The operator of any solid waste
management facility shall be required to clean litter each day from all
feeder roads utilized by trucks depositing solid waste therein for a
distance of one thousand five hundred feet ( 1, 500') in each direction from
the entrance of the facility.
23. Vector Control Procedures. Vector control procedures shall be
carried out a minimum of twice each month, or more often as required, to
prevent health hazards or nuisances. The permittee shall submit a control
program for the approval of the Board of Supervisors, including evidence of
a contractual agreement . for services with an exterminator. The permit is
required to submit proof of extermination to the Board of Supervisors.
24. Waste Remaining at Transfer Stations. There shall be no solid
waste remaining at a transfer station at the end of a working day unless it
is stored in containers constructed to be watertight, leak -proof, weatherproof
and rodent -proof. Special provisions shall be made for the transfer
of bulky waste ( e. g. tree branches and stumps, appliances, junk automobiles,
machinery) at the transfer station, otherwise such waste shall -be
excluded from the provisions stated in § 1303( 9), above.
25. Emergency Operation Plans; Storage of Material. All solid waste
management facilities shall have a written emergency operational plan to
provide for an alternative waste handling system during periods when the
facility is inoperative. These plans shall delineate the procedures to be
followed in case of equipment breakdown which will require stand- by equipment,
extension of operating hours or diversion of solid waste to other
facilities. Solid waste materials shall not be stored at a permitted
facility for more twenty- four ( 24) hours before ultimate disposition
by transfer, dispos, a landfill, or incineration, except for material
to be recycled such as glass, metal, paper, rags and so forth, and material
to be processed at an incinerator or resource recovery facility which is
stored within the confines of a building in a holding pit or bunker. Under
no circumstances shall such pit or bunder be built with a capacity larger
than will accommodate or hold a six- day supply of material for the incinerator
or resource recovery facility.
26. Vehicles to Originate from Transfer -Transport Facility; Load
Capacity. Twenty- five percent ( 25%) of all vehicles delivering solid waste
generated outside of Douglass Township to an incinerator or resource
recovery facility within Douglass Township shall originate from a transfer -
transport facility permitted by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources and shall have a load capacity of not less than forty ( 40)
cubic yards.
27. Limitation of Facilities. Not more than one ( 1) incinerator and
one ( 1) resource recovery facility and one ( 1) trash transfer station
utilizing a total of not more than three ( 3) compactors shall be permitted
to be in existence and to operate within this district at any time.
28. Limitation of Capacity. No incinerator or resource recovery
facility shall have a design capacity of greater than seven hundred fifty
750) tons in a twenty- four ( 24) hour period.
I*
358 - Page revised 10/ 3/ 1988
279 § 1303( 29)) ( 27, § 1303( 29))
29. Indemnification. The owner and/ or operator of a solid waste
management facility shall agree to indemnify and hold the Township harmless
from any liability in connection with the permitting, construction and/ or
operation of the solid waste management facility and/ or any sanitary
landfill within Douglass Township accepting ash, residue, reject material
and other materials generated therefrom.
30. Waiver of Requirements. The Board of Supervisors for good cause
may, in its discretion, waive any of the requirements set forth in this
section.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 86- 9, 7/ 21/ 1986; and by Ord. 88- 1,
4/ 18/ 1988)
1304. Dimensional Standards. The following table contains the
dimensional standarda. applicable to the M- 2 District:
1. Minimum lot size ( exclusive of existing rights- of- way of public
roads): 5 acres
2. Minimum lot width at the building line: 300 feet
3. Minimum building setbacks measured from:
A. The ultimate right- of- way line: 100 feet
B. An abutting residential or institutional district boundary
line: 100 feet
C. An abutting commercial or industrial district boundary line:
100 feet
D. Any other property line not abutting a zoning district
boundary or street: 50 feet
4. Minimum driveway, parking and loading setbacks measured from:
A. The ultimate right- of- way line
1) parking or parallel drive: 20 feet
2) loading: 100 feet
B. An abutting residential or institutional district: 100 feet
C. An abutting commercial or industrial district: 50 feet
D. With shared parking and loading: 1 foot
E. Street intersection ( applies only to driveways, measured
between centerlines): 100 feet
5. Other Standards:
A. Maximum building coverage: 60 percent
B. Minimum area of vegetative cover: 25 percent
C. Maximum building height: 50 feet
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
1305. General Regulations. The following general regulations shall
apply for any development proposal within the M- 2 Manufacturing Industrial
District:
Page revised 10/ 3/ 1988 - 359 -
27, § 1305( 1)) 27, § 13050))
1. Ownership - The tract of land shall be in single ownership, or
ownership shall be such that the tract will be developed under a single
direction in accordance with an approved plan.
2. Sewer and Water Facilities - A11 development in the M- 2 District
shall be served by public sewer and water facilities, subject to approval
by the Board of Supervisors, Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources, and appropriate sewer and water authorities.
3. Development Plan - The application for subdivision or land development
shall be accompanied by a plan or plans which shall:
A. Show detailed use of the entire tract
B. Comply with the Subdivision and Land Development Regulations
as well as other applicable ordinances of Douglass- Towaship.
C. Clearly designate the proposed use( s) of each area of the
tract proposed for land development.
4. Development Stages and Permits - The development of the tract may
be carried out in either a single phase or in stages. If carried out in
stages the development shall be in accordance with a development agreement
which shall:
A. Be binding to the overall tract and its development;
B. Be recorded with the final plan;
C. Be acceptable to the Board of Supervisors upon recommendation
of the Township Solicitor.
5. Other Development Regulations -
A. Utilities - All utility lines ( electrical, telephone, etc.)
shall be placed underground.
B. Signs - All signs in the M- 2 Industrial District shall comply
with the requirements of Part 15, Signs, of this Chapter, including
traffic control, directional and street signs.
C. Lighting Facilities - Lighting facilities shall be arranged
in a manner which will protect streets and neighboring properties from
unreasonable glare or hazardous interference of any kind.
6. Landscaped Planting and Buffer Areas - Screening and softening
buffers shall be provided in compliance with the following regulations:
A. Screening Buffers. Screening buffers shall be provided when
M- 2 office and industrial properties abut residential or institutional
uses or districts. The screening buffer shall be a minimum of twentyfive
( 251) feet in width along the property line and must be developed
in accordance with the provisions of § 420( 4) of the Township Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance [ Chapter 22]. Whenever possible,
the owner shall make every effort to retain existing natural screening,
such as vegetation and topography.
B. Softening Buffers. Softening buffers shall be provided along
all side and rear property lines that are not requird to have a screening
buffer. Softening buffers must be developed in accordance with
the provisions of § 420( 5) of the Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance [ Chapter 22].
Ord. 90- 1]
360 - Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990
27, § 1305, cont' d) ( 27, § 1305, cont' d)
7. Access - Provision shall be made for safe and efficient ingress
and egress to and from public streets and highways serving the M- 2 Industrial
Development without causing undue congestion or interference with the
normal traffic flow. The Township Planning Agency, with the advice of the
Township Engineer, shall evaluate the adequacy of the thoroughfares and
access points intended to accommodate the traffic generated by the proposed
M- 2 Industrial Development.
8. Minimum Distance Between Buildings on One Lot - The minimum
distance between buildings on one lot shall be twenty- five feet ( 25'),
except that all structures connected by common roof lines or covered
walkways shall be considered as one building.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 90- 1, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 38)
1306. Plan Submission Requirements. All proposals for development
within the M- 2 Manufacturing Industrial District shall comply with the
pertinent requirements of the Douglass Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, concerning nonresidential developments. ( Ord. 82- 4,
6/ 7/ 1982)
1307. Parking. Off- street parking facilities serving a proposed M- 2
Manufacturing Industrial District. Development shall be provided as follows:
1. One ( 1) space per two hundred fifty ( 250) square feet of gross
floor area.
2. Parking Held in Reserve - If the number of spaces required by
subsection 1. above, is substantially larger than the number anticipated by
the applicant, the reserve parking concept may be utilized to avoid unnecessary
paving, in accordance with the following criteria:
A. The total number of spaces which must be paved initially may
be reduced by the Township Supervisors, upon recommendation of the
Township Planning Agency and Engineer, in accordance with the following
standards:
1) for one - shift operations, one ( 1) space per employee.
2) for multi -shift operations, one and one- quarter ( 1')
spaces per employee on the largest shift.
B. Suitable area must be available and reserved for construction
of the balance of the total number of spaces otherwise required by
subsection 1., above, if and when they are deemed necessary by the
Township Supervisors, upon recommendation of the Township Planning
Agency and Engineer. In addition, a re- evaluation of parking capacity
shall be required upon a change in status ( use, building additions,
ownership, number of employees). Following re- evaluation, the Supervisors
may require installation of additional parking spaces, upon
recommendation of the Township Planning Agency and Engineer.
C. To qualify for use of the reserve parking concept, the
applicant shall provide evidence supporting reduced parking needs to
the Township Planning Agency and Engineer for their review and recommendation.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990 - 361 -
21, § 1601, cont' d) ( 27, 91601, cont' d)
flood plain and alluvial soils. Where the one hundred year flood
plain boundary has been approximated ( paragraph 1. 0 above), both the
approximated one hundred year flood plain ( paragraph 1. 0 above) and
alluvial soils ( paragraph B.) shall be used in determining the flood
plain. The most extensive of these areas shall determine the outermost
boundary of the Flood Plain Conservation District.
2. Studies used to establish the flood plain boundaries shall be
available in the Township Municipal Building for reference.
3. The data used in the studies referred to in Subsection B. above
shall be plotted when feasible on the Zoning Map to indicate the Flood
Plain Conservation District, which map shall be designated as the Douglass
Township Flood Plain Conservation District Map and shall be available to
the public in the Township Office. Whenever there is a difference between
the Map and the data contained in the studies, the data contained in the
studies shall determine the boundary of the district.
4. All subsequent boundary changes shall be indicated on the Flood
Plain Conservation District Map ( the Zoning Map) when feasible.
5. " Development" is defined' as any man- made change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other
structures, the placement of manufactured homes, streets and other paving,
utilities, mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation or drilling
operations and the subdivision of land.
6. " One -Hundred Year Flood" is defined as a flood that has one chance
in one hundred or a one percent ( 17) chance of being equalled or exceeded
in any one year. For the purposes of this Part, the one hundred year flood
base flood) is that which is defined by Federal Insurance Administration,
Federal Emergency Management Agency in the Flood Insurance Study, Douglass
Township.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 84- 6, 5/ 7/ 1982; and by Ord. 86- 8,
7/ 21/ 1986; and by Ord. 87- 5, 12/ 7/ 1987, § 13)
1602. Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted in the Flood
Plain Conservation District: ( listed in general order of appropriateness).
1. Wildlife sanctuary, woodland preserve, arboretum.
2. Game farm, fish hatchery, ( excluding rearing structures) hunting
and fishing reserves.
3. Forestry, lumbering and reforestation excluding storage and mill
structures.
4. Harvesting of any wild crops such as marsh hay, ferns, moss,
berries or wild rice.
5. Outdoor plan nursery, orchard.
6. Pasture, grazing land.
7. Recreation use such as: park, day camp, picnic grove, golf
course, hunting, fishing and boating club, excluding structures.
8. Outlet installations for sewage treatment plants, sealed public
water supply wells.
Page Revised 12/ 7/ 1987 - 379 -
27, § 1602, cont' d) 27, § 1602, cont' d)
9. Utility transmission lines.
10. Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the foregoing
permitted uses when approved as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing
Board.
11. Within the floodway part of the Flood Plain Conservation District
no development shall be permitted if it would cause any increase in the
elevation of the one hundred year flood.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
1603. Prohibited Uses. The following uses are prohibited unless
approved in the manner noted in each sub - section:
1. All structures and buildings within the Flood Plain conservation
District and/ or located closer to the limits of the District thantherear
yard dimensions of the applicable Zoning District.
2. Flood retention dams, damming or relocation of any water course,
culvert, bridge, excavation or placement of embankment, removal of topsoil,
filling or grading, unless approved by Douglass Township Planning Agency
and• Douglass Township Board of Supervisors upon recommendation of Township
Engineer and with' approval of Montgomery County Conservation District,
Pennyslvania Department of Environmental Resources, Pennsylvania Emergency
Management Agency, and Army Corps of Engineers.
Uses located within the alluvial soil area shall be approved by
Douglass Township Planning Agency and Douglass Township Board of Supervisors
upon recommendation of the Township Engineer and with approval of
any agency which may be required by the Board of Supervisors.
Prior to the alteration or relocation of any water course within the
FEMA Flood Insurance Study Area, which is part of the Flood Plian Conservation
District, all adjacent communities and the Bureau of Community Planning
or the Pennsylvania Department of Community Affairs shall be notified.
Copies of such notification shall be sent to Federal Insurance Administrator.
The flood -carrying capacity within the altered or relocated
portions shall be maintained.
Ord. 90- 11
3. Within the Flood Plain Conservation District sanitary landfill,
dump, junkyard, outdoor storage of vehicles and/ or materials and paved or
all-weather parking lot.
4. Within the Flood Plain Conservation District on- site sewage
disposal system and private wells.
5. Within the floodway part of the Flood Plain Conservation District
any development if it would cause any increase in the elevation of the one
hundred ; 100) year flood.
6. The construction, enlargement or expansion of manufactured homes,
manufactured home parks and manufactured home subdivisions. [ Ord. 91- 51
7. The construction, enlargement or expansion of hospitals ( public
or private). [ Ord. 91- 51
8. The construction, enlargement or expansion of nursing homes
public or private). [ Ord. 91- 51
380 - Page Revised 10/ 22/ 1991
27, § 1603, cont' d) 27, § 1603, cont' d)
9. The construction, enlargement or expansion of jails or prisons
public or private). [ Ord. 91- 51
10. The construction, enlargement or expansion of any structure which
would be used for the production, storage or maintenance of a supply of the
following toxic chemicals which are dangerous to human life:
A. Acetone.
B. Ammonia.
C. Benzine.
D. Calcium carbide.
E. Carbon disulfide.
G. Celluloid.
H. Chlorine.
I. Hydrochloric acid.
J. Hydrocyanic acid.
K. Magnesium.
L. Uitric acide and oxides of nitrogen.
M. Petroleum products ( gasolines, fuel oil, etc.)
N. Phosphorus.
0. Potassium.
P. Sodium.
Q. Sulphur and sulphur prodicts.
R. Pesticides ( including insecticides, fungicides and
rodenticides).
S. Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
T. Any other dangerous materials or substances regulated by the
appropriate Federal or State agencies * or listed by Department of
Environmental Resources as hazardous.
Ord. 91- 51
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 84- 6, 5/ 7/ 1984; and by Ord. 86- 8,
7/ 21/ 986; by Ord. 87- 5, 12/ 7/ 1987, § 1b4y Or;d. 90- 1, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 14; and
by Ord. 91- 5, 8/ 5/ 1991, § 3)
1604. Planning_Agency Agproval. All plans for- structures within a
distance of one hundred fe t 100) from the Flood Plain Conservation
District and all plans for the development of a recreational or utility use
within or adjacent to the district shall be approved by the Township
Planning Agency. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
1605. Boundary Disputes and Changes.
1. The extent of flood plain shall be determined in the first insurance
by the Township Engineer using accepted engineering practices.
Page Revised 10/ 22/ 1991 - 381 -
27, § 1605( 2)) ( 27, § 1605( 2))
2. Should a dispute arise concerning any identified floodplain
boundary, a determination shall be made by the Township Planning Agency and
any party aggrieved by this decision may appeal to the Zoning Hearing
Board. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
3. Insofar as various natural conditions, including the flood plain
herein defined, may change, and such change can be validated by detailed
on- site survey techniques approved by the Soil Conservation Service, United
States Department of Agriculture, and the Township Engineer, the delineation
of the flood plain boundary as shown on the soil maps can be modified
by the Zoning Hearing Board based upon such detailed on- site survey techniques.
4. The Zoning Hearing Board shall act only upon the affirmative
recommendations of the Township Planning agency and the Township Engineer
and the validation of the Soil Conservation Service and/ or other appropriate
agency, In addition, prior to any modification to the one hundred
year flood plain as shown in the Flood Insurance Study, approval must be
obtained from the Federal Insurance Administration ( FIA).
5. Flood Plain limit modification requests shall be in accordance
with the following procedure:
A. Changes within the areas designated in the FEMA study shall
be changed in accordance with FEMA regulations.
B. Changes which may be requested in relation to areas defined
by the Soil Survey of Montgomery County shall be as follows:
1) confirmation of the soil type by a qualified individual
practicing in the soil analyses field or a soil scientist from
the Soil Conservation Service, Department of Agriculture.
2) delineation of the Flood Plain limits by a detailed
on- site survey. This method would also include any other material
deemed necessary by the Township to minimize damages which
would be caused by surface water.
6. The following items shall apply only to Flood Plain which has been
defined by the soils classifications:
A. Changes shall not modify the existing ground cover, contour
and terrain within the revised Flood Plaim limits.
B. Building setback lines shall be measured from the revised
Flood Plain limits and using any setbacks required in the applicable
zoning district and as required in this District.
C. Changes to the District boundary as defined by the soils
classifications shall not allow any structure to be located within the
alluvial soil area as shown in the soil survey of Montgomery County
unless field testing indicates that such soil has been improperly
classified.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982, § 1606; as amended by Ord. 84- 6, 5/ 7/ 1984; and by Ord.
86- 8, 7/ 21/ 1986)
1606. Determination of the One Hundred Year Flood Elevation.
1. Within any approximated flood plain area, one hundred ( 100) year
flood elevation and floodway information from other Federal, State, or
382 Page Revised 10/ 22/ 1991
27, § 1606, cont' d) ( 27, § 1606, cont' d)
other acceptable sources shall be used when available. When such other
information is not available, the elevation shall be determined by using
the elevation of a point on the boundary of the identified flood plain area
which is nearest the construction site in question. [ Ord. 87- 51
2. In lieu of the above, the Township may require the applicant to
determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques
performed by professional engineers, subject to review by the Township
Engineer.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982, § 1607; as amended by Ord. 84- 6, 5/ 7/ 1982; and by Ord.
87- 5, 12/ 7/ 1987, § 15)
1607. Building Floor Elevations. If, for any reason, a building or
structure is permitted within the boundaries of this district, plans
submitted for building permits shall show the proposed lowest floor or
flood proofing elevation of any proposed building based upon National
Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982, § 1608)
1608. Changes in Existing Structures. Structures existing in any
identified flood plain area prior to the enactment of this Chapter may
continue to remain, provided that:
1. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of fifty percent
50%) or more of its market value shall constitute a substantial improvement
and shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of
this Part.
2. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement to an
extent or amount of less than fifty percent ( 50%) of its market value,
shall be elevated and/ or floodproofed to the greatest extent possible.
3. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure and/ or use
shall be allowed within any floodway that would cause any increase in flood
heights.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982, § 1609; as amended by Ord. 84- 6, 5/ 7/ 1984)
1609. Variance Procedures and Conditions. If compliance with any of
the requirements of this Part would result in an exceptional hardship to a
prospective builder, developer or landowner, the Zoning Hearing Board may,
upon request, grant relief from the strict application of these requirements
in accordance with the procedures contained in Part 18 and the
following:
1. No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use or activity within any floodway area which would cause any increase in
the one hundred year flood elevation and no variance shall be granted for
development which may endanger human life or for construction of hospitals,
nursing homes, jails or prisons, and new manufactured home parks and
manufactured home subdivisions, and substantial improvements to existing
manufactured home parks.
2. If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief. The applicant shall be required to comply
with all applicable requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program
Page Revised 10/ 22/ 1991 - 383 -
27, § 1609( 2), cont' d) ( 27, § 1609( 2), cont' d)
Regulations ( Section 60. 3( 1) through ( 4)), including the requirements for
elevation, floodproofing and anchoring. [ Ord. 96- 11
3. In granting any variance, the Zoning Hearing Board shall attach
whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers necessary in
order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, and to achieve the
objectives of this Part.
4. Whenever a variance is granted, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
notify the applicant in writing that:
A. The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance; and
B. Such variance may increase the risks to life and property.
5. In reviewing any request for a variance, the Zoning Hearing Board
shall consider, at a minimum, the following:
A. That there is a good and sufficient cause.
B. That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
C. That the granting of the variance will ( i) neither result in
an unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood heights, additional
threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, ( ii) nor
create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public, or conflict
with any other applicable State or local ordinances and regulations.
6. A complete record of all variance requests and related actions
shall be maintained by the Zoning Hearing Board. In addition, a report of
all variances granted during the year shall be included in the annual
report to the Federal Insurance Administration.
Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the one
hundred year flood.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982, § 1610; as amended by Ord. 84- 6, 5/ 7/ 1984; by Ord.
87- 5, 12/ 7/ 1987, § 15; by Ord. 91- 5, 8/ 5/ 1991, § 4; and by Ord. 96- 1,
1/ 15/ 1996)
1610. Municipal Liability. The granting of zoning permit in any
flood plain district shall not constitute a representation, guarantee or
warranty of any kind by the Township, or by an official or employee thereof
of the practicability or safety of any structure, use or other plan proposed,
and shall create no liability upon, or a cause of action against
such public body, official or employee for any damage that may result
pursuant thereto. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
384 - Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996
27, § 1706) 27, § 1706)
1706. Registration of Nonconforming Uses. [ Repealed] ( Ord. 82- 4,
6/ 7/ 1982; as repealed by Ord. 90- 1, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 21)
Page Revised 7/ 16/ 1990 - 387 -
27, § 1800) ( 27, § 1800)
Part 18
Administrative Procedures
1800. Administration. The duty of administering and enforcing the
provisions of this Chapter is hereby conferred upon the Zoning Officer who
shall have such powers as are conferred on him by this Chapter and who
shall administer this Chapter in accordance with its literal terms. The
Zoning Officer shall not have the power to permit any construction or any
use or change of use which does not conform to this Chapter. ( Ord. 82- 4,
6/ 7/ 1982)
1801. Duties. The duties of the Zoning Officer shall be:
1. To examine all applications for building permits.
2. To issue permits only for construction and uses which are in
accordance with the regulations of this Chapter and other applicable
ordinances as may be subsequently enacted.
3. To record and file all applications for permits with the accompanying
plans.
4. To issue permits for uses by special exception only after such
uses and buildings are approved by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance
with the regulations of this Chapter.
5. To receive all required fees and issue all necessary stop orders.
6. Upon the request of the Planning Agency or of the Zoning Hearing,
or Board of Supervisors, to present to such body, facts, records and any
similar information on specific requests to assist such bodies in reaching
their decision.
7. To institute civil enforcement proceedings as a means of
enforcement. [ Ord. 90- 11
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 90- 1, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 22; and by Ord.
96- 1, 1/ 15/ 1996)
1802. Appeal. Any appeal from a decision or action of the Zoning
Officer shall be made directly to the Zoning Hearing Board. ( Ord. 82- 4,
6/ 7/ 1982)
1803. Complaints Regarding Violations. Whenever a violation of this
Chapter occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written
complaint. Such complaint stating fully the causes and basis thereof
shall be filed with the Zoning Officer. He shall record promptly such
complaint, immediately investigate, and take action thereon as provided by
this Chapter. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
1804. Notification of Violation. Enforcement notice shall be given
as provided in §616( 1) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 90- 1, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 23)
Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996 - 389 -
27, § 1805) 27, § 1805)
1805. Enforcement. This Chapter shall be enforced by the Zoning
Officer. No permit of any kind as provided in this Chapter shall be
granted by him for any purpose except in compliance with the provisions of
this Chapter, or a decision of the Zoning Hearing Board or a court of
competent jurisdiction. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
1806. Enforcement Remedies. Enforcement remedies shall be as
provided in § 617( 2) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 90- 1, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 24)
1807. Requirements for Zoning Permits. A zoning permit shall be
required prior to the erection, construction, alteration, moving or change
in use of any building or structure or part thereof and before any zoning
permit is issued for a new principal building or structure, permanent
reference monuments of solid steel three quarter ( 3/ 4) inch in diameter and
thirty- six ( 36) inches in length or marble or concrete monuments four ( 4)
inches square by thirty ( 30) inches in length shall be set at all corners
and angle points of the boundaries of the lot and a certificate of compliance
from a registered surveyor dated within thirty ( 30) days of the
date of the application for the zoning permit shall be submitted to the
Township. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 87- 4, 11/ 16/ 1987)
1808. Enforcement Remedies. Any violation or proposed violation of
this Chapter may be corrected by any necessary actions instituted by the
Board of Supervisors or by the Zoning Officer with the Board' s approval.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
1809. Application for Permits. Application for permit shall be made
in writing to the Zoning Officer on such forms as may be furnished by the
Township. Such application shall include building and plot plans of a
satisfactory nature in duplicate, and shall contain all information necessary
for such official to ascertain whether this proposed erection, alteration,
use or change in use complies with the provisions of this Chapter.
No permit shall be considered complete or permanently effective until the
Zoning Officer has certified that the work meets all the requirements of
applicable codes and ordinances. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
1810. Issuance of Permits.
1. No zoning permits shall be issued except in conformity with the
regulations of this Chapter, except after written order from the Zoning
Hearing Board or any court of competent jurisdiction. In addition, no
zoning permits shall be issued in regard to any lot or tract of land if any
fees and/ or costs including, but not limited to, legal and engineering
costs and Zoning Hearing Board costs due to the Township in connection with
said lot or the subdivision in which it is located, whether required by
this or any other law, ordinance or regulation or by development agreement
are unpaid and no permit shall be issued to a party who has not paid all
such fees and/ or costs due from said party to Douglass Township, whether in
connection with the lot or tract of land which is the subject of the
application or any other lot or tract of land in Douglass Township.
Further, in addition, in the event that the Department of Labor and
Industry approval is required in connection with proposed construction or
use, no zoning permits shall be issued until such approval is obtained and
proof thereof is furnished to the Zoning Officer. [ Ord. 94- 21
390 - Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994
27, § 1810( 2)) ( 27, § 1810( 2))
2. In case of refusal, the applicant shall be informed of his right
to appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board.
3. Proceedings of the Zoning Hearing Board shall be governed by the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended. The Board shall fix
its own rules of procedure. The Board of Supervisors shall establish by
resolution a schedule of fees for appeals to the Zoning Hearing Board.
4. The building permit or assigned permit to which the applicant may
be entitled as a result of a decision of the Zoning Hearing Board shall be
applied for within twelve ( 12) months of the date of the written decision
therefor. Failure to do so will render the decision null and void. [ Ord.
96- 1]
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 94- 2, 3/ 7/ 1994, § 21; and by Ord.
96- 1, 1/ 15/ 1996)
1811. Expiration of Permits. No permit for the erection, razing,
change, alteration or removal of buildings shall be valid or effective
after twelve ( 12) months from the date of issuance thereof and shall
thereafter be void, unless the work authorized by such permit shall have
been substantially commenced within twelve ( 12) months from the date of
issuance and proceeded with, with due diligence. If, however, the applicant
has been delayed in proceeding with the work for which the permit was
granted by reason of any reasonable cause not due to his own negligence,
the permit may be renewed without additional cost to the applicant. ( Ord.
82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
1812. Certificate of Occupancy.
1. Upon completion of the erection or alteration of any building or
portion thereof authorized by any permit, and prior to occupancy or use,
or prior to any change in occupancy or use, the permittee shall notify the
Zoning Officer of such completion or change and obtain a Certificate of
Occupancy.
2. In commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts, at such time as
performance standards are imposed, no certificate of occupancy shall
become permanent until thirty ( 30) days after the facility is fully operating,
when upon a reinspection by the Zoning Officer it is determined that
the facility is in compliance with all performance standards.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 86- 8, 7/ 21/ 1986)
1813 Permits for Variances and Special Exceptions.
1. Variances and Special Exceptions shall expire after twelve ( 12)
months, unless the use of construction authorized thereby has been begun
within that time. If such use is discontinued for a period of more than
one ( 1) year, or if such construction is removed or destroyed, the
Variance or Special Exception shall terminate. [ Ord. 87- 4]
2. Special exceptions shall not be granted by the Zoning Hearing
Board unless the applicant therefor shall establish:
A. That the granting of the special exception will not adversely
affect the public interest.
B. That the proposed structure or development complies with the
letter and intent of this Chapter.
Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996 - 391 -
27, § 1813( 2)( C)) 27, § 1813( 2)( C))
C. That the public health, safety and welfare has been protected
in the following respects, where applicable:
1) ingress and egress to property and proposed structures
thereon with particular reference to automotive and pedestrian
safety and convenience, traffic flow and control and access in
case of fire or catastrophe.
2) off- street parking and loading areas where required
with particular attention to the items in ( 1) above, and the
noise, glare or odor effects of the proposal on adjoining properties
and properties generally in the district.
3) refuse and service areas, with particular reference to
the items in ( 1) and ( 2) above.
4) utilities, with reference to locations, availability
and compatibility.
5) screening and buffering with reference to type, dimensions
and character.
6) signs, if any, and proposed exterior lighting with
reference to glare, traffic safety and compatibility and harmony
with properties in the district.
7) required yards and other open spaces.
8) general compatibility with adjacent properties and
other property in the district.
9) compliance with any standards for special exception
established in a separate zoning district.
3. Extension of permits for variances and special exceptions may be
granted by the Zoning Hearing Board for a period of one ( 1) year or, if the
circumstances warrant, for a specified period of time in excess of one ( 1)
year. If an extension exceeds one ( 1) year, the terms and conditions of
the extension by the Zoning Hearing Board shall specify the exact time of
the extension and the requirements in connection therewith ( for example, if
the applicant shall continue to pursue subdivision and/ or land development
approval). [ Ord. 96- 11
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 87- 4, 11/ 16/ 1987; and by Ord.
96- 1, 1/ 15/ 1996)
1814. Procedures for Consideration of a Conditional Use Application.
An application for any conditional use as specified in the various districts
of this Chapter shall be considered by the Board of Supervisors
according to the following procedures:
1. Conditional Use Application - An application shall be submitted in
writing to the Township Secretary. It shall include as a minimum, a
tentative sketch plan indicating basically how the applicant intends to
develop the property, and sufficient data to document compliance with
applicable standards of this Chapter. The Board of Supervisors shall
schedule a public hearing on said application within sixty days ( 60) days
unless the time limit is waived in writing by the applicant.
392 - Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996
27, § 1814, cont' d) ( 27, § 1814, cont' d)
2. Public Hearings - Prior to deciding to approve or deny the use of
a tract for the proposed use the Board of Supervisors shall hold a public
hearing pursuant to public notice. At least forty- five ( 45) days prior to
the date of the hearing, one copy of the development proposal and all
additional submitted information shall be transmitted to the Township
Planning Agency and the Montgomery County Planning Commission together with
a request that these agencies submit recommendations regarding said use.
3. Development Plan - If conditional use approval is granted for the
use of a tract of land, within three ( 3) years after the date of conditional
use approval, the development plan shall be submitted, and then processed
and acted by the normal procedures established in the Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance for all other subdivision and/ or
land development plans. If development plans are not submitted within the
specified time period, the conditional approval is voided.
4. In allowing a conditional use, the Board of Supervisors may
attache such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those
expressed in the Zoning Ordinance, as * it may deem necessary to implement
the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance. [ Ord. 90- 11
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 90- 1, 7/ 16/ 1990)
1815. Amendments. The Board of Supervisors may, from time to time,
amend, modify or repeal this Chapter, including the Zoning map, as follows:
1. The Township may initiate a zoning change at any time.
2. Applicants for rezoning shall petition the Board of Supervisors by
letter on or before the 5th day of the month preceding the month in which
the hearing shall be held.
3. Applications shall be accompanied by payment as a deposit against
advertising, stenographic, legal, engineering and other expenses connected
with the application. The Board shall bill or credit applicants when total
expenses are determined after the hearing.
4. Applications shall be accompanied by development plans for the
area proposed to be rezoned, including layout, elevations and architectural
sketches, along with a study of the impact on the Township to be expected
from the development.
5. All applications shall be
recommendations shall be forwarded
20th day of the month preceding
held.
Ord.' 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
reviewed by the Planning Agency and its
to the Board of Supervisors before the
the month in which the hearing will be
1816. Public Notice. Notice of a rezoning hearing shall be given as
required by § 609 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as amended by Ord. 90-, 1, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 26)
1817. Referral to Township and County Planning Agencies. The Board
of Supervisors shall refer all requests for zoning ordinance amendments to
Ord. 90- 1 states adding a new section 3. A section 3 already exits,
added section 4.
Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996 393 -
27, § 1817, cont' d) ( 27, § 1817, cont' d)
both the Douglass Township Planning Agency and the Montgomery County Planning
Commission for review and recommendations at least thirty ( 30) days
prior to the public hearing on the ' proposed amendment. The respective
planning agencies shall consider whether the proposed amendment( 2) would be
consistent with the intent of the Douglass Comprehensive Plan and the
Montgomery County Land Use Plan, as well as general planning principles.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
1818. Schedule of Fees. The Board of Township Supervisors shall
determine a schedule of fees, charges and expenses, as well as a collection
procedure for special permits, variances, amendments and other matters
pertaining to this Chapter, by resolution. Said schedule of fees shall be
posted in the office of the Zoning Officer and the Township Secretary.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
0
394 Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996
27, § 1900) ( 27, § 1900)
Part 19
Fence Regulations
1900. Declaration of Legislative Intent. It is the intent of this
Part to set standards and provide controls that permit the reasonable use
of fences while restricting the adverse visual effects of fences, especially
in regard to sight distances and visibility along streets. ( Ord.
82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
1901. Conformance with Fence Regulations. No fence will be permitted
to be erected or maintained in the Township except in conformance
with the regulations contained in this Part. Freestanding walls and hedges
that serve the same purposes as a fence shall also be governed by this Part
as if they were fences. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
1902. Application and Fees. Anyone wishing to erect a fence shall
file an application with the Township Zoning Officer, accompanied by the
appropriate fee. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
1903. Height Regulations in Residential and Limited Commercial
Districts. In the R- 1, R- 2, R- 3, R- 4 and LC zoning districts the following
regulations shall prevail:
1. Within the front yard of any lot, as defined herein, including
both street frontages for a corner lot or a lot with double frontage,
fences my not exceed four ( 4) feet in height. A sight triangle shall be
provided. [ Ord. 96- 11
2. Behind the front yard line, as defined herein, fences may not
exceed six feet ( 6') in height.
3. For corner lots, fences shall comply with § 109 of this Chapter, by
providing sight triangles.
4. No fence may be placed closer to a street than the ultimate
right- of- way line as defined herein.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982; as ameded by Ord. 96- 1, 1/ 15/ 1996)
1904. Height Regulations in Nonresidential Districts. In the IN,
CC, GC, M- 1 and M- 2 zoning districts the following regulations shall
prevail:
1. Within the front yard of any lot, as defined herein, including all
street frontages, fences constructed of solid materials which block visibility
may not exceed four feet ( 4') in height.
2. Within the front yard of any lot, as defined herein, including all
street frontages, fences constructed of open materials such as mesh, posts
or rails, which allow good visibility may not exceed eight feet ( 8') in
height.
3. For corner lots, fences shall comply with § 109 of this Chapter by
providing sight triangles, regardless of the type of fence construction.
Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996 - 395 -
27, § 1904, cont` d)
4. No fence may be placed closer
right- of- way line as defined herein.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
1905. Construction of Fences.
27, § 1904, cont' d)
to a street than the ultimate
1. If the fence is wood cover or wood frame, the framework must face
onto the interior of the lot, unless the fence is so designed to provide
equal frame and cover area to adjoining yards.
2. If the fence is open metal mesh, supported by posts and frames of
either pipe or wood, the posts and frames must be on the interior of the
mesh.
3. If the fence is of masonry construction, a finished side must be
provided to the exterior side.
Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
1906. Exemptions. Fences erected on tracts of five ( 5) or more
acres for agricultural purposes are exempt from the requirements of this
Chapter, but must comply with § 109 of this Chapter. ( Ord. 82- 4, 6/ 7/ 1982)
396 -
27, Pt. 20) 27, Pt. 20)
Page Revised 10/ 22/ 1991 - 397 -
Part 20
Chronological History of Zoning Enactments
Ord. Date Subject
26 9/ 1968 General Zoning Regulations
73- 7 11/ 7/ 1973 Amendment to § 1411 re: Cluster Development
73- 13 12/ 19/ 1973 Reclassification of land from R- 2 to Commercial
75- 2 1/ 20/ 1975 Amendment to § 804 re: Plans for Commercial Use
75- 5 6/ 2/ 1975 Amendments to §§ 1502, 1704; and addition of Art.
XXI on Mobile Home Parks
76- 4 12/ 6/ 1976 Amendment to §§ 1100 and 1105, re: Signs
77- 1 1/ 17/ 1977 Reclassification of land at Sweinhart Rd. and
Rhoads Rd. from R- 2 to Commercial
77- 2 7/ 5/ 1977 Amendment to § 1704, re: Charges for appeals
78- 1 5/ 1/ 1978 Reclassification of land from R- 2 to Commercial
78- 4 6/ 19/ 1978 Reclassification of land from Commercial to R- 2
79- 2 11/ 19/ 1979 Amendment to §§ 200 and 800 re: Adult oriented
businesses and locations
79- 5 11/ 19/ 1979 Reclassification of land from R- 2 to Limited
Industrial
80- 2 5/ 19/ 1980 Amendment to § 1407, re: Frontage along street
80- 4 12/ 15/ 1980 Amendment, complete replacement of Art. X, re:
Industrial District, M- 1 Office and Light
Industrial
82- 3 2/ 1/ 1982 Amendment to § 1001( 5), re: Manufacturing uses
82- 4 Current Zoning regulations ( This Chapter)
83- 3 3/ 7/ 1983 Reclassification of land from R- 1 to R- 2
87- 2 7/ 6/ 1987 Reclassification of 2 parcels of land along
Buchert Road, from Institutional District to
R- 1 Agricultural Residential District.
88- 3 8/ 1/ 1988 Reclassification of land from R- 1 Agricultural -
Residential District to R- 1 Agricultural -Residential
Alternate District.
89- 1 6/ 6/ 1989 Reclassification of land from R- 2 Residential
District to R- 3 Residential District.
90- 7 10/ 17/ 1990 Reclassification of land from R- 1 Agricultural -
Residential District to R- 1 Agricultural -Residential
Alternate District.
91- 2 5/ 6/ 1991 Reclassification of land from GC General Commercial
and M- 1 Office and Light Industrial to MU
Office and Mixed -Use District.
Page Revised 10/ 22/ 1991 - 397 -
27, Pt. 20, cont' d)
Ord. Date
91- 6 8/ 5/ 1991
91- 9 10/ 22/ 1991
91- 10 10/ 22/ 1991
93- 4 5/ 17/ 1993
94- 1 3/ 7/ 1994
94- 5 7/ 5/ 1994
27, Pt. 20, cont' d)
Subject
Reclassification of land previously zoned R- 1
Agricultural -Residential Alternate District
to R- 1 Agricultural -Residential District.
Reclassification of land from IN -Institutional
District to LC -Limited Commercial District.
Reclassification of land from LC -Limited
Commercial District to GC - General Commercial
District.
Reclassification of land from R- 1 Residential
District to M- 2 Manufacturing Industrial
District.
Reclassification of land from M- 1 Office and
Light Industrial District to R- 1 Agricultural
Residential District.
Reclassification of land from IN Institutional
District to R- 2 Residential District.
398 - Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996
27, § 2100) ( 27, § 2100)
Part 21
AHA - Airport Hazard Area
2100. Declaration of Legislative Intent. The following is an
expansion of the statement of Community Development Objectives contained in
Part 1, § 101 of this Chapter. In addition, the intent of this district is
to regulate and restrict the height of structures and objects of natural
growth, and otherwise regulate the use of property in the vicinity of
Butter Valley Golf Port and New Hanover Airports.
It is hereby found that an obstruction has the potential for endangering
the lives and property of users of Butter Valley Golf Port and New
Hanover Airports, and property or occupants of land in its vicinity; that
an obstruction may affect existing and future instrument approach minimums
of Butter Valley Golf Port and New Hanover Airports; and that an obstruction
may reduce the size of areas available for the landing, takeoff and
maneuvering of aircraft, thus tending to destroy or impair the utility of
Butter Valley Golf Port and New Hanover Airports and public investment
therein. Accordingly, it is declared:
A. That the creation or establishment of an obstruction has the
potential of being a public nuisance and may injure the region served
by Butter Valley Golf port and New Hanover Airports;
B. That it is necessary in the interest of the public health,
safety, morals and general welfare that the creation or establishment
of obstructions that are a hazard to air navigation be prevented; and
C. That the prevention of these obstructions should be accomplished,
to the extent legally possible, by the exercise of the police
power without compensation.
It is further declared that the prevention of the creation or establishment
of hazards to air navigation, the elimination, removal, alteration
or mitigation of hazards to air navigation, or the making and lighting of
obstructions are public purposes for which a political subdivision may
raise and expend public funds and acquire land or interests in land.
Ord. 90- 3, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 2100)
2101. District Delineation. The AHA -Airport Hazards Area overlay
shall include the approach zones to the Butter Valley Golf Port and New
Hanover Airports shown on Figure 1, the Airport Hazard Area Map for New
Hanover Airport, and Figure 2, the Airport Hazard Area Map for Butter
Valley Golf Port Airport. ( Ord. 90- 3, 7/ 16/ 1990, 62101)
2102. Airport Hazards Area Definitions. The following words and
phrases when used in this Part shall have the meaning given to them in this
Section unless the context indicates otherwise:
AIRCRAFT - any contrivance, except an unpowered hangglider or parachute,
used for manned ascent into or flight through the air.
AIRPORT - Butter Valley Golf Port and New Hanover Airports. Any area
of land or water which is used, or intended to be used, for the landing and
takeoff of aircraft and any appurtenant areas which are used, or intended
399 - Page Added 7/ 16/ 1990
22, § 2102, cont' d) ( 22, § 2102, cont' d)
to be used, for airport buildings or air navigation facilities or rightof-
way, together with all airport buildings and facilities thereon. As
used herein, the term " airport" includes public airports but excludes
private airports and heliports. Public and private airports are defined
separately in this Section.
AIRPORT ELEVATION - the highest point of an airport' s usable
landing area measured in feet above sea level. For Butter Valley Golf
Port Airport, the airport elevation is five hundred ( 500') feet above
sea level. For New Hanover Airport, the airport elevation is two
hundred eighty ( 280') feet above sea level.
AIRPORT HAZARD - any area of land or water upon which an airport
hazard might be established if not prevented as provided for in this
Part and Act 164 of 1984 ( Pennsylvania Laws Relating to Aviation).
APPROACH SURFACE - a surface longitudinally centered on the extended
run -way centerline, extending outward and upward from the end of the
primary surface and at the same slope as the approach surface zone
height limitation slope set forth in § 2104 of this Part. In plan the
perimeter of the approach surface coincides with the perimeter of the
approach surface zone.
APPROACH, TRANSITIONAL, HORIZONTAL, and CONICAL SURFACE ZONES -
these zones are set forth in §2104 of this Part.
CONICAL SURFACE - a surface extending outward and upward from the
periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of twenty ( 20) to one ( 1)
for a horizontal distance of four thousand ( 4, 000') feet.
FAA - Federal Aviation Administration of the United States Department
of Transportation.
HEIGHT - for the purpose of determining the height limits in all
zones set forth in this Part and shown on the Zoning Map, the datum
shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
HORIZONTAL SURFACE - a horizontal plane one hundred fifty ( 150')
feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which in
plan coincides with the perimeter of the horizontal surface zone.
LARGER THAN UTILITY RUNWAY - a runway that is constructed for and
intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of greater than twelve
thousand five hundred ( 12, 500) pounds maximum gross weight and jet
powered aircraft.
NONPRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY - a runway having an existing
instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with
only horizontal guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for which a
straight -in nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved
or planned.
OBSTRUCTION - any structure, growth, or other object, including a
mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in § 2104 of
this Part.
PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY a runway having an existing instrument
approach procedure utilizing an instrument landing system ( ILS) or
400 - Page Added 7/ 16/ 1990
27, § 2102, cont' d) ( 27, § 2102, cont' d)
a Precisions Approach Radar ( PAR). It also means a runway for which a
precision approach system is planned and is so indicated on an approved
airport layout plan or any other planning document.
PRIMARY SURFACE - a surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When
the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface
extends two hundred ( 200') feet beyond each end of that runway. For
military runways or when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface,
or planned hard surface, the primary surface is set forth in § 2104 of this
Part. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the
elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline.
PRIVATE AIRPORT - an airport which is privately owned and which is not
open or intended to be open to the public as defined in 74 Pa. C. S. § 5102.
PUBLIC AIRPORT - an airport which is either publicly or privately
owned and which is open to the public as defined in 74 Pa. C. S. § 5102.
RUNWAY - a defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff
of aircraft along its length.
STRUCTURE - an object, including a mobile object, constructed or
installed by man, including but without limitation, buildings, towers,
cranes, smokestacks, earth formation and overhead transmission line.
TRANSITIONAL SURFACES - these surfaces extend outward at ninety ( 90°)
degree angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended
at a slope of seven ( 7') feet horizontally for each foot vertically from
the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the
horizontal and conical surfaces. Transitional surfaces for these portions
of the precision approach surfaces, which project through and beyond the
limits of the conical surface, extend a distance of five thousand ( 5, 000')
feet measured horizontally from the edge of the approach surface and at a
ninety ( 90°) degree angle to the extended runway centerline.
TREE - any object of natural growth.
UTILITY RUNWAY - a runway that is constructed for and intended to. be
used by propeller driven aircraft of twelve thousand five hundred ( 12, 500)
pounds maximum gross weight or less.
VISUAL RUNWAY - a runway intended solely for operation of aircraft
using visual approach procedures.
Ord. 90- 3, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 2102)
2103. Airport Surface Zones. In order to carry out the provisions
of this Part, there are hereby created and established certain zones which
include all of the land lying beneath the approach surfaces, transitional
surfaces, horizontal surfaces and conical surfaces as they apply to Butter
Valley Golf Port and New Hanover Airports. Such zones are shown on Figure
3, an explanatory diagram of visual and utility non -precision runway zones
with corresponding height limitations, on Figure 1, the Airport Hazard Area
Map for New Hanover Airport, and on Figure 2, the Airport Hazard Area Map
for .Butter Valley Golf Port Airport, each of which is attached to this Part
and made a part hereof. An area located in more than one ( 1) of the fol -
Page Added 7/ 16/ 1990 - 401 -
27, § 2103, cont' d) 27, § 2103, cont' d)
lowing zones in considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive
height limitation. The various zones are hereby established and
defined as follows:
1. Utility Runway Visual Approach Surface Zone. Established
beneath the visual approach surface. The inner edge of this zone
coincides with the width of the primary surface and is two hundred fifty
250') feet wide. The zone expands outward uniformly to a width of one
thousand two hundred ( 1, 250') feet at a horizontal distance of five
thousand ( 5, 000') feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the
continuation of the centerline of the runway.
2. Utility Runway Nonprecision Instrument Approach Surface Zone.
Established beneath the nonprecision instrument approach surface. The
inner edge of this zone coincides with the width of the primary surface
and is five hundred ( 5001) feet wide. The zone expands outward uniformly
to a width of two thousand ( 2, 0001) feet at a horizontal distance of
five thousand ( 5, 000') feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is
the continuation of the centerline of the runway.
3. Runway Larger than Utility Visual Approach Surface Zone.
Established beneath the visual approach surface. The inner edge of this
zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is five hundred
500') feet wide. The zone. expands outward uniformly to a width of one
thousand five hundred ( 1, 500') feet at a horizontal distance of five
thousand ( 5, 000') feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the
continuation of the centerline of the runway.
4. Runway Larger than Utility with a Visibility Minimum Greater
than Three -Quarter ( 3/ 4) Mile Nonprecision Instrument Approach Surface
Zone. Established beneath the nonprecision instrument approach surface.
The inner edge of this zone coincides with the width of the primary
surface and is five hundred ( 500') feet wide. The zone expands outward
uniformly to a width of three thousand five hundred ( 3, 500') feet at a
horizontal distance of ten thousand ( 10, 0001) feet from the primary
surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the
runway.
5. Runw er than Utilit, with a Visib r Minimum as Low as
Three -Quarter ( 3/ 4) Mile Nonprecision Instrument Approach Surface Zone.
Established beneath the nonprecision instrument approach surface. The
inner edge of this zone coincides with the width of the primary surface
and is one thousand ( 1, 000') feet wide. The zone expands outward
uniformly to a width of four thousand ( 4, 000') feet at a horizontal
distance of ten thousand ( 10, 000') feet from the primary surface. Its
centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway.
6. Precision Instrument Runway Approach Surface Zone. Established
beneath the precision instrument approach surface. The inner edge of
this zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is one
thousand ( 1, 000') feet wide. The zone expands outward uniformly to a
width of four thousand ( 4, 000') feet at a horizontal distance of ten
thousand ( 10, 000') feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the
continuation of the centerline of the runway.
7. Transitional Surface Zones.
tional surfaces
cated on Figures
Established beneath the transiadjacent
to each runway and approach surface as indi-
1, 2, and 3.
402 - Page Added 7/ 16/ 1990
27, § 2103($)) ( 27, § 2103( 8))
8. Horizontal Surface Zone. Established beneath the horizontal 0 surface one hundred fifty ( 150') feet above the established airport elevation,
the perimeter of which is constructed by swinging arcs of five
thousand ( 5, 0001) feet radii from the center of each end of the primary
surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines
tangent to those arcs. The horizontal surface zone does not include the
approach surface and transitional surface zones.
9. Conical Surface Zone. Established beneath the conical surface.
This zone commences at the periphery of the horizontal surface and extends
outward therefrom a horizontal distance of four thousand ( 4, 000') feet.
Ord. 90- 3, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 2103)
2104. Airport Surface Zone Height Limitations. Except as otherwise
provided in this Part, no structure shall be erected, altered, or maintained,
and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any zone created by this Part
to a height in excess of the applicable height limit herein established for
such zone. Such applicable height limitations are hereby established for
each of the zones in question as follows:
1. Utility Runway Visual Approach Surface Zone. Slopes twenty ( 20')
feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same
elevation as the primary surface and extended to a horizontal distance of
five thousand ( 5, 000') feet along the extended runway centerline.
2. Utility Runway Nonprecision Instrument Approach Surface Zone.
Slopes twenty ( 20') feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end
of and at. the same elevation as the primary surface and extended runway
centerline.
3. Runway Larger than Utility Visual Approach Surface Zone. Slopes
twenty ( 20') feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and
at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal
distance of five thousand ( 5, 000') feet along the extended runway
centerline.
Thr
end of and at the same
horizontal distance of
runway centerline.
Minimum Greater than
roach Surface Zone.
elevation as the primary surface and extending to a
ten thousand ( 10, 000') feet along the extended
5. Runway Larger than Utility with a Visibility Minimum as Low as
Three -Quarter ( 3/ 4) Mile Nonprecision Instrument Approach Surface Zone.
Slopes thirty- four ( 341) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the
end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a
horizontal distance of ten thousand ( 10, 0001) feet along the extended
runway centerline.
6. Precision Instrument Runway Approach Surface Zone. Slopes fifty
50') feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the
same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance
of forty ( 40') feet horizontally for each foot vertically to an
additional horizontal distance of forty thousand ( 40, 0001) feet along the
extended runway centerline.
Page Added 7/ 16/ 1990 - 403 -
27, § 2104, cont' d) ( 27, § 2104, cont' d)
7. Transitional Surface Zones. Slopes seven ( 71) feet outward
for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation
as the primary surface and the approach surface, and extending to a
height of one hundred fifty ( 150') feet above the airport elevation
which is five hundred ( 5001) feet above mean seal level for Butter
Valley Golf Port Airport and two hundred eighty ( 280') feet above mean
sea level for New Hanover Airport. In addition to the foregoing, when
an airport has a precision instrument runway approach zone, there are
established height limits sloped seven ( 7') feet outward for each foot
upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevations as the
approach surface, and extending to where they intersect the conical
surface. Where the precision instrument runway approach zone projects
beyond the conical zone, there are established height limits sloping
seven ( 7') feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of
and at the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending a
horizontal distance of five thousand ( 5, 000') feet measured at ninety
90°) degree angles to the extended runway centerline.
8. Horizontal Surface Zone. Established at one hundred_ fifty
150') feet above the established airport elevation or at a height of
six hundred fifty ( 650') feet above mean sea level for Butter Valley
Golf Port or four hundred thirty ( 430') feet above mean sea level for
New Hanover Airport.
9. Conical Surface Zone. Slopes twenty ( 20') feet outward for
each foot up -ward beginning at the periphery of the horizontal surface
and at one hundred fifty ( 150') feet above the established airport
elevation and extending to a height of three hundred fifty ( 350') feet
above the established airport elevation.
10. Expected Height Limitations. Nothing in this Part shall be
construed as prohibiting the construction or maintenance of any structure,
or growth of any tree to the maximum height permitted by this
Chapter for the principal use. The Board of Supervisors may grant
additional height as allowed by the applicable zoning district after
consideration of the Airport Hazard Area.
Ord. 90- 3, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 2104)
2105. Use Restrictions. Notwithstanding any other provisions of
this Part, no use may be made of land or water within any zone established
by this Part in such a manner as to create electrical interference
with navigational signals or radio communication between the
airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish
between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots
using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport,
create bird strike hazards, or otherwise in any way endanger or interfere
with the landing, takeoff, or maneuvering of aircraft intending to
use the airport. ( Ord. 90- 3, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 2105)
2106. Nonconforming Uses.
1. Regulations not Retroactive. The regulations prescribed by
this Part shall not be construed to required the removal, lowering, or
other change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to
the regulations as of the effective date of this Part, or otherwise
404 - Page Added 7/ 16/ 1990
27, § 2106, cont' d) 27, § 2106, cont' d)
interfere with the continuance of any nonconforming use, except as provided
in § 2106 ( relating to permits and variances). Nothing contained herein
shall require any change in the construction, alteration or intended use of
any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to
the effective date of this Part, and is diligently executed.
2. Marking and Lighting. Notwithstanding the preceding provision of
this Section, the owner of any existing nonconforming structure or tree is
hereby required to permit the installation, operation, and maintenance
thereon or nearby of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary
by the Township Zoning Officer to indicate to the operators of aircraft in
the vicinity of the airport the presence of such airport obstruction. Such
markers and lights shall be installed, operated, and maintained at the
expense of Douglass Township.
Ord. 90- 3, 7/ 16/ 1990, § 2106)
2107. Permits and Variances..
1. Future Uses. Except as specifically provided in subsection ( A),
B) or ( C) hereunder, no material change shall be made in the use of land,
no structure shall be erected or otherwise established, and no tree shall
be planted in any zone hereby created unless a permit therefore shall have
been applied for and granted. Each application for a permit shall indicate
the purpose for which the permit is desired, with sufficient particular to
permit it to be determined whether the resulting use, structure, or tree
would conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such determination
is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted. No permit for a use
inconsistent, with the provisions of this Part shall be granted unless a
variance has been approved in accordance with § 2106( 4).
A. In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone
and conical zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure
less than seventy- five ( 75') feet of vertical height above the
ground, except when, because of terrain, land contour, or topographic
features, such tree or structure would extend above the height limits
prescribed for such zones.
B. In the areas lying within the limits of the approach zones,
but at a horizontal distance of not less than four thousand two
hundred ( 4, 2001) feet from each end of the runway, no permit shall be
required for any tree or structure less than seventy- five ( 75') feet
of vertical height above the ground, except when, because of terrain,
land contour, or topographic features, such tree or structure would
extend above the height limit prescribed for such approach zones.
C. In the areas lying within the limits of the transition zones
beyond the perimeter of the horizontal zones, no permit shall be
required for any tree or structure less than seventy- five ( 75') feet
of vertical height above the ground, except when such tree or structure,
because of terrain, land contour, or topographic feature, would
extend above the height limit prescribed for such transition zones.
D. Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be
construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction or
alteration of any structure, or growth of any tree in excess of any of
the height limits established by this Part, except that no permit is
Page Added 7/ 16/ 1990 - 405 -
27, § 2107( 1)( D), cont' d) 27, § 2107( 1)( D), cont' d)
required to make maintenance repairs to or to replace parts of
existing structures which do not enlarge or increase the height of
an existing structure.
2. Existing Uses. Before any nonconforming structure may be replaced,
substantially altered or rebuilt or tree allowed to grow higher
or replanted, a permit must be secured from the Township authorizing the
replacement or change. No permit shall be granted that would allow the
establishment or creation of an obstruction or permit a nonconforming
use, structure, or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation
then it was on the effective date of this Part or any amendments thereto
or than it is when the application for a permit is made.
3. Nonconforming Uses Abandoned or Destroyed. Whenever the Zoning
Officer determines that a nonconforming tree or structure has been abandoned
or more than eighty ( 80%) percent torn down, physically deteriorated,
or decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such
structure or tree to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise
deviate from this Part.
4. Variance. Any person desiring to erect any structure or
increase the height of any structure or permit the growth of any object
of natural growth or otherwise use his property in violation of the
airport zoning regulations may apply to the Zoning Hearing Board for a
variance from the zoning regulations in question. A variance may be
allowed where a literal application or enforcement of the regulations
would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship and the
relief granted would not be contrary to the public interest but would do
substantial justice and would be in accordance with the spirit of the
regulations and this Part. Variances may be granted subject to any
reasonable conditions that the Zoning Hearing Board may deem necessary
to effectuate the purpose of this Part. The application for a variance
shall be accompanied by a determination from the Federal Aviation
Administration ( FAA) as to the effect of the proposal on the operation
of air navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable
airspace. Additionally, no application for variance to the requirements
of this Part may be considered by the Zoning Hearing Board unless a copy
of the application has been furnished to the airport manager ( or person
of equivalent description) for advice as to the aeronautical effect of
the variance. If the airport manager ( or person of equivalent description)
does not respond to the application within fifteen ( 15) days after
the receipt, the Zoning Hearing Board may act without such input to
grant or deny said application.
5. Hazard Marking and Lighting. In granting any permit or variances
under this Section, the Zoning Hearing Board shall, if it deems the
action advisable to effectuate the purpose of this Part and reasonable
under the circumstances, so condition the permit or variances as to
require the owner of the structure or object of natural growth in
question to permit the Township, at its own expense, or required the
person or persons requesting the permit or variance, to install, operate,
and maintain thereon such markers and lights as may be required by
guidelines or regulations adopted by the FAA.
Ord. 90- 3, 7/ 16/ 1990, 12107)
406 - Page Added 7/ 16/ 1990
FIGURE 1
eM ELEV 6fl' '
7J'" .• r 1•'~•'% . ; /• ,;/ 191 20• CAL ^.
t i
f€ SURFACE ZONE
E
o 7 0fp li •° ••~•.. •• ggM •V uK•n1h )' •' ',• - ` 40":
ftt °.,_:'_ ij e
y• •` ,•,
y$ ' `
r
nuRIZONT
SUR. ACE` NE.. 1' 50' h
ut .',; w• O- YE'` ESABF°.iSHE0
Can • r •``.
f"'"' i
rt
7: 1 TRANS
oS • o .. a•. r• •v• J
c ',
l :/"'`
t ' ' app \ : Q t :..1`- ',
r
t ' • •, ''''
r i+..(:
i;, 1. --. ..' o. I . " •:,,,_\ \.
brGoff
r .> '( s L
1' v '\•.• •. il=y:: '•'. ifTi'.,i . S j . Z
no
pa
t( f
AIRPORT HAZARD AREA - NEW HANOVER AIRPORT
LOCATION MAP
in = 2000 feet
u
Page Added 7/ 16/ 1990 - 407
FIGURE 2
i,.ti:.> a'tsl5:` l '•, l• J ' •
if ', '
Y t : 9 ; ` ','• \ \ J'
AIRPORT HAZARD AREA - BUTTER VALLEY GOLF PORI
LOCATION MAP
1" = 2000 feet
408 - Page Added 7/ 16/ 1990
FIGURE 3
VISUAL and UTILITY NON - PRECISION RUNWAY ZONES
3
5,000
4,000'.:.
ALLOWABLE HEIGHT FORMULAS
IC= av ZWE mregzA
1
71
Hori= ntal Allowable Height = ( Establish—ea Airport Elevation) + ( 150')
17-7 Surface Ground Elevation)
2QCbnical-
Surface
Allowable Height = ( Established Airport Elevation) + ( 1501)
A 20) ( Ground Elevation)
3 ••..;.. b •.• Primary Allowable Freight = ( Elevation of the F3mway Perpendicular to
Surface the Location Point) - ( Ground Elevation)
4 Transitional Allowable Height = ( Elevation of the Primary Surface along
Surface the R way Centerline Perpendicular- to the Lxatio. Point)
B+7) - ( Ground Elevation)
5 = Transitional Allowable Height = ( Elevation of the Approach Surface along .
Surface the Rrmay Centerline Perpendicular to the Location Point) +
Et7) - ( Ground Elevation)
6 :•
a '.
Surface
Approach Allowable Height = Mxwiay Erni Elevation). + (( C- 200)* : 20) -
Ground Elevation)
br Turf Rziways do not subtract 200 from C
Page Added 7/ 16/ 1990 - 409 -
27, § 2200)
0 Part 22
MU Office and Mixed -Use Planned Development
27, § 2200)
2200. Declaration of Legislative Intent. The following is an
expansion of the Statement of Community Development Objectives contained in
101 of this Chapter. It is the intent of this Part to provide for office
uses and allow for the continuation and reinforcement of the Gilbertsville
village character, currently a mix of residences, stores, offices and
institutional uses. Further, it is the intent of this Part to:
A. Provide employment centers in close proximity to existing and
future high density residential development to reduce commuting
distance for the work force.
B. Encourage activity and employment centers in locations with
ease of access from highway interchanges to reduce the overall impact
of traffic on Township streets.
C. Allow for a balanced combination of offices, stores and
shops, hotels and inns, residences and recreation in one ( 1) district
in proximity to each other to enable safe and convenient pedestrian
circulation between uses as well as to encourage day and evening,
weekday and weekend ' activity.. .
D. Serve the need for community open space such as trails, parks
and plazas near the center of Gilbertsville.
E. Minimize the traffic hazard of multiple driveways by controlling
access points in unified developments.
Ord. 90- 8, 11/ 19/ 1990, § 1)
2201. Permitted Uses. The following uses, and no others, are
permitted.
1. Scientific or industrial research, engineering, testing or experimental
laboratory or similar establishment for research, training or
product development provided the proposed use meets the requirement for
Class I uses in Part 12 of this Chapter.
2. Offices, corporate headquarters and administrative buildings or
centers provided the proposed use meets the requirements for Class I uses
in Part 12 of this Chapter.
3. Mixed- use planned developments are allowed as a conditional use
provided the proposed development meets the conditional use criteria
specified in § 2203 of this Part, as well as all other requirements of this
Part. • In a mixed- use planned development a building or group of buildings
may be erected, altered or used and a lot may be used or occupied for any
of the following use or combination of the following uses and no. -others.
A. Offices, corporate headquarters and administrative buildings
or centers.
B. Nursery schools, day care centers, group day care homes and
family day care homes.
C. Retail commercial as otherwise permitted in § 1103, Class 2
Permitted Uses, of this Chapter.
Page Added 10/ 22/ 1991 - 411 -
27, § 2201( 3)( D)) 27, § 2201( 3)( D))
D. Movie theaters and theaters for live stage performances or
similar recreational and cultural establishments.
E. Banks or other financial institutions including drive- in
facilities provided that:
1) A minimum of six ( 6) automobile waiting spaces or four
4) spaces per teller, whichever is greater, shall be provided
for each drive- in bank teller, remote teller window or drive- in
automated teller machine.
2) These spaces shall not interfere with parking spaces or
internal circulation of the site.
F. Mid -rise apartments.
G. Garden apartments provided they meet the dimensional requirement
of the R- 4 Residential District contained in § 604 of this
Chapter.
H. Two ( 2) family and single- family attached dwelling units
provided they meet the dimensional requirements of the R- 3 Residential
District contained in §§504 and 505 of this Chapter.
I. Hotels, tourist homes ( bed and breakfast) or inns.
J. Civic uses, municipal offices, community centers and post
offices.
K. Any accessory uses on the same lot with and customarily
incidental to any of the above permitted uses including, but not
limited to, parking structures.
Ord. 90- 8, 11/ 19/ 1990, § 1)
2202. Mixed -Use Requirements. Every mixed- use planned development
shall contain office, retail, residential and open space uses and may
contain hotels. Each use shall fall within the following ranges of utilization,
based on the total gross floor, area of the development. Gross
floor area used for parking should not be included in the calculations:
Use Type Min. % Max. %
Office, day care, civic uses 10 60
Retail, movie theaters, banks 10 20
Residential 10 50
Hotel 0 30
Common open space and plaza area shall comprise fifteen ( 15%) percent of
the total tract area in conformance with § 2207 of this Part.
Jrd. 90- 8, 11/ 19/ 1990, 51)
2203. Conditional Use Criteria. An application for a conditional
use as specified in § 2201 of this Part pursuant to § 1814 of this Chapter
shall be accompanied by the following information, and subject to the
following requirements: 0
412 - Page Added 10/ 22/ 1991
27, § 2203( 1)) ( 27, § 2203( 1))
1. Minimum Tract Size. Twenty- five ( 25) acres.
10 2. Location. The tract of land to be developed shall have direct
vehicular access to at least two ( 2) existing roads classified as feeders
or higher road classification within the Township' s 1976 Comprehensive
Plan.
3. The applicant shall construct all proposed roads shown in the 1988
Comprehensive Plan that cross or abut the property.
4. Traffic Impact Analysis. A traffic impact study shall be required
for any mixed -used planned development. Such study shall be prepared by a
professional traffic engineer and shall address the ability of adjoining
streets and intersections to safely handle the traffic generated by the
proposed mixed- use development. In addition, all adverse effects of
traffic generated by the mixed- use development shall be corrected by the
applicant. The following topics should be addressed in the traffic impact
study:
A. Traffic impact on adjacent roadways, intersections and
interchanges.
B. Description of traffic characteristics of the proposed
development.
C. Traffic volumes for average daily traffic at peak hours,
before and after the proposed development.
D. Source of trip generation rates used.
E. Documentation of on- site and off- site improvements proposed
to mitigate any adverse impacts.
F. All other information, findings, conclusions and recommendations
necessary to produce a complete analysis and compliance with
accepted traffic engineering principals and practice.
Ord. 90- 8, 11/ 19/ 1990, § 1)
2204. General District Regulations. The following regulations shall
apply. to any mixed- use development proposal.
1. Ownership. The tract of land to be developed shall be in one ( 1)
ownership or shall be the subject of an application filed jointly by the
owners of the entire tract and it shall be agreed that the tract will be
developed .under single direction in accordance with an approved plan.
2. Land Development.- The application for land development shall be
accompanied by a plan showing in detail the proposed use of the entire
tract. The plan shall - learly designate the proposed uses of each portion
of the tract.
3. Phasing. The development of a mixed- ue punned development may
be executed in phases according to a phasing plan submitted by the applicant
and approved by the Board of Supervisors; this development shall be
executed in accordance with a development agreement. Until fifty ( 50%)
percent of the site' s total proposed gross building square footage is
constructed, each phase shall contain at least two ( 2) of the use types
listed in § 2202 of this Part and no single use shall comprise more than
Page Added 10/ 22/ 1991 - 413 -
27, § 2204, cont' d) 27, § 2204, cont' d)
sixty ( 60%) percent of the total building square footage of any particular
phase. After half of the site' s building square footage has been constructed,
there are no mix requirements for the phases.
4. Sewer and Water Facilities. All buildings in a mixed- use planned
development shall be served by public water facilities and public sanitary
sewer facilities subject to the approval of any applicable agency.
Ord. 90- 8, 11/ 19/ 1990, § 1)
2205. Dimensional Standards. The following are the dimensional
standards for mixed- use planned developments.
1. Maximum Building Coverage. Twenty- five ( 25%) percent of the total
tract area.
2. Maximum Impervious Coverage. Sixty- five ( 65%) percent of the
total tract area.
3. Maximum Height. The maximum height for buildings or other structures
erected or enlarged in a mixed- use planned development shall be no
more than six 6) stories and less than sixty- five ( 65') feet.
4. Minimum Building Setbacks.
A. From the ultimate right- of- way of any
public street or highway, except for 25 feet or
residential uses from limited access height of
highways: building
B. Residential uses from limited access highways: 100 feet
C. From any tract boundary abutting land zoned
or used for residential or institutional use: 100 feet
D. From a tract boundary abutting land used or
zoned for nonresidential use: 50 feet
E. From parking and/ or driveways: 20 feet
F. From drop- off areas located at major building
entrances: 10 feet
G. From floodplain boundaries: 25 feet
H. From other buildings on the tract: 35 feet
5. Minimum Parking Setbacks.
A. From the ultimate right- of- way of any public
street or highway: 20 feet
B. From residential or institutional uses or districts: 25 feet
C. From all other tract boundaries: 20 feet
D. From floodplain boundaries: 25 feet
Ord. 90- 8, 11/ 19/ 1990, § 1)
2206. Parking and Access Requirements.
1. Mixed- use planned developments shall be governed by the following
parking capacity requirements:
414 - Page Added 10/ 22/ 1991
27, § 2206( 1)( A)) 27, § 2206( 1)( A))
A. Office. One ( 1) parking space per two hundred seventy- five
275) square feet of gross floor area.
B. Retail Stores/ Supermarket/ Service Shops. One ( 1) parking
space per two hundred fifty ( 250) square feet of gross floor area.
C. Theater and Cinema. One ( 1) parking space per three ( 3)
seats.
D. Bank or Other Financial Institutions. Three ( 3) parking
spaces per teller plus three ( 3) spaces per self- service facility.
E. Restaurant. One ( 1) parking space per eighty ( 80) feet of
gross floor area.
F. Residential. Two ( 2) parking spaces per dwelling unit.
G. Hotel, Tourist Homes and Inns. One ( 1) parking space per
rental unit.
H. Civic Uses. Parking shall be provided in accordance with
809( 1) of this Chapter.
2. Shared Parking. Mixed- use planned developments shall allow for
shared parking based upon alternating times for peak demand for variance
uses. Shared parking may be used on the following method:
A. Calculate the minimum amount of parking required ' for each
land use as shown in § 2206( 1) above.
B. Multiply each amount by the corresponding percentage in Table
1 for each of the five ( 5) time periods to determine peak parking
requirements.
C. Calculate the column total for each time period.
D. The column total with the highest value is the shared parking
requirement.
E. The full amount of required parking shall be placed in
reserve as green space and be designed as a unified component of the
whole parking area.
F. When shared parking is used, the land uses and shared parking
facilities must be owned by the same developer/ owner and all parking
shared by more than one ( 1) use must be within five hundred ( 500) feet
of each use.
Table 1
Use Weekday Weekend Nighttime
Day Evening Day Fvening Midnight -
9am - 4pm 6pm - midnight 9am - 4pm bpm - midnight Gam
Office 100% 10% 10% 5% 5%
Retail 60% 90% 100% 70% 5%
Theater 40% 100% 80% 100% 10%
Restaurant 50% 100% 100% 100% 10%
Hotel 75% 100% 75% 100% 75%
Residential 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%
Page Added 10/ 22/ 1991 - 415 -
27, § 2206( 3)) ( 27, § 2206( 3))
3. Parking Held in Reserve. In order to avoid unnecessary paving,
the reserve parking concept may be utilized pursuant to § 905( 2) of this
Chapter.
4. Access Drives. No more than one ( 1) access point per five hundred
500) feet of proposed or existing street frontage is permitted, unless a
traffic study provides convincing evidence otherwise, and upon recommendation
of the Township Engineer.
Ord. 990-88, 11/ 19/ 1990, § 1)
2207. Common Open Space and Plaza Standards.
1. A minimum of fifteen ( 15%) percent of the total tract area shall
be in common open space. Common open space shall conform to the regulations
set forth in §§704( 1) - 704( 4) of this Chapter.
2. Plaza areas shall be provided in accordance with the following
standards:
A. All non- residential uses are required to provide plaza space
equal to no less than two ( 27) percent of the total non- residential
gross floor' area.
B. Plaza areas shall be located within one hundred ( 100)' feet of
each nonresidential use and are encouraged to be ' located at the main
entrance to the building( s) or by a gathering place such as a
cafeteria.
C. The plaza shall have a fifteen ( 15) foot minimum width, and
main walkways within the plaza shall be at least six ( 6') feet wide. Ia
D. Plazas shall be connected with the overall pedestrian system
by at least ' one ( 1) major walkway and shall be integrated with the
landscape plan.
E. Plazas shall have seating at the rate of two ( 2) linear feet
of bench, seating wall or seating steps per two hundred fifty ( 250)
linear feet of plaza.
Ord. 90- 8, 11/ 19/ 1990, § 1)
2208. Landscape Plan. A landscape plan prepared by a licensed
landscape architect shall be submitted with each plan application. The
plan shall identify existing and proposed trees, shrubs, groundcover and
natural features such as floodplains, steep slopes and rock out croppings.
When existing plants are proposed to remain, the applicant shall show in
the plans the proposed methods to protect the plants during and after
construction. The following-- egulations shall also apply:
A. Buffer Requirements. Screening and softening buffers shall
be provided in compliance with the following requI.-ements:
1) Screening Buffers. Screening buffers shall be provided
when mixed- use planned developments abut residential or institutional
uses or districts. The screening buffer shall be placed
in a planting area with a minimum width of twenty- five ( 25') feet
along the property line and must be developed in accordance with
the provisions of § 420( 4) of the Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance [ Chapter 221.
416 - Page Added 10/ 22/ 1991
27, § 2208( A), cont' d) 27, § 2208( A), cont' d)
2) Softening Buffers. Softening buffers shall be provided
along all side and rear property lines that are not required to
have screening buffer. Softening buffers must be developed in
accordance with the provisions of § 420( 5) of the Township Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance [ Chapter 221.
Ord. 90- 8, 11/ 19/ 1990, § 1)
2209. Pedestrian Circulation.
1. Walkways shall be provided throughout the site at the following
locations:
A. Walkways shall be provided along all public street and shall
link up with walkways on abutting tracts.
B. An interior pedestrian circulation system, that is independent
of the street walkway system yet connects to it, shall link all
activity areas and destination points, including parking areas,
plazas, recreational open spaces, building entrances, off- site locations
and other destination points.
2. Design Criteria. All walkways shall meet the following design
standards:
A. The walkways shall form a continuous, coordinated pedestrian
system.
B. Residential walkways• shall be at least four ( 4') feet in
width and nonresidential walkways shall be at least five ( 5') feet in
width.
C. Walkways shall be " barrier free" for handicapped individuals
and shall facilitate easy pedestrian movement for all people, regardless
of physical condition.
D. Walkways shall be comprised of materials that are compatible
with the architecture, durable, easily maintained and non -slip.
Ord. 90- 8, 11/ 19/ 1990, § 1)
2210. Design Standards. A mixed- use planned development shall be
designed with a unified architectural scheme, to include building facades,
street furniture, signs and lighting standards. The following regulations
shall also apply:
1. The maximum length of any single building shall be two hundred
thirty ( 230) feet.
2. The use of traditional building materials such as local stone and
wood is encouraged.
3. Facades shall be varied to provide contrast of texture and
materials.
4. Any building facade which faces a parking or loading area, street
or other public space shall receive decorative treatment similar to all
other facades.
5. Buildings and parking areas shall be laid out to minimize disruption
of the site' s natural features.
Ord. 90- 8, 11/ 19/ 1990, § 1)
Page Added 10/ 22/ 1991 - 417 -
27, § 2211) 27, § 2211)
2211. Private Ownership and Maintenance of Common Elements. Common
elements including, but not limited to, open space, recreation, plazas,
roads, parking, sewer, water and stormwater management facilities which
will not be publicly owned, shall be subject to a form of ownership established
in private agreements acceptable to the Board of Supervisors, upon
recommendation of the Township Solicitor. Such private ownership shall be
governed by the following:
1. Access to, and use of these common elements may be restricted to
the following:
A. Property owners or tenants within the development.
B. Nearby property owners or tenants who wish to join.
C. Visitors to the property.
2. Perpetual maintenance shall be guaranteed by condominium indenture
or similar instrument, approved by the Board of Supervisors, upon recommendation
of the Township Solicitor, which instrument:
A. Shall be recorded with the Recorder of Deeds of Montgomery
County simultaneously with the recording of the final plan.
B. Shall restrict the common elements by deed restrictions
granting the Township the right to enforce the restrictions.
C. Shall include provisions for:
1) Bonds posted by the developer to cover expenses incurred
before formation of a homeowner' s or businessmen' s
association.
i
2) Adjustment of association fees to account for
inflation.
3) A reserve fund to cover capital improvements and/ or
unforeseen major maintenance requirements.
4) Funds for professional management.
D. Shall authorize the Township to maintain the common elements
and assess the private ownership accordingly if private ownership
fails to function as required in the private agreements. Shall
authorize the Township to bring the common elements up to Township
standards and assess the private ownership for the improvement of the
common elements.
Ord. 90- 8, 11/ 19/ 1990, 91)
2212. Financial Subdivision. The land directly under nonresidential
buildings and residential buildings not located on a separate lot may be
subdivided for mortgage purpc. es only. The lots which are created shall
follow -the building footprint and shall be exempted from design, bulk,
location and coverage requirements, which are intended for application to
the development as a whole. However, the development as a whole, including
all financially subdivided lots, must be able to meet all the requirements
of this Part. The foregoing shall be approved only if there is provided a
duly executed and acknowledged agreement, to be recorded at the time of
subdivision in a form acceptable to the Township Solicitor, which:
418 - Page Added 10/ 22/ 1991
27, 52212, cont' d) 27, § 2212, cont' d)
A. Requires each of the subdivided lots to be operated and
maintained as an integral part of the previously approved development
plan in accordance with these regulations.
B. Insures that each lot will have permanent means of access,
adequate parking and use of common facilities.
C. Prohibits the said lots from being treated as separate
development parcels at a future time.
Ord. 90- 8, 11/ 19/ 1990, § 1)
Page Added 10/ 22/ 1991 - 419 -
APPENDIX
The following ordinances and resolutions are no longer of general
interest, primarily because their provisions were carried out directly
after their enactment. Since they are mainly of historical interest, it
has not been considered necessary to include their entire text. Instead,
they are arranged in groups, according to subject matter, and within each
group listed by title in chronological order. The content of the
ordinances and resolutions is indexed, in all necessary detail, in the
general index at the end of this volume. The annual budget and tax
ordinances have been listed only in the " Rey to the Disposition of
Ordinances." Any person who desires to read the full text of any of the
ordinances or resolutions may do so by consulting the original Ordinance
Books on file in the Township Offices.
The enactments included in this Appendix are grouped under the
following headings:
A. . . . . . . . . Annexation of Territory
B. . . . . . . . . Bond Issues and Loans
C. . . . . . . . . Franchises and Services
D. . . . . . . . . Governmental and Intergovernmental Affairs
E. . . . . . . . . Plan Approval
F. . . . . . . . . Public Property
G. . . . . . . . . Sewers
H. . . . . . . . . Streets
T -- I
J
A- 1
Appendix A
Annexation of Territory
Reserved to accommodate future ordinances)
A- 3
LI
Appendix B
Bonds and Debt
Ord./ Res. Date Reason
86- 3 Obligation Note ( 15 yr.)
for Municipal Building
A- 5
Debt
260, 000.
Appendix C
Franchises and Services
Ord./ Res. Date Subject
80- 3 11/ 17/ 1980 Cable TV franchise with Eastern Pennsylvania
Cablevision, Inc.
81- 2 5/ 18/ 1981 Cable TV franchise with Suburban Cable
TV Company, Inc.
R- 010384( 1) 1/ 3/ 1984 Transfer of Cable TV franchise from
Eastern Pennsylvania Cablevision to
Lenfest Berks Cable TV, Inc.
R - 121685( C) 12/ 16/ 1985 Transfer of Cable TV franchise from
Lenfest Berks Cable TV to Suburban Cable
TV, Inc.
A- 7
Appendix D
Governmental and Intergovernmental Affairs
A- 9
Ord./ Res. Date Subject
R- 120155 12/ 01/ 1958 Creation of Road Machinery Fund
R- 091659 9/ 16/ 1959 Accepting funds from U. S. Government for
preparing public works plan
R- 020160 2/ 01/ 1960 Approving the Montgomery County -Planning
Commission Committee as Industrial Development
Agency for the whole county
Agreement 10/ 16/ 1961 Division of responsibility for maintaining
Township Line Road
Agreement 1/ 24/ 1967 Boyertown Area School District to collect
of 1% of Earned Income Tax
Agreement 1/ 24/ 1967 Township to pay school district expenses for
collection of Earned Income Tax
R- 102069 10/ 20/ 1969 Income retirement annuity for Russel Hummel
R- 040572 4/ 5/ 1972 Authorization to participate in purchase
contracts with Commonwealth Department of
Property and Supplies
R- 060673 6/ 06/ 1973 Income retirement annuity for Clinton
Stofflet
R- 081974 8/ 19/ 1974 Police Retirement Plan based on Act 600
R - 081875a 8/ 18/ 1975 Contract escalator clauses
R- 090776 9/ 7/ 1976 Electing to become voting members of the
Berks -Montgomery Council of Governments
R- 120676 12/ 6/ 1976 Electing to participate in Boyertown Area
Communications Center
77- 3 9/ 6/ 1977 Mutual Police Protection agreement
R - 121779a 12/ 17/ 1979 Suspending requirement for policemen to
contribute to pension plan for 1980
79- 7 12/ 17/ 1979 Mutual Police Assistance agreement with New
Hanover Township
R - 122181a 12/ 21/ 1981 Suspending requirement for policemen to
contribute to pension plan for 1982
R - 122181b 12/ 21/ 1981 Suspending requirement for non -uniformed
employees to contribute to pension plan for
1982
R - 122082a 12/ 20/ 1982 Suspending requirement for policemen to
contribute to pension plan for 1983
A- 9
App. D, cont' d) App. D, cont' d)
Ord./ Res. Date Subject
R - 122082b 12/ 20/ 1982 Suspending requirement for non -uniformed
employees to contribute to pension plan for
1983
R - 121983a 12/ 19/ 1983 Suspending requirement for policemen to
contribute to pension plan for 1984
R - 121983b 12/ 19/ 1983 Suspending requirement for non -uniformed
employees to contribute to pension plan for
1984
R- 100884 10/ 8/ 1984 Establishing Grievance procedure and a
handicapped non- discrimination committee
R - 121784a 12/ 17/ 1984a Suspending requirement for policemen to
contribute to pension plan for 1982
R - 121784b 12/ 17/ 1984b Suspending requirement for non -uniformed
employees to contribute to pension plan for
1985
R- 121685 12/ 17/ 1985a Suspending requirement for policemen to
contribute to pension plan for 1986
R - 121685b 12/ 17/ 1985b Suspending requirement for non -uniformed
employees to contribute to pension plan for
1986
R- 012086 1/ 20/ 1986 Adopted Penna. Retention and Disposition
Schedule for Township records
R - 040786a 4/ 7/ 1986 Personnel Rules and Regulations for
Non -Uniformed employees; and a pay plan
86- 4 7/ 14/ 1986 Police Mutual Assistance Agreement
86- 5 7/ 14/ 1986 Fire Company Mutual Assistance agreement
R- 1215863 12/ 15/ 1986 Suspending requirement for policemen to
contribute to pension plan for 1986
R- 1215864 12/ 15/ 1986 Suspending requirement for non -uniformed
employees to contribute to pension plan for
1987
R- 1215865 12/ 15/ 1986 Entitling each Highway Department employee to
50. 00 per year clothing allowance
R- 0406872 4/ 6/ 1987 Authorized agents shall destroy zoning
hearing records from 7/ 7/ 1976 to 6/ 30/ 1982,
which have been microfilmed.
R- 0420871 4/ 20/ 1987 Police Dept. Regs, re: Escort services.
R- 060187 6/ 1/ 1987 Authorized agents shall destroy zoning
hearing records from 12/ 4/ 1968 to 6/ 14/ 1976,
which have been microfilmed.
A- 10 Page revised 12/ 7/ 1987
App. D, cont' d)
Ord./ Res Date
R- 072087 7/ 20/ 1987
R- 102087
R- 111687
R- 1221873
R- 1221874
R- 120588
R- 1219883
R- 1219884
R- 0306891
R- 0306893
R- 0320899
R- 041789
R- 51589
R- 030590
10/ 20/ 1987
11/ 16/ 1987
12/ 21/ 1987
12/ 21/ 1987
12/ 5/ 1988
12/ 19/ 1988
12/ 19/ 1988
App. D, cont' d)
Subject
Autorized agents shall destroy zoning hearing
records from 7/ 28/ 1982 to 12/ 17/ 1985, which
have been microfilmed; and shall destroy bid
proposals and contracts for the years 1970
through 1979.
Amend non -uniformed employee regs, re: sick
leave and overtime.
Authorized agents shall destroy zoning
hearing records from 1/ 28/ 1986 to 4/ 21/ 1987,
which have been microfilmed.
Eliminating employee contributions to non -
uniformed employees pension fund for 1988.
Eliminating employee contributions to the
police pension plan for 1988.
Authorizing the Police Department to give
abandoned bicycles to different charitable
organizations for families in need.
Eliminating employee contributions to the
non -uniformed pension plan for 1989. -
Eliminating employee contributions to the
police pension fund for 1989.
3/ 6/ 1989 Authorizing the Township to seek reimbursement
for expenses incurred under the Police
Officers Education and Training Act, Act 120
of 1974.
3/ 6/ 1989 Approving the Montgomery County Municipal
Solid Waste Management Plan in accordance
with Act 101.
3/ 20/ 1989
4/ 17/ 1989
5/ 15/ 1989
3/ 5/ 1990
Page Corrected 4/ 7/ 1993
Designating the Montgomery County Development
Corporation as the Industrial Development
Agency for the Township under the industrial
development assistance law for the purpose of
promoting industry in the Township.
Authorizing the Township to apply for funding
with the Montgomery County Housing and Community
Development Program for Community
Development Block Grant Funds for 1989- 1990
program.
Authorizing a clothing allowance for each
employee in the Highway Department.
Authorizing the conducting of the 1990 census
by mail by the Boyerstown Area School
District.
A- 10. 1
App. D, cont' d) App. D, cont' d)
Ord./ Res Date Subject
R- 041690 4/ 16/ 1990 Authorizing the Township to file for funding
with the Montgomery County Housing and Community
Development Program for Community
Development Block Grant Funds for the 1990-
1991 program.
90- 4 8/ 6/ 1990 Adopting a municipal drug task force agreement
with the office of the Attorney General
to enforce narcotics and illegal drug laws
and thereby preserve the safety and welfare
of the community.
R- 0904904 9/ 4/ 1990 Authorizing the Township to amend the Montgomery
County Municipal Waste Management
Plan.
R- 0904905 9/ 4/ 1990 Supporting the passage of legislation
authorizing the Township to impose fair and
equitable impact fees on new development to
pay for the cost of the infrastructure
improvements needed to serve the development.
90- 6 10/ 1/ 1990 Authorizing the cooperation agreement with
Colebrookdale Township, Berks County, Pennsylvania,
regarding police patrol and enforcement
on County Line Road.
R- 0805912 8/ 5/ 1991 Authorizing the Township to have Berkheimer
Associates collect delinquent per capita
taxes.
92- 1 1/ 6/ 1992 Levying and assessing a tax upon all property
fronting streets in the Village ' of
Gilbertsville illuminated by electric street
lights.
R- 0106921 1/ 6/ 1992 Amending R -040786A, creating and establishing
a personnel rule and regulation system for
non -uniformed employees, by changing the
Township Office hours.
R- 022492 2/ 24/ 1992 Approving the proposed addition to the
Douglass Township Agricultural Security Area,
dated 9/ 23/ 1991.
R- 0302922 3/ 2/ 1992 Approving the proposed addition to the
Douglass Township Agricultural Security Area,
dated 12/ 2/ 1991.
R- 1102921 11/ 2/ 1992 Authorizing the execution of an agreement
with the Department of Transportation to
transfer from State to Township control a
portion of State Route 1040.
R- 1102922 1112/ 1992 Authorizing the execution of an agreement
with the Department of Transportation to
transfer from State to Township control a
portion of State Route 1048.
A- 10. 2 Page Revised 4/ 7/ 1993
App. D, cont' d) APp• D, cont' d)
Ord./ Res Date Subject
R- 1102923 11/ 2/ 1992 Authorizing the execution of an agreement
with the Department of Transportation to
transfer from State to Township control a
portion of State Route 1035.
R- 1102924 11/ 2/ 1992 Authorizing the execution of an agreement
with the Department of Transportation to
transfer from State to Township control a
portion of State Route 1046.
R- 1102925 11/ 2/ 1992 Authorizing the execution of an agreement
with the Department of Transportation to
transfer from State to Township control a
portion of State Route 1052.
R- 1102926 11/ 2/ 1992 Authorizing the execution of an agreement
with the Department of Transportation to
transfer from State to Township control a
portion of State Route 1039.
R- 1102927 11/ 2/ 1992 Authorizing the execution of an agreement
with the Department of Transportation to
transfer from State to Township control a
portion of State Route 1039.
R- 1102925 11/ 2/ 1992 Authorizing the execution of an agreement
with the Department of Transportation to
transfer from State to Township control a
portion of State Route 4035.
R- 1102929 11/ 2/ 1993 Designating the Delaware Valley Regional
Planning Commission as the Metropolitar_
Planning Organization ( MPO) for Douglass
Township.
93- 3 4/ 7/ 1993 Authorizing mutual aid agreements for
emergency services pursuant to the Emergency
Management Services Code.
R- 071993 7/ 19/ 1993 Approving the addition to the Douglass
Township Agricultural Security Area dated
4/ 7/ 1993.
R- 1004931 10/ 4/ 1993 Authorizing Lower Pottsgrove Township as the
lead municipality to make application for a
grant from the Department of Community
Affairs on behalf of Douglass Township for
support of the regional transportation study.
R- 1004932 10/ 4/ 1993 Township of Douglass agrees to comply with
the requirement of the RIRA program and the
Department of Community Affairs for the
purpose of obtaining grant funds to rehabilitate
Douglass Park.
R- 1004933 10/ 4/ 1993 Adoption of the one hundred million
100, 000, 000) dollar Open Space Program.
R- 030794 3/ 7/ 1994 Adoption of the Family and Medical Leave Act
of 1993.
Page Revised 3/ 7/ 1994 A- 10. 3
App. D, cont' d) App. D, cont` d)
Ord./ Res Date Subject
R- 040494 4/ 4/ 1994 Authorizing the appropriate officers of the
Township to file an application for funding
with the Montgomery County Housing and
Community Development Program.
R- 050294 5/ 2/ 1994 Approving the proposed addition to the
Douglass Township Agricultural Security Area,
dated February 7, 1994.
R- 070594 7/ 5/ 1994 Ordering and directing Metropolitan Edison
Company to furnish additional lighting at the
intersection of Wilson Ave. and Knoll Ln.
R- 0718942 7/ 18/ 1994 Requesting permission to participate in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Cooperative
Purchasing Program.
R- 090694 9/ 6/ 1994 Authorizing the Chairman of the Board to
sign an agreement with the Department of
Transportation for winter traffic services.
R- 0221951 2/ 21/ 1995 Requesting approval of the Secretary of the
Department of Transportation for erection of
traffic signals.
R- 0221952 2/ 21/ 1995 Requesting approval of the Secretary of the
Department of Transportation for erection of
traffic signals.
R- 030695 3/ 9/ 1995 Urging the General Assembly to repeal the
Prevailing Wage Act or make its provisions
optional for local governments.
R- 050195 5/ 1/ 1995 Approving the proposed addition to the
Douglass Township Agricultural Security Area
dated January 31, 1995.
R- 071795- 7/ 17/ 1995 Disapproving the Municipal Waste Management
Plan, 1994 Revision.
R-- 120495 12/ 4/ 1995 Approving the proposed addition to the
Douglass Township Agricultural Security Area
dated July 7, 1995.
R- 030496 3/ 4/ 1996 Authorizing Thomas Gray to execute all
required forms and documents for the purpose
of obtaining financial assistance under the
Robert T. Stafford Disaster and Emergency
Assistance Act.
R- 052096 5/ 20/ 1996 Adopting the Douglass Township Open Space and
Environmental Resource Protection Plan.
R- 071596 7/ 15/ 1996 Approving the proposed addition/ deletion to
the Douglass Township Agricultural Security
Area, dated March 13, 1996,
R- 010697 10/ 6/ 1997 Creating and establishing a Personnel Rule
and Regulation System for nonuniform
employees by providing for a shoe allowance
for each employee in the Highway Department.
A- 10. 4 Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997
R- 061995 6/ 19/ 1995 Adopting and submitting to the
Department of Environmental Resources
for its approval a revision of the
Official Sewage Facilities Plan for the
Gilbertsville Elementary School subdivision.
R- 082195 8/ 21/ 1995 Adopting and submitting to the
Department of Environmental Resources
for its approval a revision of the
Official Sewage Facilities Plan for the
County Line Village Shopping Center
subdivision.
Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996 A- 11
Appendix E
Plan Approval
Ord./ Res. Date Subject
R- 030172 3/ 01/ 1972 Comprehensive Plan for Township.
R- 071873 7/ 18/ 1973 Purchase of 15 acres South of Philadelphia
Avenue for use as park.
R- 060374 6/ 03/ 1974 Adopting Montgomery Co. Solid Waste
Management Plan.
R- 1220933 12/ 20/ 1993 Adopting and submitting to the
Department of Environmental Resources
for its approval a revision of the
Official Sewage Facilities Plan for the
Grosser Road Estates subdivision.
R- 032194 3/ 21/ 1994 Adopting and submitting to the
Department of Environmental Resources
for its approval a revision of the
Official Sewage Facilities Plan for the
Alverda Clauser subdivision.
R- 101894 10/ 18/ 1994 Adopting and submitting to the
Department of Environmental Resources
for its approval a revision of the
Official Sewage Facilities Plan for the
Forroth Acres ( Section II) subdivision.
R- 110794 11/ 7/ 1994 Adopting and submitting to the
Department of Environmental Resources
for its approval a revision of the
Official Sewage Facilities Plan for the
Green Hill Meadows subdivision.
R- 120594 12/ 5/ 1994 Adopting and submitting to the
Department of Environmental Resources
for its approval a revision of the
Official Sewage Facilities Plan for the
Caroline Specht subdivision.
R- 061995 6/ 19/ 1995 Adopting and submitting to the
Department of Environmental Resources
for its approval a revision of the
Official Sewage Facilities Plan for the
Gilbertsville Elementary School subdivision.
R- 082195 8/ 21/ 1995 Adopting and submitting to the
Department of Environmental Resources
for its approval a revision of the
Official Sewage Facilities Plan for the
County Line Village Shopping Center
subdivision.
Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996 A- 11
App. E, cont' d) App. E, cont' d)
Ord./ Res. Date Subject
R- 1120951 11/ 20/ 1995 Adopting and submitting to the
Department of Environmental Resources
for its approval a revision of the
Official Sewage Facilities Plan for the
Lot No. 2 Middle Creek Farms subdivision.
R- 040196 4/ 1/ 1996 Adopting and submitting to the
Department of Environmental Resources
for its approval a revision of the
Official Sewage Facilities Plan for the
Fryer subdivision.
A- 12 Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996
7
Appendix F
Public Property
Ord./ Res. Date Description
R - 112160a 11/ 21/ 1960 Purchase of land to the rear and adjacent
to the Municipal Building.
R- 080272 8/ 2/ 1972 Acquire land Gilbertsville Fire Co. No. 1 for
Municipal Building.
R- 040576 4/ 5/ 1976 Accepting Recreation Area located in Colonial
Manor.
R- 02081 7/ 20/ 1981 Condemning land at 1324 E. Philadelphia
Avenue for Township use.
R - 122181c 12/ 21/ 1981 Condemning 9. 438 acres along Merkel Road to
be added to recreation area.
R - 100383a 10/ 3/ 1983 Condemning land along Jackson Road to be
added to recreation area.
R- 070185 7/ 1/ 1985 Condemning land along Municipal Drive to be
added to garage and utility land.
R- 100388 10/ 3/ 1988 Authorizing that 1, 451 acres of land be
formed into an Agricultural Area.
R- 090589 9/ 5/ 1989 Acquiring land from Amandus D. Moyer Lumber,
Inc., as land for recreational purpose.
Page Revised 10/ 22/ 1991 A- 13
A- 15
Appendix G
Sewers
Ord./ Res. Date Subject
R - 021661a 2/ 16/ 1961 Plan for complete sanitary sewerage system
including treatment plant.
R- 021667 2/ 16/ 1967 Montgomery County Sewage Facilities Plan
13 8/ 16/ 1962 Approving plans by Berks -Montgomery Municipal
Authority for sanitary sewage collection
system, sewage treatment plants, and related
facilities for portions of Colebrookdale
Township and Douglass Township.
14 9/ 4/ 1962 Granting Berks -Montgomery Municipal Authority
rights re: sewer system construction.
16 8/ 27/ 1962 Agreement with Berks -Montgomery Municipal
Authority re: sewage system construction and
requirement of property owners to connect.
20 9/ 7/ 1965 Supplemental agreement with Authority
regarding agreement of 9/ 4/ 1962.
R- 112271 11/ 22/ 1971 Adopting Montgomery County Sewage Facilities
Plan.
73- 12 12/ 5/ 1973 Approving plans for extension of sewage
system into Jackson Road Addition.
R- 080574 8/ 5/ 1974 Approving plans for extension of sewage
system into Presidential Estates.
R- 021775 2/ 17/ 1975 Approving plans for extension of sewage
system into Flint development.
R - 021775a 2/ 17/ 1975 Approving plans for extension of sewage
system into Winding Creek ( Section C)
R- 030375 3/ 3/ 1975 Approving plans for extension of sewage
system into Twin Ponds development.
R - 030375a 3/ 3/ 1975 Approving plans for extension of sewage
system into Colonial Manor ( Section A).
R - 030375b 3/ 3/ 1975 Approving plans for extension of BMMA sewage
system into Colonial Manor ( Section B).
R - 060776B 6/ 7/ 1976 Approving plans for a community sewage system
to serve Winding Creek ( Section D).
R - 120676A 12/ 6/ 1976 Approving plans for a community sewage system
to serve Cobblestone Crossing.
R - 020579a 2/ 5/ 1979 Approving plan for extension of BMMA sewage
40
system into Colonial Manor ( Section C).
R- 061879 6/ 18/ 1979 Approving plans for a community sewage system
to serve Wilshire Acres.
A- 15
App. G, cont' d) ( App. G, cont' d)
Ord./ Res. Date Description
R- 020480 2/ 4/ 1980 Approving plans for a community sewage system
to serve S. D. of Goshen Assocs.
R- 021681 2/ 16/ 1981 Approving plans for a community sewage system
to serve Wilshire Acres.
R- 041883 4/ 18/ 1983 Adoption of Montgomery County Sewage Facilities
Plan Information Update of 1978.
R- 011684 1/ 16/ 1984 Approving plan for a community sewage system
to serve Brancaccio subdivision.
R- 081186 8/ 11/ 1986 Approving and supporting plan and financing
of capital sewage construction by the Berks -
Montgomery Municipal Authority.
R- 102186 10/ 21/ 1986 Approving plan for connection of Bonanza Restaurant
with public sewers.
R- 090688 9/ 6/ 1988 Authorizing the transfer of all rights, title
and lines of the Bechtelsville Municipal
Authority to the Berks -Montgomery Municipal
Authority.
R- 020689 2/ 6/ 1989 Approving the Township Comprehensive Plan Up -
date for 1988.
R- 111990 11/ 19/ 1994 Approving plans for a community sewage system
to serve St. Luke Knolls.
R- 0121911 1/ 21/ 1991 Approving plans for an individual sewage
system for the White Feather Farm IV.
R- 0121912 1/ 21/ 1991 Approving plans for an individual sewage
system to serve Yorkshire Estates.
R- 0219912 2/ 19/ 1991 Approving plans for an individual sewage
system to serve the Rothelmel Property.
R- 021913 2/ 19/ 1991 Approving plans for an individual sewage
system to serve Eugene A. - and Elizabeth A.
Davis property.
R- 0318911 3/ 18/ 1991 Approving plans for an industrial sewage
system to serve the Green Ridge III
development.
R- 0415911 4/ 15/ 1991 Approving plans for an individual sewage
system to serve Windward IV..
R- 0603911 6/ 3/ 1991 Authorizing the Township to proceed with the
refr, ding of the Series 1986 Sewer Revenue
bonds and the Series 1988 Sewer Revenue Bonds
R- 0701911 7/ 1/ 1991 Approving plans for an individual sewage
system to serve the property of Clarence
Standhart.
R0805911 8/ 5/ 1991 Approving plans that 1050 Grosser Road Enterprises
shall have sewer tap -ins for their
property.
A- 16 Page Revised - 10/ 22/ 1991
App. G, cont' d) App. G, cont' d)
Ord./ Res. Date Description
R- 0819911 8/ 19/ 1991 Approving plans for an individual sewage
system to serve the Kenneth Gephart property.
R- 0706921 7/ 6/ 1992 Adopting and submitting to the Department of
Environmental Resources for its approval as a
revision to the " Official Sewage Facilities
Plan" the planning module proposed by Stanley
C. Latshaw for LASO V.
R- 0720921 7/ 20/ 1992 Adopting and submitting to the Department of
Environmental Resources for its approval as a
revision to the " Official Sewage Facilities
Plan" the planning module proposed by Robert
A. Sugg.
R- 1005921 10/ 5/ 1992 Adopting and submitting to the Department of
Environmental Resources for its approval as a
revision to the " Official Sewage Facilities
Plan" the planning module proposed by New
Hanover Associates for New Hanover II.
R- 1020921 10/ 20/ 1992 Adopting and submitting to the Department of
Environmental Resources for its approval as a
revision to the " Official Sewage Facilities
Plan" the planning module proposed by Gambone
Brothers Development Co. for Covered Bridge
Estate III.
R- 1020922 10/ 20/ 1992 Adopting and submitting to the Department of
Environmental Resources for its approval as a.
revision to the " Official Sewage Facilities
Plan" the planning module proposed by Andrew
D. Kozak for same.
R- 062193 6/ 21/ 1993 Adopting and submitting to the Department of
Environmental Resources for its approval as a
revision to the " Official Sewage Facilities
Plan" the planning module proposed by Hugh F.
Kelly, Jr. for the Kelly subdivision.
R- 091696 9/ 16/ 1996 Adopting and submitting to the Department of
Environmental Protection for its approval as
a revision to the " Official Sewage Facilities
Plan" the planning module proposed by Don Erb
for the Don Erb Subdivision.
R- 1022961
R- 1022962
10/ 22/ 1996
10/ 22/ 1996
Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997
Adding the Donald E. Erb subdivision to the
Sewage Maintenance Ordinance X692- 5 that was
enacted and ordained October 5, 1992.
Accepting Deed of Dedication in RE: Storm
Drainage Easements in Twin Ponds Development.
A- 16. 1
Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996 A- 17
Appendix H
Streets
This appendix contains an alphabetical listing of streets and activities
in those streets are listed chronologically.
Name Activity Location Ord./ Res. Date
Arcon Dr. accepting West side of Hoffmansville
Rd. south to
place of beginning R- 100791 10/ 7/ 1991
Ammon Ave. acceptance R- 110773 11/ 7/ 1973
Arrow Dr. accepting A total length of
1228. 79 feet R- 0917904 9/ 17/ 1990
Ash St. accepting Unnamed 50' rd. intersecting
with Oak St. R- 1215862 12/ 15/ 1986
Aspen Ln. accepting A total length of
775. 30 feet R- 0917903 9/ 17/ 1990
Bow Ln. accepting Revised final plan of R- 101795 10/ 17/ 1995
Winding Creek III
Brian Rd. accepting A total length of
1026. 29 feet R- 0917902 9/ 17/ 1990
Broad St. acceptance R- 110259 11/ 2/ 1959
Broad St. accepting Broad Meadows Sub- R- 051881 5/ 18/ 1981
division
Brookside Dr. accepting Between Sweinhart Rd. R- 0919941 9/ 19/ 1994
and Cleaver Rd.
Buchanan Dr. accepting R- 091779 9/ 17/ 1979
Buchert Rd. naming Cross Rd. to New 17 1/ 16/ 1963
Hanover In.
Buchert Rd., accepting Revised final plan of R- 101795 10/ 17/ 1995
East Winding Creek III
Creek.side accepting Revised final plan of R- 101795 10/ 17/ 1995
Court Winding Creek III
Crestview Dr. accepting A total length of
1760. 99 ft. R- 081693 8/ 16/ 1993
Cross Rd. naming Upper Pottsgrove In to 17 1/ 16/ 1963
Grosser Rd.
Diehl Drive opening Gilbertsville Rd. to 21 7/ 6/ 1965
Yoder Dr.
Douglass Park accepting R- 030777 3/ 7/ 1977
Lane
Douglass St. opening E. Philadelphia Ave. to 17c 6/ 10/ 1973
a point 855 ft, south
Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996 A- 17
App. H, cont' d) App. H, cont' d)
Name Activity Location Ord./ Res. Date
Eagle Court acccepting A total length of 526
feet. R- 0917904 9/ 17/ 1990
Elm Street accepting R- 111576 11/ 15/ 1976
Estate Road accepting R- 091779 9/ 17/ 1979
Fadler Drive accepting Revised final plan of R- 101795 10/ 17/ 1995
Winding Creek III
Fairfield accepting Northwesterly side of R- 1220931 12/ 20/ 1993
Drive Miller Rd. northwestwardly
to Lot 7
Falcon Court accepting A total length of 405
feet. R- 0917904 9/ 17/ 1990
Fifth St. opening Berks Street and 3a 4/ 4/ 1949
Montgomery Street
Grosser Road naming Sweinhart Road to 17 1/ 16/ 1963
Gilbertsville Road
Grosser Rd. accepting Centerline of Grosser
Rd. to a point on the
Northwest side of
Thomas Lane. R- 0917902 9/ 17/ 1990
Hawk Court accepting A total length of 265
feet R- 0917904 9/ 17/ 1990
Heidi Court accepting South side of Hoffman
Rd. east a distance
of 470. 22 feet to
place of beginning R- 0917901 9/ 17/ 1990
Hemlock Drive opening Hawthorne Ave. to 21a 12/ 6/ 1965
Grosser Rd.
Hidden Valley Revised final plan of R- 101795 10/ 17/ 1995
Drive Winding Creek III
Highland Ave. opening Boro of Boyertown to 17c 6/ 10/ 1983
Douglass Ave.
Hillside accepting Revised final plan of R- 101795 10/ 17/ 1995
Circle Winding Creek III
Holly Road accepting Industrial Park Sub- R- 101883 10/ 18/ 1983
division
Hoover Court accepting R- 091779 9/ 17/ 1979
Jackson Road naming Sweinhart Rd. to Swamp 17 1/ 16/ 1965
Pike
lighting Route 73 and Southwest R- 010161 1/ 1/ 1961
Lark Lane accepting R- 100278 10/ 2/ 1978
Lincoln Court
Linsenbigler
accepting
naming Congo Rd. to Township
R- 091779
17
9/ 17/ 1979
1/ 16/ 1963
Road Line Rd.
A- 18 Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996
App. H, cont' d) App. H, cont' d)
Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996 A- 19
Name Activities Location Ord./ Res. Date
Little Road naming Hoffmansville Rd. to 17 1/ 16/ 1963
Little Rd.
Maple Street accepting R- 111576 11/ 15/ 1976
Martin Ave. opening Virmay Dr. to northern 32 8/ 2/ 1971
terminus
Mega Lane accepting Mango Subdivision R- 042081 4/ 20/ 1981
accepting Mango Subdivision R- 110783 11/ 7/ 1983
Section 2)
Merkel Rd. naming Jackson Rd. to Swamp 17 1/ 16/ 1963
Pike
Miller Rd. accepting Parcels B and C in the R- 0718941 7/ 18/ 1994
Stanley C. Latshaw Trust
subdivision
Montgomery St. opening Highland Ave. to Rhoads 17c 6/ 10/ 1983
Ave.
Moore Drive accepting R- 041972 4/ 19/ 1972
accepting R- 120875 12/ 8/ 1975
Moser Road relocation area between Niantic R- 112160 11/ 21/ 1960
and Miller Roads
Moyer Road naming New Hanover In. to 17 1/ 16/ 1963
Douglass Township In.
Municipal Rd. opening L. R. 197 to end 17a 3/ 4/ 1963
Nathan Ave. accepting
R- 110773 11/ 07/ 1973
accepting
R- 111576 11/ 15/ 1976
Nelmor Blvd. accepting R- 110773 11/ 07/ 1973
North Hills Rd. accepting From West Branch Rd. R- 0919942 9/ 19/ 1994
a distance of 1381. 73
feet
Oak Street accepting
R- 092374 9/ 23/ 1974
Oak Street accepting
R- 111576 11/ 15/ 1976
Extension
Oberholtzer naming Berks County In. to 17 1/ 16/ 1963
Road Hoffmansville Rd.
Onyx Lane accepting
R- 092076 9/ 20/ 1976
E. Philadel- improvements Boyertown to Gilberts- 78- 3 6/ 5/ 1978
phia Ave. ville Road
Pine Lane accepting
R- 120875 12/ 8/ 1975
accepting
R- 092076 9/ 20/ 1976
Reick Rd. naming Cross Road to Sweinhart
Road
17 1/ 16/ 1963
Page Revised 6/ 17/ 1996 A- 19
App. H, cont' d) App. H, cont' d)
Name Activities Location Ord./ Res. Date
accepting
Ritter Road vacating Sweinhart Road thru 79- 3 10/ 22/ 1979
Presidential Estates
Rhoads Ave. opening Sweinhart Rd., SE 62- 2 4/ 16/ 1962
502 ft.
Roosevelt Dr. accepting R- 091779 9/ 17/ 1979
Sassamansville naming Middle Creek Road to 17 1/ 16/ 1963
Road Hoffmansville Road
Scenicview Ct. accepting A total 'length of
525 ft. R- 081693 8/ 16/ 1993
Second Ave. opening Jackson St. to Merkel 62- 3 11/ 19/ 1962
Rd.
Second Street accepting R- 091779 9/ 17/ 1979
Sixth Street opening Berks St. and Montgomery 3a 4/ 4/ 1949
Street
Spruce Street accepting R- 111576 11/ 15/ 1976
Star Drive accepting Revised final plan of R- 101795 10/ 17/ 1995
Winding Creek III
State Route transferring Transferring State Route R- 0106972 1/ 6/ 1997
1050 1050 from State to
Municipality
Stephanie accepting Revised final plan of R- 101795 10/ 17/ 1995
Court Winding Creek III
Stone ' Road naming Deep Creek Rd. to Green 17 1/ 16/ 1963
Hill Rd.
accepting right- of- way relocation R- 102574 10/ 25/ 1974
Sunny Ridge accepting Revised final plan of R- 101795 10/ 17/ 1995
Drive Winding Creek III
Swamp Creek naming Wilson Ave. to Berks 17 1/ 16/ 1962
Road County Line
vacating Several parcels due to 61- 2 3/ 6/ 1961
relocation of roadway
Swan Court accepting R- 100278 10/ 2/ 1978
Sweinhart Rd. naming Cleaver Rd. to E. 17 1/ 16/ 1963
Philadelphia Ave.
Thomas Lane accepting
Thrush Drive accepting
Truman Court accepting
unnamed road opening
unname St. accepting
A total length of
688 feet
Jackson Rd. to
Gilbertsville Rd.
South side of Acron Dr.
east to place of
beginning
A- 20
R- 091779 9/ 17/ 1979
R- 0917902
R- 100278
R- 091779
84- 8
9/ 17/ 1990
10/ 2/ 1978
9/ 17/ 1979
6/ 18/ 1984
R100791 10/ 7/ 1991
Page Revised 7/ 7/ 1997
11
App. H, cont' d) App. H, cont' d)
Name Activities LocationOrd./Res. Date
Virmay Drive opening Merkel Rd. to Gilberts- 176 3/ 4/ 1963
ville Rd.
accepting R- 120875 12/ 8/ 1975
Werstler Ave. accepting R- 041972 4/ 19/ 1972
accepting R- 110773 11/ 07/ 1973
Wilson Ave. naming Swamp Pike to Swamp 17 1/ 16/ 1963
Creek
Woodland Rd. naming New Hanover Township 17 1/ 16/ 1963
In. to Hoffman Road
Wren Road accepting R- 100278 10/ 2/ 1978
Page Added 6/ 17/ 1996 A- 20. 1

