Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 5-19-2020 by Ord. No. 1383]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 3301.5 of the Borough Code (8 Pa.C.S.A. § 3301.5),
the codification of a complete body of legislation for the Borough of Etna,
County of Allegheny, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as revised, codified
and consolidated into chapters, articles and sections by General Code,
and consisting of Chapters 1 through 615, together with an Appendix, is
hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as a single ordinance of
the Borough of Etna, which shall be known and is hereby designated as the
"Code of the Borough of Etna," hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of
the prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued
in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by
the Borough Council of the Borough of Etna, and it is the intention of
said Borough Council that each such provision contained within the Code
is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such
provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and only
new or changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to
be enacted from the effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Inconsistent legislation repealed.
A. Repeal of inconsistent ordinances. Except as provided in § 1-4,
Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal, below, all
ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions
contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are hereby repealed as
of the effective date given in § 1-15; provided, however, that such repeal
shall only be to the extent of such inconsistency, and any valid
legislation of the Borough of Etna which is not in conflict with the
provisions of the Code shall be deemed to remain in full force and
effect.
B. Repeal of specific ordinances. The Borough Council of the Borough of
Etna has determined that the following ordinances are no longer in
effect and hereby specifically repeals the following legislation:
(1) Former Chapter I, Part 1, Elected Officers, of the 1974 Code.
(2) Former Chapter I, Part 2, Appointed Officers, of the 1974 Code.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-3
1:3
§ 1-4. Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
(3) Former Chapter VIII, Part 2, Fire Protection, of the 1974 Code.
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to December 18, 2018.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Borough prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Borough or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Borough.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Borough or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the Borough or other instruments or evidence of
the Borough's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Borough.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
§ 1-3 ETNA CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted legislation; new
provisions.
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Borough or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the Borough.
S. Any currently effective ordinance providing for intergovernmental
cooperation or establishing an intermunicipal agreement
A. Nonsubstantive changes. In compiling and preparing the ordinances
and resolutions of the Borough for adoption and revision as part of the
Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes were
made in one or more of said ordinances and resolutions. It is the
intention of the Borough Council that all such changes be adopted as
part of the Code as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed had
been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, changes and revisions of a substantive
nature, as set forth in Schedule A attached hereto and made a part
hereof, are hereby made to various ordinances and resolutions included
in the Code. These changes are enacted to bring provisions into
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:5
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
conformity with the desired policies of the Borough Council, and it is
the intent of the Borough Council that all such changes be adopted as
part of the Code as if the legislation so changed had been previously
formally amended to read as such. All such changes and revisions shall
be deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of the Code specified
in § 1-15.
C. Nomenclature changes and revisions. The following changes have been
made to the following terms where used in this Code:
(1) "Burgess" is changed to "Mayor."
(2) "Justice of the Peace" is changed to "Magisterial District Judge."
(3) "Department of Community Affairs" is changed to "Department of
Community and Economic Development."
(4) "Department of Environmental Resources" is changed to
"Department of Environmental Protection" or "Department of
Conservation and Natural Resources," whichever is appropriate.
(5) USDA's "Soil Conservation Service" is changed to "Natural
Resources Conservation Service."
(6) "Department of Public Welfare" is changed to "Department of
Human Services."
D. Statutory reference updates. Pursuant to recodification of the Borough
Code in 2012 and 2014 (see now 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.), statutory
citations referring to specific sections of the Borough Code have been
updated accordingly throughout the Code.
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
§ 1-6 ETNA CODE § 1-8
1:6
§ 1-9. Filing of copy of Code.
At least one copy of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with
the Ordinance Book in the office of the Borough Secretary and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copy
or copies shall be certified to by the Borough Secretary, as provided by
law, and such certified copy or copies shall remain on file in the office of
the Borough Secretary, available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Borough Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall
thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the postbound
book containing said Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copy or copies
of the book containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the
Borough Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and
all legislation adopted by the Borough Council subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which the Borough Council shall adopt specifically
as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by
reference until such changes or new legislation are printed as supplements
to said Code books, at which time such supplements shall be inserted
therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Borough Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction and of the adoption of the
Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. The enactment
and application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the notice
of introduction, the availability of a copy or copies of the Code for inspection
by the public and the filing of an attested copy of this ordinance with the
county, as required by law, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due
and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ 1-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:7
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; violations and penalties.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Borough
to be misrepresented thereby. Any person who violates or permits a
violation of this section of this ordinance shall, upon being found liable
therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding, pay a fine of not more than $600,
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney’s fees, incurred by the
Borough in the enforcement of this chapter. If the defendant neither pays
nor timely appeals the judgment, the Borough may enforce the judgment
pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation
exists shall constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers
or agents of the Borough are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief,
including injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or unconstitutional.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Borough Council that this
ordinance and the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid
or unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or
part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
upon adoption of this ordinance.
§ 1-13 ETNA CODE § 1-15
1:8
Chapter 26
EDUCATIONAL SERVICE AGENCY
§ 26-1. Educational service agency established.
By authority vested in boroughs by the Act of 1979, P.L. 503, No. 108,1 the
Borough of Etna establishes an educational service agency.2
§ 26-2. Employment and supervision of school crossing guards.
The function of the educational service agency shall be to employ and
supervise school crossing guards, also referred to as "special school police,"
to direct traffic at or near schools. In order to enable the educational service
agency to perform that function, the Borough delegates to the educational
service agency the authority to appoint and supervise crossing guards or
special school police as set out in the Borough Code.3
§ 26-3. Authority and duties.
The educational service agency shall have the following authority, and it
shall be its duty to:
A. Prepare annually and, on or before the first day of November of each
year, submit to the Borough Council for approval a budget showing its
contemplated income and its proposed expenditures for the succeeding
year.
B. Annually adopt the budget as submitted under Subsection A of this
section, as modified by the Borough.
C. From time to time employ, and/or discharge, and fix the compensation
of crossing guards or special school police to serve in the Borough.
D. Exercise supervision and control over the crossing guards or special
school police by:
(1) Establishing, administering and enforcing rules and regulations for
the work and conduct of the crossing guards or special school
police;
(2) Establishing work schedules and designating the locations where
and the time when the various individuals are to be on duty;
(3) Establishing position classifications, if deemed necessary, and
designating the individuals to serve in each classification;
(4) Providing for supervision as necessary; and
1. Editor's Note: See 43 P.S. § 802.1.
2. Editor's Note: Original Sections 2 through 6, concerning membership, bonds and
compensation, were repealed 5-19-2020 by Ord. No. 1383.
3. Editor's Note: See 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-3
1:9
§ 26-4. Certain moneys transferred to educational service agency.
The Borough shall transfer and pay over to the educational service agency
the moneys that the Borough is required to pay as compensation to special
school police under the Borough Code, or other agreement executed with
the school district, as provided in the Borough Code, as well as other
moneys as necessary to cover expenditures budgeted for the educational
service agency as provided in § 26-3 of this chapter.
§ 26-5. Term of existence.
The educational service agency hereby recognized and formally established
shall continue until changed or abolished by action of the Borough or until
the suspension of Act 108 of 1979 as adopted by the Legislature of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in accord with the terms thereof.
Chapter 33
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES
(5) Exercising any and all other prerogatives normally associated with
personnel management.
E. From moneys budgeted and available, make all payments for the
services of crossing guards or special school police and make all other
expenditures as prescribed by law or superior body or agency, or as
otherwise deemed necessary or appropriate.
F. Receive, in addition to payments by the Borough, any payments by the
school district or any other gift, grant, devise or bequest.
G. Establish a system of accounts for all moneys under its control, and
establish one or more separate bank accounts into which all income
shall be deposited and from which all expenditures shall be made.
§ 26-3 ETNA CODE § 26-5
1:10
ARTICLE I
Minimum Standards of Prehospital Emergency Care
[Adopted 1-17-2017 by Ord. No. 1368]
§ 33-1. Appointment of agency for services.
Effective February 1, 2017, the minimum standard care of professional
prehospital care and transportation to be provided for all emergencies
within the Borough of Etna which require emergency medical services shall
be provided by Shaler Emergency Medical Services, which shall include
advanced life support as that term is defined within the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as well as advanced life support services initiated within the
Borough of Etna.
§ 33-2. Repealer.
Any ordinance or part of ordinance conflicting with the provisions of this
article is hereby repealed as far as it affects this article. Ordinance No. 1239
of 1995 is hereby repealed.
§ 33-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-2
1:11
Chapter 44
FIREMEN'S RELIEF ASSOCIATION
§ 44-1. Etna Volunteer Fire Department Relief Association
recognized.
The Etna Volunteer Fire Department Relief Association is hereby officially
recognized as the relief fund association of all fire companies and fire
associations of the said Borough.4
§ 44-2. Certain moneys to be turned over to association.
The proper officers of the Borough of Etna are hereby authorized and
directed to turn over to the Etna Volunteer Fire Department Relief
Association any and all moneys received by the said Borough or hereafter to
be received by the said Borough pursuant to the provisions of Act No. 307
of the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, known as
Act of 1929, P.L. 709.5
§ 44-3. Moneys from tax to be kept separate and turned over to
relief fund association.
The proper officers of the Borough of Etna are hereby directed to keep
separate and apart from all Borough funds any and all moneys received
by said Borough or hereafter to be received from the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania pursuant to the provisions of said Act of Assembly, namely Act
of 1929, P.L. 709, and to turn all of said sum or sums now in their hands or
hereafter received over to the said Etna Volunteer Fire Department Relief
Association as the property of said Association.
Chapter 52
HEALTH DEPARTMENT
§ 52-1. Borough under jurisdiction of County Department of Health.
It is hereby declared that the Borough of Etna will cease to exercise any of
the public health functions vested in it by law and become subject to the
jurisdiction of the Allegheny County Department of Health.6
4. Editor's Note: The preamble to this ordinance stated that all the fire companies or fire
associations of the Borough had jointly formed the Etna Volunteer Fire Department Relief
Association, and that the Association had been duly organized, had elected proper officers,
had adopted proper bylaws, and was functioning as a relief association for the Fire
Departments of the Borough.
5. Editor's Note: Editor's Note: See now 53 P.S. § 895.701 et seq. (1984 Dec. 18, P.L. 1005,
No. 205), known as "Foreign Fire Insurance Tax Distribution Law."
6. Editor's Note: The preamble to this ordinance stated that, pursuant to the Local Health
Administration Law of 1951, the County of Allegheny on January 1, 1957, established a
Department of Health; that under the Local Health Administration Law any political
subdivision may elect to become subject to the jurisdiction of the County Department of
§ 33-2 ETNA CODE § 52-1
1:12
Chapter 77
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Health upon its establishment; and that it was deemed to be in the best interests of the
people of the Borough that responsibility for the promotion and protection of the public
health be so vested.
§ 52-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-1
1:13

ARTICLE I
Secretary-Manager
[Adopted 5-8-1972 by Ord. No. 1041 (Ch. I, Part 2, §§ 21 through 23,
of the 1974 Code of Ordinances); amended in its entirety 5-19-2020
by Ord. No. 1383]
§ 77-1. Duties.
The duties of the Borough Secretary-Manager shall be as ordained or
resolved, or as amended in the future, by action of Council.
§ 77-2. Salary.
The salary of the Secretary-Manager shall be as set and amended by action
of Council.
§ 77-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-2
1:15

ARTICLE II
Treasurer
[Adopted 6-21-1988 by Ord. No. 1200 (Ch. I, Part 2, §§ 24 through
25, of the 1974 Code of Ordinances); amended in its entirety at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 77-3. Appointment of Treasurer authorized.
Pursuant to Article XI, Section 1104, of the Borough Code, Act of February
1966 (1965 P.L. 1656, No. 581), as amended, the Borough Council of the
Borough of Etna is hereby authorized to appoint a Treasurer for the
Borough of Etna.7
§ 77-4. Council authorized to set salary of Treasurer.
From time to time the Council of the Borough of Etna is authorized to set or
amend the salary of the Treasurer.
7. Editor's Note: See 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 1104.
§ 77-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-4
1:17

ARTICLE III
Auditor
[Adopted 10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 1365]
§ 77-5. Appointment of Auditor.
The Council of the Borough of Etna hereby enacts and ordains, and by the
authority of the same shall, by resolution adopted annually in January of
each fiscal year, appoint an independent auditor, who shall be a certified
public accountant registered in Pennsylvania; a firm of certified public
accountants so registered; or a competent public accountant or competent
firm of public accountants, to audit for such fiscal year the accounts,
records, and all other evidences of financial transactions of the Borough of
Etna, and file a report with the Borough Council of the Borough of Etna. The
independent auditor shall perform all other duties and exercise such powers
as required of or conferred upon said auditor by law.
§ 77-6. Elected office abolished.
The office of elected Borough Auditor is hereby abolished. However, the
elected Borough Auditor(s) now in office shall continue to hold such office
for the term for which elected and shall perform the duties of their office,
except that they shall not audit, settle, or adjust accounts audited by such
independent auditor.
§ 77-7. Resolution of appointment.
The resolution appointing an independent auditor shall state the
compensation, if any, to be paid from borough funds for said services.
§ 77-8. Severability.
In the event any provisions, section, subsection, sentence, or clause or part
of this article shall be held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not effect or
impair any remaining provision, section, subsection, sentence, clause, or
part of this article, it being the intent of this Borough of Etna that such
remainder of the ordinance shall be and shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 77-9. Repealer.
All ordinances or portions thereof that are inconsistent with this article are
hereby repealed.
§ 77-10. When effective.
This article shall become effective immediately following its enactment.
§ 77-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-10
1:19
Chapter 85
PENSIONS
§ 77-10 ETNA CODE § 77-10
1:20
ARTICLE I
Municipal Employees' Retirement System
[Adopted 2-17-1964 by Ord. No. 960 (Ch. I, Part 6, of the 1974 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 85-1. Borough elects to join Municipal Employees' Retirement
System.
The Borough of Etna, having placed all of its employees, as far as they are
eligible, under the Federal Social Security Act, hereby elects to join the
Municipal Employees' Retirement System, established by the Act of June 4,
1943, P.L. 886, as last amended by the Act of August 24, 1963, No. 485,8 and
does hereby agree to be bound by all the requirements and provisions of the
said Act and to assume all obligations, financial and otherwise, placed upon
member municipalities by said Act.
§ 85-2. Elected officials, per diem employees and officers and
employees paid wholly on fee basis ineligible for membership.
Membership for elected officials shall be prohibited, and membership for
employees paid on a per diem basis shall be prohibited. Officers and
employees paid wholly on a fee basis shall not be eligible for membership in
the system.
§ 85-3. Prior service credits.
Credit for prior service toward the municipal annuity of each original
member shall be for all years of service to the Borough. The Borough
does hereby assume the liability for payment of 100% of the member's
contributions for all years of service toward the member's annuity for the
prior service of each original member.
§ 85-4. Payment for prior service.
Payment for the prior years' service noted in § 85-3 hereof shall be made by
the Borough in accordance with Section 14 of said Act and may be spread
over a period of 30 years if the Borough so chooses and with the consent of
the Municipal Employees' Retirement Board.
§ 85-5. Retirement law incorporated by reference.
The Borough does hereby incorporate the said Municipal Employees'
Retirement Law, as last amended by the Act of August 24, 1963, No. 485,
as a part of this article insofar as the said Act, as amended, applies to a
member municipality, having accepted the options set out in this article.
8. Editor's Note: The Act of 1943, as amended, was repealed and superseded by the
Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Law (1974 P.L. 35 No. 15), Section 201 of which
provided for the uninterrupted continuation of retirement plans established under the Act
of 1943.
§ 85-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-6
1:21
§ 85-6. Election to extend Section 20.1 of Municipal Employees'
Retirement Law.
The Borough does hereby elect to extend the provisions of Section 20.1 of
the Municipal Employees' Retirement Law, Act of June 4, 1943, P.L. 886,
added by the Act of August 24, 1963, No. 485,9 so that contributors to
the retirement system shall have the options and enjoy the protections
of the provisions set forth in Subsection (a) and (b) of Section 20.1 of
the Municipal Employees' Retirement Law, and Section 20.1 is hereby
incorporated and made a part hereof by reference thereto.
9. Editor's Note: Section 20.1 relates to death benefits.
§ 85-6 ETNA CODE § 85-6
1:22
ARTICLE II
Police Pension Plan
[Adopted 8-16-1994 by Ord. No. 1231; amended in its entirety
12-17-2002 by Ord. No. 1294; 6-16-2014 by Ord. No. 1352]
§ 85-7. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the
meanings set forth in this section, unless a different meaning is otherwise
clearly required by the context:
ACCRUED BENEFIT —
ACCUMULATED CONTRIBUTIONS — The total amount contributed by any
participant to this fund or its predecessor by way of payroll deduction
or otherwise, plus interest credited at 5% per annum. Interest shall be
credited in the form of a compound interest rate from the first day of the
plan year during which the contributions were paid to the first day of the
month preceding the date that a distribution of accumulated contributions
under §§ 85-12D and 85-13B shall be paid or payment of benefits shall
commence.
ACT — The Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act
which was enacted as Act 205 of 1984, as amended, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 895.101
et seq.
ACTUARIAL EQUIVALENT — Two forms of payment of equal actuarial
present value on a specified date. The actuarial present value shall be
determined by use of the UP-1984 Mortality Table and 6.5% interest, unless
otherwise specifically provided herein.
ACTUARY — The person, partnership, association or corporation which at
any given time is serving as actuary, provided that such actuary must be an
"approved actuary" as defined in the Act.
As of any given date, the benefit determined under § 85-10B, calculated
on the basis of final monthly average salary as of the date of
determination and multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which
shall be the participant's aggregate service determined as of such
date and the denominator of which shall be the projected aggregate
service of the participant as if the participant continues in employment
until attainment of normal retirement age. Notwithstanding anything
contained herein to the contrary, in no event shall the fraction exceed
1.0. The accrued benefit shall include any service increment
determined pursuant to § 85-10D attributable to the participant's
aggregate service as of the determination date.
A.
In no event, however, shall the accrued benefit exceed the maximum
limitation, determined as of the date of computation, provided under
§ 85-10H. All accrued benefits are subject to all applicable limitations,
reductions, offsets, and actuarial adjustments provided pursuant to the
terms of the plan prior to the actual payment thereof.
B.
§ 85-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-7
1:23
AGGREGATE SERVICE — The total period or periods of the participant's
employment with the employer, whether or not interrupted.
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, should any such participant
receive a distribution of accumulated contributions with respect to a period
of employment, such period of employment shall not be included in
aggregate service thereafter unless, at the commencement of the next
period of employment, the participant repays to the fund the amount of
such distribution with interest. For purposes of this definition, interest shall
accrue as of the date the employee receives a distribution of accumulated
contributions and shall be computed at the same rate and in the same
manner as described in the definition of "accumulated contributions" in this
section. Aggregate service shall be calculated in whole years, months and
days.
ATTENDING COLLEGE — The eligible children are registered at an
accredited institution of higher learning and are carrying a minimum course
load of seven credit hours per semester.
BENEFICIARY — The person or entity designated by the participant to
receive a distribution of the participant's accumulated contributions should
the participant die prior to becoming entitled to a retirement benefit. In the
event that a participant does not designate a beneficiary or the beneficiary
does not survive the participant, the beneficiary shall be the surviving
spouse, or if there is no surviving spouse, the issue, per stirpes, or if there
is no surviving issue, the estate; but if no personal representative has been
appointed, to those persons who would be entitled to the estate under the
intestacy laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania if the participant had
died intestate and a resident of Pennsylvania.
CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The person designated by the
Borough who has the primary responsibility for the execution of the
administrative affairs for the plan.
CODE — The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
COMMITTEE — The Police Pension Committee, as determined pursuant to
§ 85-14B.
COMMONWEALTH — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
COMPENSATION — The total remuneration of the employee, whether
salary or hourly wages, including only overtime pay, holiday pay, longevity
pay, unused sick pay earned during the averaging period and court pay paid
by the employer for police services rendered. Compensation shall be limited
on an annual basis for purposes of the plan to the amount specified pursuant
to Code Section 401(a)(17), as adjusted under Code Section 415(d).
COUNCIL — The Borough Council of the Borough of Etna.
DISABILITY DATE — The date when a participant is determined by the plan
administrator to be incapacitated due to total and permanent disability, or
the date when the participant's employment terminates due to such total
and permanent disability, if later.
§ 85-7 ETNA CODE § 85-7
1:24
EMPLOYEE — Any individual employed by the employer on a regular, fulltime
basis as a member of the employer's police force.
EMPLOYER — The Borough of Etna, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
EMPLOYMENT — For the purpose of determining aggregate service:
FINAL MONTHLY AVERAGE SALARY —
The period of time for which an employee is directly or indirectly
compensated or entitled to compensation by the employer for the
performance of duties as a police officer;
A.
Any period of time for which an employee is paid a fixed, periodic
amount in the nature of salary continuation payments for reasons other
than the performance of duties (such as vacation, holidays, sickness,
entitlement to benefits under workers' compensation or similar laws),
either directly by the employer or through a program to which the
employer has made contributions on behalf of the employee;
B.
Any period of voluntary or involuntary military service with the armed
forces of the United States of America, provided that the participant
has been employed as a regular, full-time member of the employer's
police force for a period of at least six months immediately prior to the
period of military service; and the participant returns to employment
within six months following discharge from military service or within
such longer period during which employment rights are guaranteed by
applicable law or under the terms of a collective bargaining agreement
with the employer.
C.
Any period of qualified military service as determined under the
requirements of Chapter 43 of Title 38, United States Code, provided
that the participant returns to employment following such period of
qualified military service, and the participant makes payment to the
plan in an amount equal to the participant contributions that would
otherwise have been paid to the plan during such period of qualified
military service. The amount of participant contributions shall be based
upon an estimate of the compensation that would have been paid
to the participant during such period of qualified military service as
determined by the average compensation paid to the participant during
the 12 months immediately preceding the period of qualified military
service. The amount of participant contributions calculated must be
paid into the plan before the end of the period that begins on the date of
reemployment and ends on the earlier of the date that ends the period
that has a duration of three times the period of qualified military service
or the date that is five years after the date of reemployment.
D.
The average monthly salary earned by the participant and paid by
the employer during the final 36 months immediately preceding
termination of active employment. Salary shall include the employee's
compensation to which the employee is entitled for the rendering of
services in employment.
A.
§ 85-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-7
1:25
INSURER or INSURANCE COMPANY — A legal reserve life insurance
company authorized to do business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
MEMBER'S SALARY AT THE TIME THE DISABILITY WAS INCURRED —
The fixed periodic payments for the final completed calendar year of active
employment, subject to future interpretation by the state courts or state
Legislature, at which time this definition shall comply with the court or
legislative interpretation.
MINIMUM MUNICIPAL OBLIGATION — The minimum obligation of the
municipality as determined by the actuary pursuant to the provisions of the
Act.
NORMAL RETIREMENT AGE — The date on which the participant has
completed 25 years of aggregate service with the employer and has attained
age 55.
NOTICE or ELECTION — A written document prepared in the form
specified by the plan administrator and delivered as follows: if such notice
or election is to be provided by the employer or the plan administrator, it
shall be mailed in a properly addressed envelope, postage prepaid, to the
last known address of the person entitled thereto, on or before the last day
of the specified notice or election period; or, if such notice or election is to
be provided to the employer or the plan administrator, it must be received
by the recipient on or before the last day of the specified notice election
period.
PARTICIPANT — An employee who has met the eligibility requirements to
participate in the plan as provided in § 85-8A and who has not for any
reason ceased to be a participant hereunder.
PENSION FUND or FUND — The Police Pension Fund administered under
the terms of this plan and which shall include all money, property,
investments, policies and contracts standing in the name of the plan.
PLAN — The plan set forth herein, as amended from time to time and
designated as the Borough of Etna Police Pension Plan.
PLAN ADMINISTRATOR — The committee or the individual appointed for
the purpose of supervising and administering the provisions of the plan. In
Final monthly average salary shall be calculated by taking into account
only those periods during which an employee receives salary, as that
term is defined in this section. Therefore, for example, the final monthly
average salary for a participant who is voluntarily or involuntarily
serving in the United States armed forces during the final 36 months
of aggregate service shall be based on the period during which the
employee last received salary (as defined in the preceding paragraph)
from the employer.
B.
Salary used to determine final monthly average salary shall be limited
on an annual basis for purposes of the plan to the amount specified
in accordance with Code Section 401(a)(17), as adjusted under Code
Section 415(d).
C.
§ 85-7 ETNA CODE § 85-7
1:26
the event that no such appointment is made, the plan administrator shall be
the Council.
PLAN YEAR — The twelve-month period beginning on January 1 and ending
on December 31 of each year.
POLICY or CONTRACT — A retirement annuity or retirement income
endowment policy (or a combination of both) or any other form of insurance
contract or policy which shall be deemed appropriate in accordance with
the provisions of applicable law.
RESTATEMENT DATE — January 1, 2014, the date upon which this
amendment and restatement of the plan becomes effective.
RETIREMENT DATE — The first day of the month coincident with or next
following the date on which the participant retires from employment or
the first day of any month thereafter on which the payment of retirement
benefits pursuant to this plan shall commence.
SERVICE INCREMENT — The amount calculated pursuant to § 85-10D
on behalf of a participant for each completed year of aggregate service
accumulated in excess of 25 years.
TOTAL AND PERMANENT DISABILITY — A condition of physical or mental
impairment due to which a participant is unable to perform the usual
and customary duties of employment, which condition continues for six
months and which is reasonably expected to continue to be permanent for
the remainder of the participant's lifetime. For purposes of this definition
and § 85-11, a condition shall not be treated as a total and permanent
disability unless such condition is a direct result of and occurs in the line
of duty of employment. Therefore, a participant whose physical or mental
impairment does not occur in the line of duty is not entitled to receive
disability benefits under the plan. Total and permanent disability shall not
include any condition which is intentionally self-inflicted or is the result of
the participant's criminal activity or substance abuse.
§ 85-8. Participation in plan.
A. Eligibility requirements. Each employee who is employed as a regular,
full-time permanent member of the Police Department of the employer
shall participate herein as of the date on which such employee's
employment first commences or recommences, provided all
prerequisites to participation under this plan shall have been fulfilled,
including but not limited to completion of all forms required by the plan
administrator.
B. Notification of plan administrator. The Council shall furnish the plan
administrator with written notification of the appointment of any new
full-time permanent employee who is eligible for participation
hereunder.
C. Designation of beneficiary. Any new, full-time employee who becomes a
participant hereunder shall provide a written notice in the manner
§ 85-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-8
1:27
§ 85-9. Contributions.
prescribed by the plan administrator which designates a beneficiary
at the time participation commences. The participant's election of any
such beneficiary may be rescinded or changed, without the consent
of the beneficiary, at any time, provided the participant provides the
written notice of the changed designation to the plan administrator in
the manner prescribed by the plan administrator. Any designation of a
beneficiary made in any manner other than one acceptable to the plan
administrator shall be null and void and have no effect under the terms
of this plan.
D. Change in status. A participant who remains in the service of the
employer but ceases to be an employee eligible for participation
hereunder, or ceases or fails to make any contributions which are
required as a condition of participation hereunder, shall have no further
benefit accruals occur until the individual again qualifies as a
participant hereunder eligible to resume such accrual of benefits.
E. Recordkeeping. The employer shall furnish the plan administrator with
such information as will aid the plan administrator in the administration
of the plan. Such information shall include all pertinent data on
employees for purposes of determining their eligibility to participate in
this plan.
A. participant contributions. Each participant shall as a requirement of
participation pay regular contributions to the pension fund in an
amount equal to between 5% and 8%. Each participant shall complete
the necessary forms to authorize the payment of participant
contributions by way of payroll deduction.
B. Reduction of participant contributions. Notwithstanding the preceding
§ 85-9A, payments into the pension fund by participants may be
reduced below the minimum percentages prescribed in § 85-9A, or may
be eliminated, and that if such payments are reduced or eliminated,
contributions by the employer will not be required to keep the pension
fund actuarially sound. The employer may, by ordinance or resolution,
reduce or eliminate payments into the pension fund by participants.
C. Employer contributions. The actuary, in accordance with the Act, shall
determine the minimum municipal obligation of the employer. The
employer shall pay into the pension fund, by annual appropriations or
otherwise, the contributions necessary to satisfy the minimum
municipal obligation.
D. State aid. General municipal pension system state aid, or any other
amount of state aid received by the employer from the commonwealth
in accordance with the Act, may be deposited into the pension fund
governed by this plan in amounts determined by the Council and shall
be used to reduce the amount of the minimum municipal obligation of
the employer.
§ 85-8 ETNA CODE § 85-9
1:28
§ 85-10. Retirement benefits.
E. Gifts. The Council is authorized to take by gift, grant, devise or
otherwise any money or property, real or personal, for the benefit of the
plan and cause the same to be held as a part of the pension fund. The
care, management, investment and disposal of such amounts shall be
vested in the Council or its delegate, the plan administrator, subject to
the direction of the donor and not inconsistent with applicable laws and
the terms of the plan.
F. Employer reversion. At no time shall it be possible for the plan assets to
be used for, or diverted to, any purpose other than for the exclusive
benefit of the participants and their beneficiaries, including payment of
any reasonable plan expenses. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any
contributions made by the employer may be returned to the employer if
the contribution was made due to a mistake and the contribution is
returned within one year of the date on which the discovery of the
mistaken payment of the contribution was made or reasonably should
have been made or the plan is terminated, as provided in § 85-16.
A. Normal retirement. Each participant shall be entitled to normal
retirement benefits after retirement on or after the participant has
attained normal retirement age.
B. Normal retirement benefit. Each participant who shall become entitled
to a benefit pursuant to § 85-10A shall receive a benefit paid monthly in
an amount equal to 50% of the participant's final monthly average
salary as determined herein.
C. Late retirement. A participant may continue to work beyond the
attainment of normal retirement age, subject to the employer's rules
and regulations regarding retirement age. If a participant who has met
the requirements of § 85-10A continues to work beyond normal
retirement age, there shall be no retirement benefits paid until
employment ceases and retirement begins. The retirement benefit of a
participant who retires after attainment of normal retirement age shall
be calculated in accordance with § 85-10B on the basis of the final
monthly average salary as of such participant's actual retirement date.
D. Service increment benefit. Notwithstanding anything contained herein
to the contrary, a participant who shall retire after completion of at
least 26 years of aggregate service may be entitled to receive a monthly
service increment benefit; provided, however, that the participant shall
have accrued sufficient service credit pursuant to this Subsection D.
Such service increment benefit shall only be available to a participant
who shall retire on a retirement date after attainment of normal
retirement age and whose aggregate service for purposes of this
§ 85-10D shall only include periods of time when the participant
actively renders service in employment and shall not include any period
of time during which the participant received a disability benefit or was
not otherwise in active employment. Such service increment benefit
§ 85-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-10
1:29
shall be an amount equal to $100 and shall be paid monthly in addition
to the amount of normal retirement benefit calculated pursuant to
§ 85-10B hereof.
E. Cost-of-living adjustments. participants who shall retire and receive a
retirement benefit determined pursuant to § 85-10B hereunder shall be
entitled to receive a cost-of-living adjustment to the amount of benefit
payable to such participant under § 85-10B, effective as of each
anniversary date of the original commencement of the participant's
retirement benefit payments hereunder. Such cost-of-living adjustment
shall be equal to the percentage change in the Consumer Price Index
(CPI-W) during the previous year times the benefit currently being
received by the participant, exclusive of service increment, if any. The
following limits shall apply:
(1) The total of all increases shall not exceed the percentage increase
in the Consumer Price Index (CPI-W) for the year in which the
participant was last employed as an employee of the employer.
(2) The total retirement benefits payable under this plan shall not
exceed 75% of the participant's final monthly average salary.
(3) The total cost-of-living increase shall not exceed 30% of the
participant's retirement benefit under this plan.
(4) The cost-of-living adjustment shall not impair the actuarial
soundness of the pension fund.
F. Special ad hoc post-retirement adjustment. Any participant who retired
or was disabled prior to January 1, 1996, shall be entitled to receive a
special ad hoc post-retirement adjustment, effective July 1, 2002, equal
to the following formula:
($0.15 x years of service x years retired) multiplied by
[(2.5% x years retired up to 25) + (7.5% x years retired over 25)]
The amount of the special ad hoc post-retirement adjustment shall be
reduced annually by 65% of the total amount of any post-retirement
adjustments provided to the retiree after December 31, 1988, and
before December 31, 2001, and paid in the immediately preceding
year.
G. Payment of benefits. Retirement benefit payments shall be made in the
normal form which shall be payable as of the first day of the month
coincident with or next following the participant's retirement date and
the first day of each month thereafter during the participant's lifetime.
A participant must complete an application for benefit in the manner
prescribed by the plan administrator and deliver such application to the
plan administrator at least 30 days prior to the date on which benefit
payments shall commence. Notwithstanding anything contained herein
to the contrary, no retirement benefit payments nor any other payments
shall be due or payable on or before the first day of the month
§ 85-10 ETNA CODE § 85-10
1:30
coincident with or next following the date that is 30 days after the date
the plan administrator receives the application for benefits. Payment of
benefits hereunder shall cease as of the date of death of the participant.
H. Maximum benefit limitations.
(1) Notwithstanding any provision of this plan to the contrary, no
benefit provided under this plan attributable to contributions of the
employer shall exceed, as an annual amount, the amount specified
in Code Section 415(b)(1)(A) as adjusted pursuant to Code Section
415(d), assuming the form of benefit shall be a straight life annuity
(with no ancillary benefits). The limitations described in this
section shall be governed by the following conditions and
definitions:
(a) Benefits paid or payable in a form other than a straight life
annuity (with no ancillary benefits) or where the employee
contributes to the plan or makes rollover contributions shall be
adjusted on an actuarially equivalent basis in accordance with
applicable regulations to determine the limitation contained
herein;
(b) In the case of a benefit which commences prior to the
attainment of age 62 by the participant, the limitation herein
shall be adjusted on an actuarially equivalent basis in
accordance with applicable regulations to the amount
determined pursuant to this section commencing at age 62;
however, in the case of a qualified participant (a participant
with respect to whom a period of at least 15 years of service as
a full-time employee of a police or fire department or as a
member of the Armed Forces of the United States is taken into
account in determining the amount of benefit), the limitation
contained herein shall not apply;
(c) In the case of a benefit which commences after attainment of
age 65 by the participant, the limitation herein shall be
adjusted on an actuarially equivalent basis in accordance with
applicable regulations to the amount determined herein
commencing at age 65;
(d) Benefits paid to a participant which total less than $10,000
from all defined benefit plans maintained by the employer
expressed as an annual benefit shall be deemed not to exceed
the limitation of this section, provided that the employer has
not at any time maintained a defined contribution plan in which
the participant has participated; however, in the case of a
participant who is not receiving a disability retirement benefit
or a survivor benefit hereunder (if applicable), with fewer than
10 years of participation, the limitation expressed in this
Subsection H(1)(d) shall be reduced by 1/10 for each year of
§ 85-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-10
1:31
participation less than 10, but in no event shall this limitation
be less than $1,000;
(e) The limitations expressed herein shall be based upon plan
years for calculation purposes, shall be applied to all defined
benefit plans maintained by the employer as one defined
benefit plan and to all defined contribution plans maintained by
the employer as one defined contribution plan, and shall be
applied and interpreted consistent with Code Section 415 and
regulations thereunder as applicable to government plans in
general and this plan in particular;
(f) In the case of a survivor benefit under § 85-12B or a disability
retirement benefit under § 85-11B hereunder (if applicable),
the adjustment under Subsection H(1)(b) and (e) hereof shall
not apply, and the applicable limitation shall be the limitation
contained herein without regard to the age or years of service
or participation of the benefit recipient;
(g) Effective for distributions with annuity starting dates
beginning on or after December 31, 2008, notwithstanding any
other plan provisions to the contrary, the applicable mortality
table used solely for purposes of adjusting any benefit or
limitation under Section 415(b)(2)(B), (C) or (D) of the Internal
Revenue Code, as set forth in the applicable maximum benefit
limitations section of the plan is the applicable mortality table
under Code Section 417(e)(3)(B); and
(h) Effective as of January 1, 2008, for the purpose of Code Section
415(b)(1)(A), the "applicable mortality table" and "applicable
interest rate" are found in Rev. Rul. 2007-67.
(2) Incorporation of Code Section 415 by reference. Notwithstanding
anything contained in this section to the contrary, the limitations,
adjustments, and other requirements prescribed in this section
shall at all times comply with the provisions of Code Section 415
and the regulations thereunder (as such apply to governmental
plans), the terms of which are specifically incorporated herein by
reference. Effective for limitation years beginning on and after July
1, 2007, the plan shall comply with the final regulations issued
under Code Section 415.
I. Required distributions.
(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this plan, the entire benefit
of any participant who becomes entitled to benefits prior to his
death shall be distributed either:
(a) Not later than the required beginning date; or
(b) Over a period beginning not later than the required beginning
date and extending over the life of such participant or over the
§ 85-10 ETNA CODE § 85-10
1:32
lives of such participant and a designated beneficiary (or over
a period not extending beyond the life expectancy of such
participant, or the joint life expectancies of such participant
and a designated beneficiary).
If a participant who is entitled to benefits under this plan dies
prior to the date when his entire interest has been distributed
to him after distribution of his benefits has begun in
accordance with Subsection I(1)(b) above, the remaining
portion of such benefit shall be distributed at least as rapidly
as under the method of distribution being used under
Subsection I(1)(b) as of the date of his death.
(2) If a participant who is entitled to benefits under this plan dies
before distribution of his benefit has begun, the entire interest of
such employee shall be distributed within five years of the death of
such employee, unless the following sentence is applicable. If any
portion of the employee's interest is payable to (or for the benefit
of) a designated beneficiary, such portion shall be distributed over
the life of such designated beneficiary (or over a period not
extending beyond the life expectancy of such beneficiary), and such
distributions begin not later than one year after the date of the
employee's death or such later date as provided by regulations
issued by the Secretary of the Treasury; then for purposes of the
five-year rule set forth in the preceding sentence, the benefit
payable to the beneficiary shall be treated as distributed on the
date on which such distributions begin. Provided, however, that
notwithstanding the preceding sentence, if the designated
beneficiary is the surviving spouse of the participant, then the date
on which distributions are required to begin shall not be earlier
than the date upon which the employee would have attained age
70 1/2; and further provided, if the surviving spouse dies before the
distributions to such spouse begin, this subparagraph shall be
applied as if the surviving spouse were the employee.
(3) For purposes of this section, the following definitions and
procedures shall apply:
(a) "Required beginning date" shall mean April 1 of the calendar
year following the later of the calendar year in which the
employee attains age 70 1/2, or the calendar year in which the
employee retires.
(b) The phrase "designated beneficiary" shall mean any individual
designated by the employee under this plan according to its
rules.
(c) Any amount paid to a child shall be treated as if it had been
paid to the surviving spouse if such amount will become
payable to the surviving spouse upon such child's reaching
§ 85-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-10
1:33
majority (or other designated event permitted under
regulations issued by the Secretary of the Treasury).
(d) For purposes of this section, the life expectancy of an employee
and/or the employee's spouse (other than in the case of a life
annuity) may be redetermined but not more frequently than
annually.
(4) General rules. The requirements of this section will take
precedence over any inconsistent provisions of the plan. All
distributions required under this section will be determined and
made in accordance with Section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue
Code and the Treasury regulations thereunder, and the employer's
good faith interpretation of such Code and regulations.
J. Assignment. The pension benefit payments prescribed herein shall not
be subject to attachment, execution, levy, garnishment or other legal
process and subject of a domestic relations order, mandated by a court
of competent jurisdiction, that clearly provides for proper distribution
of a portion of the pension benefit payments to an alternate payee
(former spouse of the participant) and does not require any benefit to
be paid in excess of the available earned and accrued under the plan.
K. Retired participants. Any participant who shall have retired prior to the
restatement date shall not have the benefit altered in any way by the
provisions of this amended and restated plan, except where otherwise
expressly provided herein. Such retired participants shall continue to
have their benefits governed by the terms of the plan in effect on the
day preceding the restatement date.
L. Limitation of liability. Nothing contained herein shall obligate the
employer, the plan administrator, any fiduciary or any agent or
representative of any of the foregoing to provide any retirement or
other benefit to any participant or beneficiary which cannot be provided
from the assets available in the pension fund, whether such benefits are
in pay status or otherwise payable under the terms of the plan. The
Council retains the right to amend or terminate this plan consistent
with applicable law at any time, with or without cause and whether or
not such action directly or indirectly results in the suspension,
reduction or termination of any benefit payable under the plan or in pay
status, and without liability to any person for any such action.
M. Personal right of participant. The right to receive any benefits under
this plan is a personal right of the participant and shall expire upon the
death of the participant. No heir, legatee, devisee, beneficiary, assignee
or other person claiming by or through a participant shall have any
interest in any benefits hereunder unless clearly and expressly so
provided by the terms of this plan or the provisions of applicable law. A
participant's election, failure to make an election or revocation of an
election hereunder shall be final and binding on all persons.
§ 85-10 ETNA CODE § 85-10
1:34
N. Nonduplication of benefit. To avoid any duplication of benefits, a
participant who is receiving a retirement benefit under the plan and
who shall resume employment shall have benefit payments suspended
until the first day of the month coincident with or next following the
date such employment shall cease. Upon resumption of benefit
payments, such participant shall receive the greater of the amount of
the suspended benefit or the amount of benefit based upon final
monthly average salary and aggregate service as of the date that such
period of resumed employment shall cease.
O. Direct rollovers.
(1) Notwithstanding any provision of the plan to the contrary that
would otherwise limit a distributee's election under this section, a
distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed by
the plan administrator, to have any portion of an eligible rollover
distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by
the distributee in a direct rollover.
(2) This Subsection O(2)(b) shall apply to distributions made on or
after January 1, 2006. Notwithstanding any provisions of the plan
to the contrary that would otherwise limit a distributee's election
under this section, if a distribution in excess of $1,000 is made and
the distributee does not make an election under Subsection O(2)(a)
and does not elect to receive the distribution directly, the plan
administrator shall make such transfer to an individual retirement
plan of a designated trustee or issuer pursuant to authority and
duties of the plan administrator section of the plan. The plan
administrator shall notify the distributee in writing, within a
reasonable period of time and as otherwise prescribed by law, that
the distribution may be transferred to another individual
retirement plan.
(3) For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
DIRECT ROLLOVER —
DISTRIBUTEE — Includes a participant or former participant. In
addition, the participant's or former participant's surviving spouse
and the participant's or former participant's spouse or former
spouse who is the alternate payee under a qualified domestic
A payment by the plan to the eligible retirement plan specified
by the distributee or the plan administrator, if the distributee
does not make an election.
(a)
Effective January 1, 2008, direct rollovers may be made to a
Roth IRA described in Section 408A of the Internal Revenue
Code to the extent that the applicable requirements of Code
Section 408A are satisfied with respect to any direct rollover
to such Roth IRA.
(b)
§ 85-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-10
1:35
relations order, as defined in Code Section 414(p), are distributees
with regard to the interest of the spouse or former spouse.
ELIGIBLE RETIREMENT PLAN — A qualified trust described in
Code Section 401(a), an individual retirement account described
in Code Section 408(a), an individual retirement annuity described
in Code Section 408(b), an annuity plan described in Code Section
403(a), an annuity contract described in Code Section 403(b), an
eligible plan under Section 457(b) of the Code which is maintained
by a state, political subdivision of a state, or any agency or
instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state and
which agrees to separately account for amounts transferred into
such plan from this plan.
ELIGIBLE ROLLOVER DISTRIBUTION —
Any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the
credit of the distributee, except that an eligible rollover
distribution does not include: any distribution that is one of
a series of substantially equal periodic payments (not less
frequently than annually) made for the life (or life expectancy)
of the distributee or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies)
of the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary,
or for a specified period of 10 years or more; any distribution
to the extent such distribution is required under Code Section
401(a)(9); and the portion of any distribution that is not
includible in gross income (determined without regard to the
exclusion for net unrealized appreciation with respect to
employer securities).
(a)
For purposes of the direct rollover provisions in this section
of the plan, a portion of a distribution shall not fail to be
an eligible rollover distribution merely because the portion
consists of after-tax employee contributions that are not
includible in gross income. However, such portion may be paid
only to an individual retirement account or annuity described
in Section 408(a) or (b) of the Code, or to a qualified defined
contribution plan described in Section 401(a) or 403(a) of the
Code (effective for distributions on or after January 1, 2007,
any qualified trust or Code Section 403(b) plan) that agrees
to separately account for amounts so transferred, including
separately accounting for the portion of such distribution
which is includible in gross income and the portion of such
distribution which is not so includible.
(b)
(4) This section applies to distributions made on or after January 1,
2010. Notwithstanding any provision of the plan to the contrary
that would otherwise limit a nonspouse beneficiary's election under
this section, a nonspouse beneficiary may elect to have any portion
of a plan distribution (that is payable to such nonspouse beneficiary
due to a participant's death) paid in a direct trustee-to-trustee
§ 85-10 ETNA CODE § 85-10
1:36
§ 85-11. Disability retirement.
transfer to an individual retirement account described in Code
Section 408(a) or to an individual retirement annuity described in
Section 408(b) (other than an endowment contract) that has been
established for the purposes of receiving the distribution on behalf
of such nonspouse beneficiary. For these purposes, a "nonspouse
beneficiary" is an individual who is a designated beneficiary (as
defined by Section 401(a)(9)(E) of the Internal Revenue Code) of a
participant and who is not the surviving spouse of such participant.
A. Disability retirement. A participant who shall incur a total and
permanent disability shall be entitled to a disability retirement benefit
as of the disability date.
B. Disability retirement benefits. A participant who retires due to a total
and permanent disability, pursuant to § 85-11A shall be eligible for a
disability retirement benefit equal to 50% of the member's salary at the
time the disability was incurred, provided that any member who
receives benefits for the same injuries under social security disability
shall have the participant's disability benefits offset or reduced by the
amount of such benefits. The amount of the monthly disability benefit
(before social security offset) shall be no less than 50% of the
participant's salary at the time the disability occurs.
C. Payment of disability benefits.
(1) Disability payments shall be made monthly as of the first day of
each month, commencing as of the first day of the month coincident
with or immediately following the participant's disability date and
continuing until the earliest of the death of the participant,
cessation of total and permanent disability, or attainment of normal
retirement age (such a participant upon attainment of normal
retirement age shall thereafter receive a normal retirement benefit
under the terms of the plan).
(2) A participant who shall fail to return within three months to
employment as an employee of the employer upon cessation of total
and permanent disability prior to attainment of normal retirement
age shall be deemed to have terminated employment as of the
disability date, and shall not be entitled to any distribution of
accumulated contributions pursuant to § 85-13B to the extent that
the total amount of disability payments exceeds the value of the
participant's accumulated contributions as of the disability date.
D. Verification of disability. The plan administrator shall in its sole
discretion determine whether a participant shall have incurred a total
and permanent disability. The plan administrator shall rely on the
report of a physician acceptable to the plan administrator. If the plan
administrator shall determine that a participant who is totally and
permanently disabled has recovered sufficiently to resume active
§ 85-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-11
1:37
§ 85-12. Death benefits.
employment as a police officer or if a participant refuses to undergo
a medical examination as directed by the plan administrator (such a
medical examination may not be required more frequently than once
in any given twelve-month period), the payment of disability retirement
benefits shall cease.
E. Cessation of disability. A participant who is receiving payment of
disability retirement benefits under this plan must notify the plan
administrator of any change which may cause a cessation of entitlement
to receipt of such benefits hereunder. If a participant fails to provide
immediate notice to the plan administrator of any such change in status
and continues to receive payment of benefits hereunder to which the
participant is not entitled, then the plan may take whatever action is
necessary to recover any amount of improperly paid amounts, including
legal action or offsetting such amounts against any future payments of
retirement or other benefits under the plan, including the costs of such
actions.
A. Death of participant. Upon the occurrence of the death of a participant,
there shall be benefits payable in accordance with the following
sections of this § 85-12.
B. Survivor benefit. If a participant shall die after commencement of
benefit payments or after becoming eligible to receive benefit
payments, a survivor benefit shall be paid to the surviving spouse, if
any, of the participant in an amount equal to 50% of the benefit the
participant was receiving or was eligible to receive as of the date of
death. The survivor benefit shall be paid to the surviving spouse until
the date of death of the surviving spouse. Upon the death of the
surviving spouse, the survivor benefit shall be paid monthly in equal
shares to the surviving dependent children of the deceased participant
until attainment of age 18 or, if attending college, under or attaining the
age of 23.
C. Payment of survivor benefit. The survivor benefit commences as of the
first day of the month coincident with or immediately following the date
of death of the participant. The survivor benefit shall be paid monthly to
the surviving spouse of the participant, if any, until the date of death of
the surviving spouse. Upon the death of the surviving spouse or if there
is no surviving spouse, the survivor benefit shall be paid monthly in
equal shares to the surviving dependent children of the deceased
participant who have not attained 18 years of age, or if attending
college, under or attaining the age of 23. The shares payable to the
surviving dependent children shall be adjusted as each child ceases to
be eligible to receive a share of the benefit hereunder.
D. Death of participant prior to retirement. If a participant shall die before
payment of a benefit has commenced and without eligibility for
payment of a survivor benefit under § 85-12B, the beneficiary shall be
§ 85-11 ETNA CODE § 85-12
1:38
§ 85-13. Termination of employment.
§ 85-14. Administration.
eligible to receive a distribution in an amount equal to the accumulated
contributions of the participant as of the date of death of the
participant.
E. Veterans' survivor benefits. Notwithstanding any other provision of the
plan to the contrary, in the case of the death of a participant who dies on
or after January 1, 2007, while performing qualified military service (as
defined in Code Section 414(u)), the survivors of the participant are
entitled to any additional benefits under the plan (if any) had the
participant resumed and then terminated employment on account of
death.
A. Rights of terminated employees. A participant who shall cease to be an
employee except as otherwise hereinbefore provided shall have all
interest and rights under this plan limited to those contained in the
following section of this article.
B. Distribution of accumulated contributions. A participant or beneficiary
of a participant, whose employment with the employer shall terminate
for any reason, including the death of the participant prior to
attainment of normal retirement age shall be entitled to receive a
distribution of accumulated contributions. Upon receipt of such
accumulated contributions, said participant and beneficiary shall not be
entitled to any further payments from the plan.
C. Deferred vested benefit. A participant who has completed at least 12
years of aggregate service and whose employment with the employer
shall terminate for any reason other than death or disability prior to
attainment of normal retirement age shall be entitled to elect to receive
a deferred vested benefit in lieu of a distribution of accumulated
contributions under § 85-13B. Such a deferred vested benefit shall be in
an amount equal to the participant's accrued benefit as of the date
employment terminates and shall commence after application pursuant
to § 85-10G as of the first day of the month coincident with or next
following the date on which the participant's normal retirement age
would be attained if the participant continued in employment until such
date. Any election made under this § 85-13C must be made in a writing
acceptable to the plan administrator within 90 days of the date which
was the last day of employment. If no election is made hereunder within
the applicable election period the participant shall be deemed to have
forever waived this election and shall receive a distribution of
accumulated contributions pursuant to § 85-13B hereof.
D. Forfeiture. To the extent permissible under the Code, rights under this
plan shall be subject to forfeiture pursuant to the act of July 8, 1978
(P.L. 752, No. 140), known as the "Public Employee Pension Forfeiture
Act," 43 P.S. § 1311 et seq.
§ 85-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-14
1:39
A. Plan administrator. The plan administrator shall be the committee or
the individual appointed by the Council who shall have the power and
authority to do all acts and to execute, acknowledge and deliver all
instruments necessary to implement and effectuate the purpose of this
plan. The plan administrator may delegate authority to act on its behalf
to any persons it deems appropriate. If a plan administrator is not
appointed, the Council shall be the plan administrator.
B. Police Pension Committee. If the Council shall appoint a Police Pension
Committee to administer the affairs of the plan, the Council shall
delegate such authority as it shall deem appropriate to the Committee.
The Committee shall consist of not more than five members appointed
by the Council. Each member of the Committee shall serve in that
capacity until the earliest of resignation, death, and removal or
otherwise. The Council may remove each member at any time, with or
without cause. Each member may resign by delivering written notice to
the Council and other members of the Committee. Vacancies on the
Committee shall be filled by the Council.
C. Authority and duties of the plan administrator.
(1) The plan administrator shall have full power and authority to do
whatever shall, in its judgment, be reasonably necessary for the
proper administration and operation of the plan. The interpretation
or construction placed upon any term or provision of the plan by
the plan administrator or any action of the plan administrator taken
in good faith shall, upon the Council's review and approval thereof,
be final and conclusive upon all parties hereto, whether employees,
participants or other persons concerned. By way of specification
and not limitation and except as specifically limited hereafter, the
plan administrator is authorized:
(a) To construe this plan;
(b) To determine all questions affecting the eligibility of any
employee to participate herein;
(c) To compute the amount and source of any benefit payable
hereunder to any participant or beneficiary;
(d) To authorize any and all disbursements;
(e) To prescribe any procedure to be followed by any participant
and/or other person in filing any application or election;
(f) To prepare and distribute, in such manner as may be required
by law or as the plan administrator deems appropriate,
information explaining the plan;
(g) To require from the employer or any participant such
information as shall be necessary for the proper administration
of the plan;
§ 85-14 ETNA CODE § 85-14
1:40
(h) To appoint and retain any individual to assist in the
administration of the plan, including such legal, clerical,
accounting and actuarial services as may be required by any
applicable law or laws; and
(i) To select an individual retirement plan provider (either the
state or a federally regulated financial institution) and invest
funds in connection with the rollover of mandatory
distributions as described in § 85-10O(2).
(2) The plan administrator shall have no power to add to, subtract from
or modify the terms of the plan or change or add to any benefits
provided by the plan, or to waive or fail to apply any requirements
of eligibility for benefits under the plan. Further, the plan
administrator shall have no power to adopt, amend, or terminate
the plan, to select or appoint any trustee or to determine or require
any contributions to the plan, said powers being exclusively
reserved to the Council.
D. Police Pension Committee organization. If the Council appoints a
Committee, it may organize itself in any manner deemed appropriate to
effectuate its purposes hereunder, subject to the following:
(1) The Committee shall act by a majority of its members at the time in
office and such action may be taken either by vote at a meeting or
in writing without a meeting.
(2) The Committee shall, from time to time, appoint a Chairman, a
Secretary who may, but need not, be a Committee member, and
such other agents as it may deem advisable.
(3) The Committee may, from time to time, authorize any one or more
of its members to execute any document or documents including
any application, request, certificate, notice, consent, waiver or
direction and shall notify the Council, in writing, of the name or
names of the member or members so authorized. In the absence of
a designation, the Chairman shall be deemed to be so authorized.
Any trustee or other fiduciary appointed hereunder shall accept
and be fully protected in relying upon any document executed by
the designated member or members (or the Chairman in the
absence of a designation) as representing a valid action by the
Committee until the Committee shall file with such fiduciary a
written revocation of such designation.
(4) The Committee or its delegate shall maintain and keep such
records as are necessary for the efficient operation of the plan or as
may be required by any applicable law, regulation or ruling and
shall provide for the preparation and filing of such forms or reports
as may be required to be filed with any governmental agency or
department and with the participants and/or other persons entitled
to benefits under the plan.
§ 85-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-14
1:41
E. Plan administrator costs. The plan administrator shall serve without
compensation for services unless otherwise agreed by the Council in
writing. All reasonable expenses incident to the functioning of the plan
administrator, including, but not limited to, fees of accountants,
counsel, actuaries and other specialists and other costs of
administering the plan, may be paid from the pension fund upon
approval by the Council to the extent permitted under applicable law
and not otherwise paid by the employer.
F. Hold harmless. No member of the Council, the plan administrator, nor
any other person involved in the administration of the plan shall be
liable to any person on account of any act or failure to act which is
taken or omitted to be taken in good faith in performing their respective
duties under the terms of this plan. To the extent permitted by law, the
employer shall, and hereby does agree to, indemnify and hold harmless
the plan administrator and each successor and each of any such
individual's heirs, executors and administrators, and the delegates and
appointees (other than any person, bank, firm or corporation which is
independent of the employer and which renders services to the plan for
a fee) from any and all liability and expenses, including counsel fees,
reasonably incurred in any action, suit or proceeding to which he is or
may be made a party by reason of being or having been a member,
delegate or appointee of the plan administrator, except in matters
involving criminal liability, intentional or willful misconduct. If the
employer purchases insurance to cover claims of a nature described
above, then there shall be no right of indemnification except to the
extent of any deductible amount under the insurance coverage or to the
extent of the amount the claims exceed the insured amount.
G. Approval of benefits. The plan administrator shall review and approve
or deny any application for retirement benefits within 30 days following
receipt thereof or within such longer time as may be necessary under
the circumstances. Any denial of an application for retirement benefits
shall be in writing and shall specify the reason for such denial.
H. Appeal procedure. Any person whose application for retirement
benefits is denied, who questions the amount of benefit paid, who
believes a benefit should have commenced which did not so commence
or who has some other claim arising under the plan ("claimant"), shall
first seek a resolution of such claim under the procedure hereinafter set
forth.
(1) Any claimant shall file a notice of the claim with the plan
administrator which shall fully describe the nature of the claim.
The plan administrator shall review the claim and make an initial
determination approving or denying the claim.
(2) If the claim is denied in whole or in part, the plan administrator
shall, within 90 days (or such other period as may be established by
applicable law) from the time the application is received, mail
notice of such denial to the claimant. Such ninety-day period may
§ 85-14 ETNA CODE § 85-14
1:42
§ 85-15. The pension fund.
be extended by the plan administrator if special circumstances so
require for up to 90 additional days by the plan administrator's
delivering notice of such extension to the claimant within the first
ninety-day period. Any notice hereunder shall be written in a
manner calculated to be understood by the claimant and, if a
notice of denial, shall set forth (i) the specific plan provisions
on which the denial is based, (ii) an explanation of additional
material or information, if any necessary to perfect such claim and
a statement of why such material or information is necessary, and
(iii) an explanation of the review procedure.
(3) Upon receipt of notice denying the claim, the claimant shall have
the right to request a full and fair review by the Council of the
initial determination. Such request for review must be made by
notice to the Council within 60 days of receipt of such notice of
denial. During such review, the claimant or a duly authorized
representative shall have the right to review any pertinent
documents and to submit any issues or comments in writing. The
Council shall, within 60 days after receipt of the notice requesting
such review, (or in special circumstances, such as where the
Council in its sole discretion holds a hearing, within 120 days of
receipt of such notice), submit its decision in writing to the person
or persons whose claim has been denied. The decision shall be
final, conclusive and binding on all parties, shall be written in a
manner calculated to be understood by the claimant and shall
contain specific references to the pertinent plan provisions on
which the decision is based.
(4) Any notice of a claim questioning the amount of a benefit in pay
status shall be filed within 90 days following the date of the first
payment which would be adjusted if the claim is granted unless the
plan administrator allows a later filing for good cause shown.
(5) A claimant who does not submit a notice of a claim or a notice
requesting a review of a denial of a claim within the time
limitations specified above shall be deemed to have waived such
claim or right to review.
A. Operation of the pension fund.
(1) The Council is hereby authorized to hold and supervise the
investment of the assets of the pension fund, subject to the
provisions of the laws of the commonwealth and of this plan and
any amendment thereto.
(2) The pension fund shall be used to pay benefits as provided in the
plan and, to the extent not paid directly by the employer, to pay the
expenses of administering the plan pursuant to authorization by the
employer.
§ 85-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-15
1:43
(3) The employer intends the plan to be permanent and for the
exclusive benefit of its employees. It expects to make the
contributions to the pension fund required under the plan. The
employer shall not be liable in any manner for any insufficiency in
the pension fund; benefits are payable only from the pension fund,
and only to the extent that there are monies available therein.
(4) The pension fund will consist of all funds held by the employer
under the plan, including contributions made pursuant to the
provisions hereof and the investments, reinvestments and proceeds
thereof. The pension fund shall be held, managed, and
administered pursuant to the terms of the plan. Except as
otherwise expressly provided in the plan, the employer has
exclusive authority and discretion to manage and control the
pension fund assets. The employer may, however, appoint a trustee,
custodian and/or investment manager, at its sole discretion.
B. Powers and duties of employer. With respect to the pension fund, the
employer shall have the following powers, rights and duties, in addition
to those vested in it elsewhere in the plan or by law, unless such duties
are delegated.
(1) To retain in cash so much of the pension fund as it deems advisable
and to deposit any cash so retained in any bank or similar financial
institution (including any such institution which may be appointed
to serve as trustee hereunder), without liability for interest
thereon.
(2) To invest and reinvest the principal and income of the fund and
keep said fund invested, without distinction between principal and
income, in securities which are at the time legal investments for
fiduciaries under the Pennsylvania Fiduciaries Investment Act, or
as the same may be subsequently modified or amended.
(3) To sell property held in the fund at either public or private sale for
cash or on credit at such times as it may deem appropriate; to
exchange such property; to grant options for the purchase or
exchange thereof.
(4) To consent to and participate in any plan of reorganization,
consolidation, merger, extension or other similar plan affecting
property held in the fund; to consent to any contract, lease,
mortgage, purchase, sale or other action by any corporation
pursuant to any such plan.
(5) To exercise all conversion and subscription rights pertaining to
property held in the fund.
(6) To exercise all voting rights with respect to property held in the
fund and in connection therewith to grant proxies, discretionary or
otherwise.
§ 85-15 ETNA CODE § 85-15
1:44
(7) To place money at any time in a deposit bank deemed to be
appropriate for the purposes of this plan no matter where situated,
including in those cases where a bank has been appointed to serve
as trustee hereunder, the savings department of its own
commercial bank.
(8) In addition to the foregoing powers, the employer shall also have all
of the powers, rights, and privileges conferred upon trustees by the
Pennsylvania Fiduciaries Investment Act, or as the same may be
subsequently modified or amended, and the power to do all acts,
take all proceedings and execute all rights and privileges, although
not specifically mentioned herein, as the employer may deem
necessary to administer the pension fund.
(9) To maintain and invest the assets of this plan on a collective and
commingled basis with the assets of other pension plans
maintained by the employer, provided that the assets of each
respective plan shall be accounted for and administered separately.
(10) To invest the assets of the pension fund in any collective
commingled trust fund maintained by a bank or trust company,
including any bank or trust company which may act as a trustee
hereunder. In this connection, the commingling of the assets of this
plan with assets of other eligible, participating plans through such
a medium is hereby specifically authorized. Any assets of the plan
which may be so added to such collective trusts shall be subject to
all of the provisions of the applicable declaration of trust, as
amended from time to time, which declaration, if required by its
terms or by applicable law, is hereby adopted as part of the plan, to
the extent of the participation in such collective or commingled
trust fund by the plan.
(11) To make any payment or distribution required or advisable to carry
out the provisions of the plan, provided that if a trustee is
appointed by the employer, such trustee shall make such
distribution only at the direction of the employer.
(12) To compromise, contest, arbitrate, enforce or abandon claims and
demands with respect to the plan.
(13) To retain any funds or property subject to any dispute without
liability for the payment of interest thereon, and to decline to make
payment or delivery thereof until final adjudication is made by a
court of competent jurisdiction.
(14) To pay, and to deduct from and charge against the pension fund,
any taxes which may be imposed thereon, whether with respect to
the income, property or transfer thereof, or upon or with respect to
the interest of any person therein, which the fund is required to
pay; to contest, in its discretion, the validity or amount of any tax,
assessment, claim or demand which may be levied or made against
§ 85-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-15
1:45
or in respect of the pension fund, the income, property or transfer
thereof, or in any matter or thing connected therewith.
(15) To appoint any persons or firms (including but not limited to
accountants, investment advisors, counsel, actuaries, physicians,
appraisers, consultants, professional plan administrators and other
specialists), or otherwise act to secure specialized advice or
assistance, as it deems necessary or desirable in connection with
the management of the fund; to the extent not prohibited by
applicable law, the employer shall be entitled to rely conclusively
upon and shall be fully protected in any action or omission taken by
it in good faith reliance upon, the advice or opinion of such persons
or firms, provided such persons or firms were prudently chosen by
the employer, taking into account the interests of the participants
and beneficiaries and with due regard to the ability of the persons
or firms to perform their assigned functions.
(16) To retain the services of one or more persons or firms for the
management of (including the power to acquire and dispose of) all
or any part of the fund assets, provided that each of such persons
or firms is registered as an investment advisor under the
Investment Advisors Act of 1940, is a bank (as defined in that act),
or is an insurance company qualified to manage, acquire or dispose
of pension trust assets under the laws of more than one state; in
such event, the employer shall follow the directions of such
investment manager or managers with respect to the acquisition
and disposition of fund assets, but shall not be liable for the acts or
omissions of such investment manager or managers, nor shall it be
under any obligation to review or otherwise manage any fund
assets which are subject to the management of such investment
manager or managers. If the employer appoints a trustee, the
trustee shall not be permitted to retain such an investment
manager except with the express written consent of the employer.
C. Common investments. The employer shall not be required to make
separate investments for individual participants or to maintain separate
investments for each participant's account, but may invest
contributions and any profits or gains therefrom in common
investments.
D. Compensation and expenses of appointed trustee. If a trustee is
appointed, the trustee shall be entitled to such reasonable
compensation as shall from time to time be agreed upon by the
employer and the trustee, unless such compensation is prohibited by
law. Such compensation, and all expenses reasonably incurred by the
trustee in carrying out its functions, shall constitute a charge upon the
employer or the pension fund, which may be executed at any time after
30 days written notice to the employer. the employer shall be under no
obligation to pay such costs and expenses, and, in the event of its failure
to do so, the trustee shall be entitled to pay the same, or to be
reimbursed for the payment thereof, from the pension fund.
§ 85-15 ETNA CODE § 85-15
1:46
§ 85-16. Amendment and termination of pension plan or pension
fund.
E. Periodic accounting. If a trustee is appointed, the pension fund shall be
evaluated annually, or at more frequent intervals, by the trustee and a
written accounting rendered as of each fiscal year end of the fund, and
as of the effective date of any removal or resignation of the trustee, and
such additional dates as requested by the employer, showing the
condition of the fund and all receipts, disbursements and other
transactions effected by the trustee during the period covered by the
accounting, based on fair market values prevailing as of such date.
F. Value of the pension fund. All determinations as to the value of the
assets of the pension fund, and as to the amount of the liabilities
thereof, shall be made by the employer or its appointed trustee, whose
decisions shall be final and conclusive and binding on all parties hereto,
the participants and beneficiaries and their estates. in making any such
determination, the employer or trustee shall be entitled to seek and rely
upon the opinion of or any information furnished by brokers, appraisers
and other experts, and shall also be entitled to rely upon reports as to
sales and quotations, both on security exchanges and otherwise as
contained in newspapers and in financial publications.
A. Amendment of the plan. The employer may amend this plan at any time
or from time to time by an instrument in writing executed in the name
of the employer under its municipal seal by officers duly authorized to
execute such instrument and delivered to the Council; provided,
however:
(1) That no amendment shall deprive any participant or any
beneficiary of a deceased participant of any of the benefits to which
he is entitled under this plan with respect to contributions
previously made;
(2) That no amendment shall provide for the use of funds or assets held
under this plan other than for the benefit of employees and no
funds contributed to this plan or assets of this plan shall, except as
provided in § 85-16E, ever revert to or be used or enjoyed by the
employer; and
(3) That no amendment to the plan which provides for a benefit
modification shall be made unless the cost estimate described in
§ 85-17C has been prepared and presented to the Council in
accordance with the Act.
B. Termination of the plan. The employer shall have the power to
terminate this plan in its entirety at any time by an instrument in
writing executed in the name of the employer.
C. Automatic termination of contributions. Subject to the provisions of the
Act governing financially distressed municipalities, the liability of the
§ 85-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-16
1:47
§ 85-17. Funding standard requirements.
employer to make contributions to the pension fund shall automatically
terminate upon liquidation or dissolution of the employer, upon its
adjudication as a bankrupt or upon the making of a general assignment
for the benefit of its creditors.
D. Distribution upon termination.
(1) In the event of the termination of the plan, all amounts of vested
benefits accrued by the affected participants as of the date of such
termination, to the extent funded on such date, shall be
nonforfeitable hereunder. In the event of termination of the plan,
the employer shall direct either: (a) that the plan administrator
continue to hold the vested accrued benefits of participants in the
pension fund in accordance with the provisions of the plan (other
than those provisions related to forfeitures) without regard to such
termination until all funds have been distributed in accordance
with the provisions; or (b) that the plan administrator immediately
distribute to each participant an amount equal to the vested
accrued benefit to the date.
(2) If there are insufficient assets in the pension fund to provide for all
vested accrued benefits as of the date of plan termination, priority
shall first be given to the distribution of any amounts attributable to
mandatory or voluntary employee contributions before assets are
applied to the distribution of any vested benefits attributable to
other sources hereunder.
(3) All other assets attributable to the terminated plan shall be
distributed and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of
applicable law and the terms of any instrument adopted by the
employer which effects such termination.
E. Residual assets. If all liabilities to vested participants and any others
entitled to receive a benefit under the terms of the plan have been
satisfied and there remain any residual assets in the pension fund, such
residual assets remaining shall be returned to the employer insofar as
such return does not contravene any provision of law, and any
remaining balance, in excess of employer contributions, shall be
returned to the commonwealth.
F. Exclusive benefit rule. In the event of the discontinuance and
termination of the plan as provided herein, the employer shall dispose
of the pension fund in accordance with the terms of the plan and
applicable law; at no time prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities under
the plan shall any part of the corpus or income of the pension fund,
after deducting any administrative or other expenses properly
chargeable to the pension fund, be used for or diverted to purposes
other than for the exclusive benefit of the participants in the plan, their
beneficiaries or their estates.
§ 85-16 ETNA CODE § 85-17
1:48
A. Actuarial valuations.
(1) The plan's actuary shall perform an actuarial valuation at least
biennially unless the employer is applying or has applied for
supplemental state assistance pursuant to Section 603 of the Act,
whereupon actuarial valuation reports shall be made annually.
(2) Such biennial actuarial valuation report shall be made as of the
beginning of each plan year occurring in an odd-numbered
calendar year, beginning with the year 1985.
(3) Such actuarial valuation shall be prepared and certified by an
approved actuary, as such term is defined in the Act.
(4) The expenses attributable to the preparation of any actuarial
valuation report or investigation required by the Act or any other
expense which is permissible under the terms of the Act and which
are directly associated with administering the plan shall be an
allowable administrative expense payable from the assets of the
pension fund. Such allowable expenses shall include but not be
limited to the following:
(a) Investment costs associated with obtaining authorized
investments and investment management fees;
(b) Accounting expenses;
(c) Premiums for insurance coverage on fund assets;
(d) Reasonable and necessary counsel fees incurred for advice or
to defend the fund; and
(e) Legitimate travel and education expenses for plan officials;
provided, however, that the municipal officials of the employer,
in their fiduciary role, shall monitor the services provided to
the plan to ensure that the expenses are necessary, reasonable
and benefit the plan; and further provided, that the plan
administrator shall document all such expenses item by item
and, where necessary, hour by hour.
B. Duties of chief administrative officer.
(1) Such actuarial reports shall be prepared and filed under the
supervision of the chief administrative officer.
(2) The chief administrative officer of the plan shall determine the
financial requirements of the plan on the basis of the most recent
actuarial report and shall determine the minimum municipal
obligation of the employer with respect to funding the plan for any
given plan year. The chief administrative officer shall submit the
financial requirements of the plan and the minimum municipal
obligation of the employer to the Council annually and shall certify
§ 85-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-17
1:49
§ 85-18. Miscellaneous provisions.
the accuracy of such calculations and their conformance with the
Act.
C. Benefit plan modifications. Prior to the adoption of any benefit plan
modification by the employer, the chief administrative officer of the plan
shall provide to the Council a cost estimate of the proposed benefit plan
modification. Such estimate shall be prepared by an approved actuary,
which estimate shall disclose to the Council the impact of the proposed
benefit plan modification on the future financial requirements of the
plan and the future minimum municipal obligation of the employer with
respect to the plan.
A. Plan not a contract of employment. No police officer of the employer
nor anyone else shall have any rights whatsoever against the employer
or the plan administrator as a result of this plan except those expressly
granted to them hereunder. Nothing herein shall be construed to give
any police officer the right to remain on the police force of the
employer.
B. Masculine/feminine; singular/plural. For purposes of this plan, the
masculine shall be read for the feminine and the singular shall be read
for the plural, wherever the person or context shall plainly so require.
C. Construction of document. This plan may be executed and/or
conformed in any number of counterparts, each of which shall be
deemed an original and shall be construed and enforced according to
the laws of the commonwealth, excepting such commonwealth's choice
of law rules.
D. Headings. The headings of articles are included solely for convenience
of reference, and if there be any conflict between such headings and the
text of the plan, the text shall control.
E. Severability of provisions. In case any provisions of this plan shall be
held illegal or invalid for any reason, said illegality or invalidity shall not
affect the remaining parts of this plan, and the plan shall be construed
and enforced as if said illegal and invalid provisions had never been
inserted therein.
F. Incapacity of participant. If any participant shall be physically or
mentally incapable of receiving or acknowledging receipt of any
payment of pension benefits hereunder, the plan administrator, upon
the receipt of satisfactory evidence that such participant is so
incapacitated and that another person or institution is maintaining him,
may provide for such payment of pension benefits hereunder to such
person or institution so maintaining him, and any such payments so
made shall be deemed for every purpose to have been made to such
participant.
§ 85-17 ETNA CODE § 85-18
1:50
G. Liability of officers of the plan administrator and/or employer. Subject
to the provisions of the Act and unless otherwise specifically required
by other applicable laws, no past, present or future officer of the
employer shall be personally liable to any participant, beneficiary or
other person under any provision of the plan.
H. Assets of the fund. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to give
any participant or beneficiary any interest in any specific property of
the pension fund or any right except to receive such distributions as are
expressly provided for under the plan.
I. Pension fund for sole benefit of participants. The income and principal
of the pension fund are for the sole use and benefit of the participants
covered hereunder and, to the extent permitted by law, shall be free,
clear and discharged from and are not to be in any way liable for debts,
contracts or agreements, now contracted or which may hereafter be
contracted, and from all claims and liabilities now or hereafter incurred
by any participant or beneficiary.
J. Information to be furnished by the employer. The employer shall furnish
to the plan administrator (and where applicable, the trustee)
information in the employer's possession as the plan administrator and
the trustee shall require from time to time to perform their duties under
the plan.
K. Benefits for a deceased participant. If any benefit shall be payable
under the plan to or on behalf of a participant who has died, if the plan
provides that the payment of such benefits shall be made to the
participant's estate, and if no administration of such participant's estate
is pending in the court of proper jurisdiction, then the plan
administrator, at its sole option, may pay such benefits to the surviving
spouse of such deceased participant, or, if there is no surviving spouse,
to such participant's then living issue, per stirpes; provided, however,
that nothing contained herein shall prevent the plan administrator from
insisting upon the commencement of estate administration proceedings
and the delivery of any such benefits to a duly appointed executor or
administrator.
L. Personal liability. Subject to the provisions of the Act and unless
otherwise specifically required by other applicable laws, no past,
present or future officer or agent of the employer or plan administrator
shall be personally liable to any participant, beneficiary or other person
under any provision of the plan.
§ 85-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-18
1:51
Chapter 91
PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 91-1. Borough Planning Commission established.
A Borough Planning Commission, composed of five members, appointed in
the manner provided by law, is hereby created and established in and for
the Borough of Etna. The said Borough Planning Commission shall perform
all the duties and may exercise any and all the powers vested by law
in planning agencies in boroughs. Provided that the persons constituting
the Borough Planning Commission now functioning in the Borough shall
constitute the Planning Commission hereby created, and nothing in this
chapter shall affect the tenure of the said present Borough Planning
Commission, but all vacancies hereafter occurring in the said Planning
Commission, regardless of the cause thereof, shall be filled in accordance
with the provisions of the law governing planning agencies in boroughs at
the time of the occurrence of the said vacancy.
Chapter 96
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 85-18 ETNA CODE § 91-1
1:52
ARTICLE I
Establishment and Organization
[Adopted 12-20-1973 by Ord. No. 1068 (Ch. I, Part 4, of the 1974
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 96-1. Police Department established; Chief of Police.
A Police Department is hereby established in and for the Borough of Etna.
The Chief of Police shall be the chief executive of the Police Department. He
shall, under the direction of the Mayor, be in charge of the police force and
have supervision over its members in the exercise of their powers, duties
and authority.
§ 96-2. Subordinate classifications in Police Department. [Amended
5-19-2020 by Ord. No. 1383]
Subordinate to the Chief of Police in the Police Department, the
classifications of Sergeant and Patrolman are hereby established, or those
of such classifications to which Council shall at any time have appointed one
or more police officers. The priority of authority among such subordinate
classifications shall be in the order above listed. The number of persons
to serve in each of such subordinate classifications, on a full-time and/or
part-time basis, and the compensation of each shall be determined by the
Borough Council from time to time.
§ 96-3. Special policemen.
Nothing herein contained shall affect the authority of the Mayor to appoint
special policemen during emergencies.
§ 96-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 96-3
1:53

ARTICLE II
Workers' Compensation for Police Officers
[Adopted 4-21-1998 by Ord. No. 1251]
§ 96-4. Enacting clause.
Therefore, in consideration of the foregoing, be it ordained and enacted by
the Council of the Borough of Etna, and it is hereby ordained and enacted
by the authority of the same, that from and after the effective date of
this article, the following ordinance shall be in full force and effect in the
Borough of Etna.
§ 96-5. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Borough of Etna Restitution of Workers'
Compensation Paid to Police Officers Ordinance."
§ 96-6. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances conflicting herewith are hereby
repealed.
§ 96-7. Purpose.
This article is adopted for the above-stated purposes and to aid in
compensating victims for harm directly caused by an offender; to decrease
the cost of workers' compensation insurance in order to minimize taxes to
the residents of the Borough of Etna; to minimize losses sustained by the
Borough and its police officers through workers' compensation payments
which occur as a direct result of criminal conduct inflicted upon its police
officers by criminal offenders; and to obtain restitution for losses sustained
by the Borough and its police officers as the direct result of criminal conduct
resulting in personal injury to police officers in the performance of their
official duties.
§ 96-8. Rules of construction.
In the construction of this article, the rules and definitions contained in
this section shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly
indicates otherwise:
A. Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural the
singular.
B. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense.
C. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary.
D. The word "may" is permissive.
E. This article shall be liberally construed to accomplish its purpose to
protect the public's health, safety, and welfare.
§ 96-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 96-9
1:55
§ 96-9. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Etna.
BOROUGH MANAGER — The Manager of the Borough of Etna.
CRIME — Any offense punishable under Title 18 of the Pennsylvania
Consolidated Statutes or Title 75 of the Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes.
OFFENDER — Any person, except a victim, who criminally causes personal
injury to the person or property of another as a direct result of a crime
and who is adjudged guilty of any offense punishable under Title 18
Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes or Title 75 Pennsylvania Consolidated
Statutes.
PERSONAL INJURY — Actual bodily harm directly resulting from the crime.
POLICE OFFICER — Any person duly employed by the Borough of Etna who
is by law given the power to arrest when acting within the scope of the
person's employment.
RESTITUTION — The return of property of the victim or payments in cash
or the equivalent thereof pursuant to an order of court.
VICTIM — Any person, except an offender, who suffered injuries to his
person or property as a direct result of the crime. The term "victim"
specifically includes the Borough of Etna and any insurance company that
has compensated the victim for loss under an insurance contract.
§ 96-10. Requirement of offenders.
When required as a condition of probation or parole, offenders convicted
of a crime wherein a police officer suffered injury to property or personal
injury directly resulting from the crime shall make restitution in the amount
of the value of the loss sustained by the victim, the Borough or an insurance
company, as ordered by the sentencing court.
§ 96-11. Duties of police officers.
A. Request for information of loss. When a Borough police officer who has
suffered personal injury receives notification from the District
Attorney's office of a pending trial for the offender, the officer who
suffered personal injury shall request the Borough to provide to the
officer the monetary value of the loss sustained by the Borough and the
Borough's insurance carrier.
B. Reporting. If the offender is convicted of a crime which resulted in
personal injury to the Borough police officer, the police officer shall
inform the Assistant District Attorney prior to sentencing of the loss
sustained by the victim, the Borough, and the Borough's insurance
carrier so that restitution may be ordered by the court pursuant to 18
Pa.C.S.A. § 1106(c).
§ 96-9 ETNA CODE § 96-11
1:56
§ 96-12. Duties of Borough Manager.
§ 96-13. Validity.
The provisions of this article are severable, and if any of its provisions or
any part of any provisions shall be held unconstitutional or otherwise held
to be invalid, the decision of the court shall not affect or impair any of the
remaining provisions. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Council
of the Borough of Etna that this article would have been enacted had such
unconstitutional provisions or parts thereof not been included herein.
§ 96-14. When effective.
This article shall become effective when it is recorded in the Ordinance
Book of the Borough of Etna.
C. Preservation of private remedies. No judgment or order of restitution
shall bar the Borough or any police officer who sustained personal
injury, by appropriate action, to recover from the offender as otherwise
provided by law, provided that any civil award shall be reduced by the
amount paid under this article.
A. Notification of value of Borough loss. Upon request from a Borough
police officer who has suffered personal injury directly resulting from a
crime, the Borough Manager shall provide to the requesting officer the
monetary value of the loss sustained by the Borough and the Borough's
insurance carrier.
B. Value of loss. Value of Borough loss shall include, but not be limited to,
medical expenses, amount of medical expenses not covered by the
Borough insurance carrier, amount of compensation received by the
police officer during absence from duty caused by the offender and the
amount of compensation paid to the police officer not reimbursed by the
insurance carrier of the Borough, as a direct result of the offender's
crime.
§ 96-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 96-14
1:57
Chapter 103
RECORDS
§ 96-14 ETNA CODE § 96-14
1:58
ARTICLE I
Retention
[Adopted 7-12-1976 by Ord. No. 1099 (Ch. I, Part 8, of the 1974
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 103-1. Intention to follow records retention schedule.
The Borough of Etna, pursuant to Section 6 of the "Municipal Records
Act," declares its intent to follow such schedule by municipal ordinance or
resolution; and10
§ 103-2. Authority of Borough Secretary.
The Borough Secretary is authorized to submit from time to time resolution
for the disposition of certain public records, archives or printed public
documents, providing such dispositions are authorized by and in
conformance with operative schedules approved by the Local Government
Records Committee and on file with the Pennsylvania Historical and
Museum Commission.
§ 103-3. Records retention schedule adopted; destruction or other
disposition of certain records authorized. [Amended 9-17-1985 by
Res. No. 1175]
The Borough Secretary is authorized and directed to destroy or otherwise
dispose of the following schedule of public records, archives or other
printed public documents. . . .11
10.Editor's Note: The preamble to this ordinance stated that the Local Government Records
Committee had approved and filed with the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum
Commission a Municipal Records Retention and Disposition Schedule, pursuant to the
Municipal Records Act of the Commonwealth, and quoted Section 6 of that Act, which
authorized municipalities to declare intent to follow the schedule by municipal ordinance
or resolution, with each individual act of disposition to be approved by resolution of the
municipal governing body.
11.Editor's Note: The current schedule is available for public inspection and consultation
during office hours.
§ 103-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-3
1:59
Chapter 112
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
§ 103-3 ETNA CODE § 103-3
1:60
ARTICLE I
Real Estate Tax Collector
[Adopted 1-15-1985 by Ord. No. 1160 (Ch. I, Part 9, § 182, of the
1974 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 112-1. Compensation of Real Estate Tax Collector.
The Real Estate Tax Collector of the Borough of Etna shall receive as
compensation an annual sum of $5,657.12
12.Editor's Note: The salary of the Real Estate Tax Collector was increased to $5,657 by
motion of Borough Council in January 2013.
§ 112-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-1
1:61
Chapter 118
SOCIAL SECURITY
§ 118-1. Borough participation in social security system.
The Borough of Etna shall become a participant in the Social Security
System and provide that the benefits of old age and survivors insurance be
extended to its employees and officers.
§ 118-2. Execution and delivery of plan and agreement.
The proper officers of the Borough of Etna are hereby authorized and
directed to execute and deliver to the state agency of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania a plan or plans and agreement, required under Section 6 of
Act No. 491 of the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
and the Social Security Act, to extend coverage to the employees and
officers of the Borough of Etna and to do all other necessary things to
effectuate coverage of employees and officers under the old age and
survivors insurance system.
§ 118-3. Payroll deduction system, matching Borough payments
authorized.
The Borough Secretary and other officers are hereby authorized and
directed to establish a system of payroll deductions, to be matched by
payments of the Borough of Etna, to be made into the contribution fund
of the Social Security Act through the office of the state agency and to
make charges of this tax to the fund or funds from which wage and salary
payments are issued to employees of the Borough of Etna. Such payments
are to be made in accordance with the provisions of the law and regulations
promulgated by the state agency and the Federal Security Administrator.
Such payments which are delinquent shall bear interest at the rate of 1/2 of
1% per month until such time as payments are made.
§ 118-4. Appropriation into contribution fund.
Appropriation is hereby made from the proper fund or funds of the Borough
of Etna in the necessary amount to pay into the contribution fund as
provided in Section 4 of the enabling Act of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, and in accordance with the plan or plans and agreement.
§ 118-5. Date participation commences.
The Borough of Etna shall become a participant in the Social Security
System and such participation shall commence as of January 1, 1951.
§ 112-1 ETNA CODE § 118-6
1:62
§ 118-6. Social security coverage extended to part-time positions.
[Amended 12-14-1959 by Res. No. 892]
Section (d) of Title I of the plan and agreement between the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania and the above-named political subdivision, bearing the date
of the 12th day of December 1952, be amended to include the following
additional group(s): "9. Services in any class or classes of part-time
positions."13
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 134
ADVERTISING MATERIALS AND SIGNS
§ 134-1. Restrictions on distribution of handbills and other
advertising devices. [Amended 3-8-1954 by Ord. No. 804]
Hereafter it shall be unlawful for any person or persons, partnership,
corporation or company to distribute, throw or deposit, or cause to be
deposited, any handbills, dodgers or other advertising devices in, into or
upon any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks, yards or doorways of residences
within the limits of the Borough, provided that this section shall not apply
to the distribution of newspapers in any manner or to the distribution of any
material or article through the United States Mail or to the handing of any
literature or article to any person willing to receive it.14
§ 134-2. Distribution violations and penalties. [Amended
12-11-1989 by Ord. No. 1208]
Any person or persons, or corporation, partnership or company or their
agents, who or which violates § 134-1 of this chapter, shall for every such
violation, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600
and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of fine and costs, to
undergo imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
§ 134-3. Restrictions on posting of posters, signs, cards or
advertising matter. [Amended 6-9-1975 by Ord. No. 1088]
From and after the enactment of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for
any person or persons, association, partnership or corporation to place or
13.Editor's Note: The preamble to this resolution stated that on June 9, 1952, Council had
passed a resolution authorizing participation in the Social Security Program; that at the
time of the execution of the plan and agreement, the Borough exercised its discretion to
exclude certain optional groups; and that the Borough had now determined to extend
coverage to such additional group previously excluded. This resolution also provided that
the amendment to the plan and agreement be operative and effective as of January 1,
1960, subject to approval and acceptance by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the
Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare.
14.Editor's Note: Original Sections 2 and 3 of Ordinance No. 181 were repealed by Section 2
of Ordinance No. 804.
§ 118-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-3
1:63
attach, or cause to be placed or attached, any posters, signs, cards or
advertising matter whatsoever upon poles or elsewhere upon any buildings
or property owned or occupied by the Borough of Etna or within the
rights-of-way of the streets, roads and public ways of the Borough of Etna;
provided, however, that such prohibition shall not apply to any posters
or signs placed which are erected by or required to be erected by any
governmental body.
§ 134-4. Posting violations and penalties. [Amended 6-9-1975 by
Ord. No. 1088; 12-11-1989 by Ord. No. 1208]
Any person or persons, association, partnership or corporation who or
which violates any provision of § 134-3 of this chapter shall, for every such
violation, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$600 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of fine and costs,
to undergo imprisonment for not more than 30 days, provided that each
attachment or posting shall constitute a separate violation and each day
that any such attachment or posting remains shall constitute a separate
violation.
Chapter 147
ALCOHOL BEVERAGES
§ 147-1. Legislative intent.15
It is the intent of the Borough of Etna as an exercise of its police power
to promote the general health, safety and welfare of the residents of the
Borough by enacting this local ordinance, since it is the finding of the
Borough Council that the consumption of alcoholic beverages and/or the
possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages by persons on public
premises, except under controlled conditions, is detrimental to the health,
safety and welfare of the residents of the Borough and contributes to the
development of unsanitary conditions and the creation of nuisances. It is
further the intent of the Council of the Borough of Etna that this local
ordinance not be considered as a traffic regulation insofar as it relates to
motor vehicles or the operation thereof.
§ 147-2. Possession or consumption in public places prohibited.
[Amended 6-21-2011 by Ord. No. 1335]
A. No person shall have, possess, carry or transport any liquor, wine, beer
or other alcoholic beverages in open bottle or other open container in or
upon any public sidewalk, street, lane, highway, building, parking lot,
park or recreation area, or other public property, or in any vehicle upon
such area, within the Borough of Etna. No person shall drink or
otherwise consume any liquor, wine, beer or other alcoholic beverage in
15.Editor's Note: The headings of the sections of this chapter are part of this ordinance as
enacted or as amended.
§ 134-3 ETNA CODE § 147-2
1:64
§ 147-3. Discarding containers.
No person shall discard alcoholic or other beverage containers upon any
public sidewalk, street, lane, highway, parking lot, park or recreation area,
or other public property within the Borough of Etna, without express
permission of the Borough Council.
§ 147-4. Penalty for violation. [Amended 11-20-1984 by Ord. No.
1155; 12-11-1989 by Ord. No. 1208]
Every person who violates any provision of this chapter shall for every such
violation, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600
and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of fine and costs, to
undergo imprisonment for not more than 30 days, provided that each day
on which any such violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 147-5. Severability.
Should any section or provision of this local ordinance be declared by the
courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect or
impair the validity of this local ordinance as a whole or any part thereof
other than the particular provision so declared to be unconstitutional or
invalid.
Chapter 153
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
§ 153-1. Definitions. [Amended 5-19-1982 by Ord. No. 1137;
7-21-1998 by Ord. No. 1254]
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings:
ARCADE — A business or portion thereof not having a current liquor
license, having on its premises for use by the public of more than five video
devices and/or electromechanical devices.
ELECTROMECHANICAL DEVICES — Any machine operated by inserting a
coin or token, such as a pinball machine, bowling machine, or a pool table.
MUSIC DEVICE — A jukebox.
PROPRIETOR — The person in whose place of business any such
electromechanical device, music device or video device is placed for the
or upon any of the aforesaid public areas or property within the
Borough of Etna.
B. This chapter shall not be applicable to the use or consumption of
alcohol on the sidewalks of restaurants within the Borough of Etna that
are in compliance with the Borough's Sidewalk Cafe Ordinance.
§ 147-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-1
1:65
use, patronage or recreation of the public or of persons in or about said
place.
VIDEO DEVICE — Any machine, including any electromechanical device,
whose game or results are shown on a video screen.
§ 153-2. Devices to be licensed. [Amended 5-19-1982 by Ord. No.
1137]
From and after May 17, 1982, it shall be unlawful for a proprietor, person
or persons, firm or corporation to operate or permit to be operated within
the limits of the Borough of Etna any electromechanical device, music
device or video device for the playing of games and/or for amusement
through the insertion therein of a coin or other metal disc or any type of
token whatsoever, without first having procured a license therefor from the
Borough Secretary of the Borough of Etna.
§ 153-3. License fee when payable. [Amended 5-19-1982 by Ord. No.
1137; 1-20-2009 by Ord. No. 1322]
§ 153-4. Restrictions as to use of devices. [Amended 5-19-1982 by
Ord. No. 1137]
No proprietor, employee thereof or person in charge shall allow any minor
under 18 years of age to play or use any electromechanical device, music
device or video device during the academic year for the Shaler Area Public
School System between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 3:00 p.m. the following
day, except during school holidays and on Saturdays and Sundays.
§ 153-5. Form and contents of device license application and
license. [Amended 5-19-1982 by Ord. No. 1137]
It shall be the responsibility of the Borough Secretary of the Borough of
Etna, with the approval of the Borough Council, to establish an appropriate
application form for the obtaining of all licenses pertaining to this chapter.
It shall also be the responsibility of the Borough Secretary of the Borough of
A. The license fee for the operation of an electromechanical device shall
be $300 per annum, which includes pool tables, bowling, shuffle board,
pinball or any other machine operated by inserting a coin or token; the
license fee for the operation of a music device shall be $200 per annum;
and the license fee for the operation of any video device shall be $600
per annum. Pool tables without coin receptacles shall pay a license fee
of $50 per annum.
B. The license fee shall be paid annually to the Borough Secretary-
Manager on or before January 31 of each year. If the license fee is paid
after January 31 of each year but before the end of February of the
same year, an additional penalty of $50 per machine shall be paid. If the
license fee is paid after the end of February of each year, then the
penalty provisions set forth in Ordinance No. 1137 shall take effect.
§ 153-1 ETNA CODE § 153-5
1:66
Etna, with the approval of the Borough Council, to establish the appropriate
form for the licenses that shall issue hereunder.
§ 153-6. Arcade businesses to be licensed. [Amended 5-19-1982 by
Ord. No. 1137]
From and after May 17, 1982, it shall be unlawful for any proprietor, person
or persons, firm or corporation to operate or permit to be operated within
the limits of the Borough of Etna an arcade without first having procured
a license from the Borough Secretary of the Borough of Etna and paying
the appropriate fee therefor. Once procured, the said license shall not be
transferable.
§ 153-7. Arcade license fee; when payable. [Amended 5-19-1982 by
Ord. No. 1137]
The license fee for conducting and/or operation of an arcade within the
Borough of Etna shall be $5,000 per annum over and above the license
fees charged for each individual electromechanical device, music device
and video device. The license fee shall be paid annually to the Borough
Secretary of the Borough of Etna on or before January 31 of each year.
§ 153-8. Restrictions as to arcade businesses. [Amended 5-19-1982
by Ord. No. 1137]
§ 153-9. Form and contents of arcade license application and
license. [Amended 5-19-1982 by Ord. No. 1137]
It shall be the responsibility of the Borough Secretary of the Borough of
Etna, with the approval of Council, to establish an appropriate application
form for the obtaining of an arcade license. It shall also be the responsibility
of the Borough Secretary of the Borough of Etna, with the approval of
Council, to establish the appropriate form under which this license shall
issue.
A. No proprietor, employee thereof or person in charge shall allow any
minor under 18 years of age to play or use any electromechanical
device, music device or video device during the academic year for the
Shaler Area Public School System between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
3:00 p.m. the following day except during school holidays and on
Saturdays and Sundays.
B. It shall be unlawful for any proprietor to cause, permit or allow an
arcade to be located, operated or maintained within 1,000 feet of a
public or private school, church, public playground, medical building or
within 300 feet of any residential zone, said distance to be measured
from the entrance or exit in the most direct line or route on, along or
across said street or streets adjacent to said public or private school,
church, public playground, medical building or residential zone.
§ 153-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-10
1:67
§ 153-10. License not transferable between owners; new license not
required for substituted machine.
All licenses granted under the provisions of this chapter shall not be
transferable from one owner to another; provided, further, that it shall not
be required to secure a new license when one machine is replaced by
another, so long as the operator is licensed to operate the total number of
machines in his place of business.
§ 153-11. Inspections of licensed machines.
The Borough policemen, under direction of the Mayor, shall make periodical
inspections of the machines so licensed.
§ 153-12. Application for license; issuance.
Said person or persons, firm or corporation, using or operating, or causing
to be used or operated, any machine or apparatus designated in this
chapter, shall first make personal application for a license to the Borough
Secretary, which application shall set forth the name, nationality, residence
and present and previous occupation of the applicant; specific name and
kind of machine; number of machines to be licensed; location where
machine or machines are to be set up and operated. If the application
is approved by the Mayor, the Borough Secretary shall thereupon issue a
license for each separate machine or apparatus for a period of one year or
part thereof upon payment of the annual license fee for each machine.
§ 153-13. License plate to be fastened to or exposed on machine.
When such license or licenses are granted, and the fee therefor paid, the
Borough Secretary shall issue a metal plate to the applicant or applicants,
which shall be fastened or exposed in a conspicuous place upon each
machine so licensed before such machine may be used or operated.
§ 153-14. Provisions not applicable to certain types of machines.
These regulations and charges relative to licenses shall not apply to
automatic collection devices in connection with telephone or gas meters or
slot machines, wherein any coin is inserted thereby producing therefrom
a certain and uniform return in value for the coin so deposited, such as
a package of confectionery, cigarettes, articles of toilet, card or picture,
or other designated article, which said slot machine is specifically
manufactured to lawfully produce.
§ 153-15. Exhibit of licenses; suspension of licenses.
The licenses granted under this chapter shall be exhibited on the request of
the Mayor or any police officer, and the Mayor may, after affording a hearing
to the licensee, of which said hearing the licensee shall have at least 48
hours' notice, suspend any license herein granted when he deems it to be of
§ 153-10 ETNA CODE § 153-15
1:68
benefit to the public health, safety or morals, and when so suspended, that
portion of the unearned license fee shall be returned to the operator.
§ 153-16. Gambling devices not authorized.
Nothing in this chapter shall in any way be construed to authorize, license
or permit any gambling devices whatsoever, or any mechanism that has
been judicially determined to be a gambling device, or in any way contrary
to law, or that may be contrary to any future law or laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 153-17. Musical machines not to be operated between certain
hours. [Amended 3-8-1954 by Ord. No. 813]
The operator of any musical machine shall not be permitted to operate such
machine between the hours of 11:30 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., Eastern standard
time or Eastern daylight saving time, or whatever other standard of time is
generally observed in the Borough at the time.
§ 153-18. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-19-1982 by Ord. No.
1137; 11-20-1984 by Ord. No. 1156; 12-11-1989 by Ord. No. 1208]
Any proprietor, person or persons, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to
pay a fine of not less than $100 per day per violation and/or undergo
imprisonment in the Allegheny County Jail for a period not to exceed 10
days. Each day that any arcade and/or electromechanical device, music
device and/or video device shall be operated or used in violation of this
chapter shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. Repeated violations
of this chapter shall be considered separate grounds for revocation of any
license without any obligation on the part of the Borough of Etna to return
license fees previously paid.
§ 153-19. Severability. [Amended 5-19-1982 by Ord. No. 1137]
If any section, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
sections, sentences, clauses and phrases of this chapter as an entirety, it
being the legislative intent that this chapter shall stand notwithstanding the
invalidity of any such section, sentence, clause or phrase.
Chapter 160
ANIMALS
§ 153-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-19
1:69

ARTICLE I
Swine
[Adopted 1-10-1944 by Ord. No. 726 (Ch. III, Part 3, of the 1974
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 160-1. Unlawful to keep swine in Borough.
From and after the passage of this article, it shall be unlawful for any
person, firm or corporation to maintain any pigsty or keep any swine within
any portion of said Borough.
§ 160-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-8-1954 by Ord. No.
815; 12-11-1989 by Ord. No. 1208]
Any person, whether principal or agent, who violates any provision of this
article, shall for every such violation, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of not more than $600 and costs of prosecution and, in default of
payment of fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than
30 days, provided that each day on which any person, firm or corporation
violates any provision of this article shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 160-3. Additional actions or proceedings authorized.
In addition to the penalties herein provided, the Borough of Etna may
institute appropriate actions or proceedings at law or in equity to secure
compliance with the provisions of this article. If by reason of the dangerous
character of any structure or its unsanitary or noxious condition the
enforcing officer may order the building vacated and kept vacant until such
dangerous, unsanitary or noxious condition is corrected.
§ 160-4. Severability.
If any of the provisions of this article shall be held by any court to be invalid
or unconstitutional, such judgment shall not be held to invalidate any other
provisions of this article.
§ 160-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-4
1:71

ARTICLE II
Dogs
[Adopted 8-7-1967 by Ord. No. 1001 (Ch. III, Part 1, of the 1974
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 160-5. Unlawful to allow dogs to run at large. [Amended
12-20-1973 by Ord. No. 1064]
It is hereby made unlawful for any owner, custodian or keeper to allow
or permit any dog to run at large upon the highways, roads, public or
private property (of persons other than the owner) within the Borough of
Etna, provided that the purpose of this section is to be in addition to the
provisions of the Dog Law of 1965, as amended, and to provide a means
of dealing with situations, if any, that are not provided for in the said Dog
Law.16
§ 160-6. Seizure and detention of dogs found at large; penalty.
[Amended 12-11-1989 by Ord. No. 1208]
Any dog found on any highway or road in the Borough or on public or
private property in the Borough in violation of any provision of § 160-5 of
this article may be seized or detained by any police officer or dog catcher of
the Borough, and notice given to the owner, custodian or keeper of the dog.
Any dog so sighted may be released to the owner upon payment of the costs
of seizure or detention, providing the owner, custodian or keeper claims the
dog within 24 hours after notice. If an owner, custodian or keeper, having
been notified under the provisions of this section, further allows the dog to
be on any highway, road, or public or private property, in violation of § 160-5
of this article, that owner, custodian or keeper shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and costs of prosecution and,
in default of payment of fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not
more than 30 days, provided that if the dog is not seized as provided in this
section the owner, custodian or keeper shall be notified that the dog is at
large in violation of § 160-5 of this article.
§ 160-7. Service of notice.
For the purpose of this article, notice left with any adult at the residence
shall be good and valid notice.
16.Editor's Note: The Dog Law of 1965 is repealed. See now the Dog Law of 1982, 3 P.S.
§ 459-101 et seq.
§ 160-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-7
1:73

ARTICLE III
Livestock
[Adopted 5-11-1970 by Ord. No. 1026 (Ch. III, Part 2, of the 1974
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 160-8. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings, respectively, designated for each:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Etna acting through its duly elected officers
and agents.
LIVESTOCK — Includes horses, ponies, stallions, colts, geldings, mares,
sheep, rams, bullocks, steers, heifers, cows, calves, mules, jacks, jennets,
burros, goats, kids, and swine.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of livestock, shall include
every person having a right of property in such livestock, and every person
who keeps or harbors such livestock or has it in his care, and every person
who permits such livestock to remain on or about any premises occupied by
him.
§ 160-9. Policy.
From and after the effective date of this article, it is henceforth declared
to be illegal and against the public health and safety for an owner of
livestock to negligently or intentionally permit his livestock to run free and
unattended within any part of the Borough. It is also declared to be illegal
to permit livestock to traverse the Borough streets even though attended
because of the danger to public safety and health.
§ 160-10. Seizure and detention of livestock running at large.
It shall be the duty of the Borough to seize and detain any livestock running
at large upon the public streets of the Borough or upon the property of
other than the owner of such livestock and unaccompanied by the owner
or keeper. Any police officer or other agent of the Borough is hereby
authorized and empowered to go upon any premises and enter any building
to seize and detain any livestock which have been found running at large
unaccompanied by the owner or keeper when such police officer or agent is
in immediate pursuit of any such livestock. The Borough shall make suitable
arrangements to keep such livestock so seized adequately housed and fed.
§ 160-11. Notice to owners.
The Borough shall give immediate notice, either personal or by registered
mail, to the owner of said livestock, advising him of the seizure. If the
owner of the livestock is not known and cannot be ascertained after diligent
inquiry, the Borough shall advertise the seizure in a newspaper of general
circulation throughout the Borough, indicating the fact of the seizure and a
description of the livestock, including the color and any marks or brands.
§ 160-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-12
1:75
§ 160-12. Disposition of unclaimed livestock.
The owner of livestock so retained shall have five days after notice to claim
his livestock by paying to the Borough all reasonable expenses incurred by
reason of the detention as well as paying for any damage caused by the
trespass of the livestock. If the owner does not appear or otherwise fails
to pay expenses and damages within five days, the Borough may sell said
livestock at a public or private sale and turn over the proceeds of said sale
to the Borough treasury or, if sale is not feasible, the Borough may destroy
said livestock in some humane manner. In either event, the Borough may
bring an action to recover from the owner of the livestock for any expenses
of the detention and damage, if any, done to Borough property, for any
amounts over and above the proceeds of the sale.
§ 160-13. Criminal property. [Amended 12-11-1989 by Ord. No.
1208]
In lieu of proceeding under §§ 160-10 to 160-12 of this article, the Borough
may elect to proceed under this section. It shall be considered a summary
offense for any owner of livestock negligently or intentionally to permit any
of his livestock to run free and unattended along any thoroughfare in the
Borough. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, for
every such violation, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $600 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of fine
and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than 30 days, provided
that an offense shall consist of livestock running free during any part of a
24-hour period, and each day on which such violation exists shall constitute
a separate offense.
§ 160-14. Attended livestock prohibited on Borough streets.
After the passage of this article it shall be illegal for livestock to be ridden,
led or guided along the Borough streets. For transporting livestock in or
through the Borough along the streets it shall be necessary for the owner
or attendant to provide a proper mode of conveyance for said livestock. Any
person violating this section shall be guilty of a summary offense and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of $50.
§ 160-15. Severability.
The provisions of this articles shall be considered severable and invalidation
of any provision or part thereof shall not affect the validity of the remaining
provisions.
§ 160-12 ETNA CODE § 160-15
1:76
Chapter 197
BUSINESSES, PROHIBITED
§ 197-1. Certain industries prohibited in Borough; violations and
penalties. [Amended 12-11-1989 by Ord. No. 1208]
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, firm or corporation to carry
on anywhere within the limits of the Borough the business of a rendering
plant, or the manufacture of glue or guano, or the grinding, boiling or
stacking of bones. For any violation of any provision of this chapter, the
violator, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$1,000 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of fine and costs,
to undergo imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
Chapter 232
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
§ 232-1. Election to administer and enforce.
The Borough of Etna hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions
of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S.
§§ 7210.101 to 7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its
regulations.
§ 232-2. Borough Building Code.
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401
to 405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference as the Borough Building Code of the Borough of Etna.
§ 232-3. Administration by County.
By virtue of the submission of the Borough of Etna to the jurisdiction of
the Allegheny County Health Department pursuant to the Local Health
Administration Law, 16 P.S. §§ 12001 to 12028, the Allegheny County Health
Department shall administer and enforce the International Plumbing Code,
Plumbing Chapters 25 through 32 of the International Residential Code,
and Article XV of the Allegheny County Health Department Rules and
Regulations. Article XV shall take precedence over the International
Plumbing Code, Plumbing Chapters 25 through 32 of the International
Residential Code where the requirements of Article XV exceed the
requirements of the International Plumbing and Residential Codes.
§ 232-4. Administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the code within the Borough of Etna
shall be undertaken as follows:
§ 160-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-4
1:77
§ 232-5. Board of appeals.
A board of appeals shall be established by resolution of the governing
body of the Borough of Etna in conformity with the requirements of the
relevant provisions of the code, as amended from time to time, and for the
purposes set forth therein. If at any time enforcement and administration
is undertaken jointly with one or more other municipalities, said board
of appeals shall be established by joint action of the participating
municipalities, except that any appeals filed with respect to the
International Plumbing Code, Chapters 25 through 32 of the International
Residential Code and Article XV of the Allegheny County Health Department
Rules and Regulations shall be conducted in accordance with Article XI of
the Allegheny County Health Department Rules and Regulations.
§ 232-6. Effect on prior ordinances.
§ 232-7. Fees.
Fees assessed by the Borough of Etna for the administration and
enforcement undertaken pursuant to this chapter and the code shall be
A. By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of the Borough of Etna;
B. With reference to electrical inspections, the applicant must furnish
proof of certification by the Department of Labor and Industry of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania furnishing proof that the third-party
agency is certified for electrical inspections, as per the "Detailed Listing
of Certified Third Party Agencies" located on the website for electrical
inspections of the Department of Labor and Industry of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania;
C. The Allegheny County Health Department, Plumbing Division, is hereby
designated to administer and enforce the International Plumbing Code,
Chapters 25 through 32 of the International Residential Code, Article
XV of the Allegheny County Health Department Rules and Regulations
through permitting and inspection.
A. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were
adopted by the Borough of Etna on or before July 1, 1999, and which
equal or exceed the requirements of the code shall continue in full force
and effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed the
minimum requirements of the code, as amended from time to time.
B. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this chapter and whose requirements
are less than the minimum requirements of the code are hereby
amended to conform with the comparable provisions of the code.
C. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of the Borough of Etna
not governed by the code shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 232-4 ETNA CODE § 232-7
1:78
established by the governing body by resolution from time to time, except
those fees as required by the Plumbing Division of the Allegheny County
Health Department.
§ 232-8. When effective.
This chapter shall be effective five days after the date of passage of this
chapter.
§ 232-9. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, or clause of this chapter is held, for any
reason, to be invalid, such decision or decisions shall not affect the validity
of the remaining portions of this chapter.
Chapter 238
CURFEW
§ 238-1. Definitions.17
In this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
AFTER HOURS — The period beginning at 10:00 p.m. and ending at 5:00
a.m. on every day of the year.
ESTABLISHMENT — Any privately owned place of business carried on for
profit, any place of entertainment to which the public is invited, and any
similar place.
MINOR — Any person who has not reached his 18th birthday.
OPERATOR — Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation
owning, operating, managing or conducting any establishment and,
whenever used in any clause prescribing a penalty, the word "operator" as
applied to associations or partnerships shall include the members, partners,
officers and managers thereof or any of them, and as applied to
corporations shall include the officers and managers thereof or any of them.
PARENT — The natural or adoptive parent or a guardian or other person 21
years of age or older responsible for the custody or care of any minor.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any public street, highway, road, alley, bridge, park,
playground, vacant lot, public building or similar place.
REMAIN — "Loiter," "idle," "wander," "stroll," "play" or "be."
§ 238-2. Unlawful acts by minors.
It shall be unlawful for any minor to remain in or upon any public place
or establishment in the Borough of Etna after hours unless accompanied
by a parent or upon an errand or other legitimate business directed by
17.Editor's Note: The headings of this chapter are part of the ordinance as enacted.
§ 232-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-2
1:79
a parent, or unless engaged in gainful, lawful employment after hours, in
which case such minor shall carry written identification and evidence of
such employment.
§ 238-3. Unlawful acts by parents.
It shall be unlawful for any parent knowingly to permit any minor to remain
in or upon any public place or any establishment after hours unless such
parent shall accompany the minor or shall direct the minor in writing to
perform an errand or engage in other legitimate business, which writing
shall be kept in the possession of such minor; or unless such minor is
engaged in gainful, lawful employment after hours, in which case such
minor shall carry written identification and evidence of such employment.
§ 238-4. Unlawful acts by operators of establishments.
It shall be unlawful for any operator of an establishment knowingly to
permit any minor to remain in or upon the premises of such establishment
after hours.
§ 238-5. Enforcement.
Any police officer who shall find a minor violating any provision of this
chapter shall endeavor to obtain the name, age, date of birth and address of
the minor and the names of the minor's parents. The minor shall thereupon
either be brought to the police station and the parents notified or shall
be taken or instructed to proceed directly to his home. The information
obtained from the minor, together with a full report, shall be transmitted to
the Chief of Police, who shall cause written notice to be delivered, by United
States Mail or otherwise, to the parents of such minor, advising them of the
violation of this chapter. A record of all violations shall be kept.
§ 238-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-11-1989 by Ord. No.
1208]
A. Any person who permits any minor to violate any provision of this
chapter after having received a notice of a prior violation shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and costs
of prosecution and, in default of payment of fine and costs, to undergo
imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
B. Any operator who violates any provision of this chapter shall for every
such violation, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of fine
and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
C. Any minor who violates any provision of this chapter more than three
times shall be arrested by the Borough Police and turned over to the
Family Court Division of the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny
County, and proceedings shall then be taken in that Court for the
permanent welfare of that minor, and a like procedure shall be taken
§ 238-2 ETNA CODE § 238-6
1:80
Chapter 259
DUMPSTERS AND PORTABLE STORAGE UNITS
§ 259-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DUMPSTER — A container that is not affixed to the land and is designed
for temporary short-term refuse disposal. This definition shall not apply to
containers used for the regular collection of solid waste by a commercial
firm or municipal contractor.
PORTABLE STORAGE UNIT — A container that is not affixed to the land and
that is designed for temporary short-term storage.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land, including
but not limited to gazebos, storage sheds, storage containers, portable
storage units, freestanding posts, communications equipment buildings,
communication towers, pillars, dumpsters or similar objects.
§ 259-2. Regulations.
The following regulations shall be applicable to dumpsters and/or portable
storage units for on-site storage:
where the arrest of the parent is not effective or where for any other
reason the curfew established by this chapter cannot be made effective
by fines and penalties imposed by this section.
A. There shall be no more than one dumpster or portable storage unit per
lot.
B. A portable storage unit shall be no larger than eight feet wide, 16 feet
long and eight feet high.
C. No dumpster or portable storage unit shall remain on a lot in a
residential zoning district (R-1 or R-2) in excess of 14 consecutive days,
and dumpsters or portable storage units shall not be placed on a lot in a
residential zoning district in excess of 30 days in any one calendar year.
The dumpster or portable storage unit shall be removed from the lot by
the expiration date on the permit.
D. No dumpster or portable storage unit shall remain on a lot in a
commercial (C-1, C-2 or C-3) or industrial zoning district (I or I-1) in
excess of 30 consecutive days, and dumpsters or portable storage units
shall not be placed on a lot in a commercial or industrial zoning district
in excess of 45 days in any one calendar year. The dumpster or portable
storage unit shall be removed from the lot by the expiration date on the
permit.
§ 238-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-2
1:81
E. A dumpster or portable storage unit shall be permitted during
construction, reconstruction, alteration or renovation of the principal
building and for an additional period of three days before and after such
activity, provided a building permit has been issued by the Borough of
Etna. The dumpster and/or portable storage unit shall be removed from
the lot before the Borough Zoning Officer issues an occupancy permit
or if the construction activity ceases for a period of more than seven
days.
F. A dumpster or portable storage unit may be located on a lot during an
emergency situation as declared by the appropriate federal, state,
county or Borough of Etna agency pursuant to a temporary permit
issued by the Borough of Etna Zoning Officer. The dumpster or portable
storage unit shall be removed from the lot within seven days after the
end of the emergency declaration.
G. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or permit the placement of a
dumpster or portable storage unit on property which he or she owns,
rents, occupies or controls without first having obtained a permit
therefor from the Borough of Etna Zoning Officer.
H. Application for a permit shall be made to the Borough of Etna Zoning
Officer on a form provided by the Borough of Etna. The Zoning Officer
shall determine the most appropriate location for the dumpster or
portable storage unit to be placed on the lot. A permit fee in an amount
to be established from time to time by resolution of the Borough of Etna
Council shall accompany the application. The issuance of a permit shall
allow the applicant to place the dumpster or portable storage unit on
the subject lot in the location specified in the permit in conformance
with the requirements of this chapter. The permit shall be posted in
plain view on the subject lot.
(1) Permits will only be issued to the person that owns, rents, occupies
or controls the property where the dumpster or portable storage
unit will be located.
(2) Permit applications for portable storage units must include a list of
the items intended to be stored in the unit. These items can only be
from within the property where the unit is located. No toxic or
hazardous materials are permitted to be stored in these units. The
Borough of Etna reserves the right to inspect the contents at any
reasonable time to ensure that these items are not being stored in
the unit.
(3) When a permitted dumpster is removed because it is full and
immediately replaced by an empty dumpster, a second permit and
fee is not required.
§ 259-2 ETNA CODE § 259-3
1:82
§ 259-3. Violations and penalties.
Whosoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of up to $500. Each day that
violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 259-4. Severability.
If any sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter is for any reason
found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality,
illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining
provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this chapter. It is hereby
declared as the intent of the Council of the Borough of Etna that this
chapter would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or
invalid sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included herein.
§ 259-5. Repealer.
Any ordinance or resolution or part of any ordinance or resolution in conflict
herewith is hereby repealed to the extent of that conflict.
Chapter 293
FIREWORKS
§ 293-1. Supervised public displays of fireworks regulated.
The Borough Council is hereby authorized to grant permits for supervised
public displays of fireworks to be held within the Borough by any
municipality, fair association, amusement park, or other organization or
group of individuals. Such permits shall be granted in the manner and
under the conditions prescribed by law. Investigations and inspections, as
required by law to be made prior to issuance of any such permit, shall be
made by the Chief of the Fire Department of the Borough of Etna and/or
any other officer who shall be designated by the Borough Council for the
purpose. The bond, required by law to be filed by every holder of a permit
for supervised public display of fireworks, shall be not less than $500 in
any case, the actual amount to be determined by the Council at the time of
granting each permit and to be based upon the special conditions applicable
to the display for which such permit shall be granted.
Chapter 300
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
§ 259-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 293-1
1:83

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 300-1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978,18 delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Council of the Borough of Etna does hereby order
as follows.
§ 300-2. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to:
§ 300-3. Applicability.
§ 300-4. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be
in effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
A. Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units and its residents, by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or
development anywhere within the Borough of Etna unless a permit has
been obtained from the Floodplain Administrator.
B. A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or
structures of which the cost of repairs is less than 50% of market value
of the structure.
18.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 300-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-5
1:85
§ 300-5. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of the chapter, which shall remain in
full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this chapter are
hereby declared to be severable.
§ 300-6. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as
ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not
imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas or that land uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of Etna
or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result
from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully
made thereunder.
§ 300-5 ETNA CODE § 300-6
1:86
ARTICLE II
Administration
§ 300-7. Designation of Floodplain Administrator.
§ 300-8. Permits required.
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken within any area of the Borough of Etna.
§ 300-9. Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
A. The Borough Manager is hereby appointed to administer and enforce
this chapter and is referred to herein as the "Floodplain Administrator."
The Floodplain Administrator may: (1) fulfill the duties and
responsibilities set forth in these regulations; 2) delegate duties and
responsibilities set forth in these regulations to qualified technical
personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and other employees; or 3) enter
into a written agreement or written contract with another agency or
private sector entity to administer specific provisions of these
regulations. Administration of any part of these regulations by another
entity shall not relieve the community of its responsibilities pursuant to
the participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance
Program as set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations at 44 CFR
59.22.
B. In the absence of a designated Floodplain Administrator, the Floodplain
Administrator duties are to be fulfilled by the Borough of Etna chief
executive officer.
A. The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this and all other applicable
codes and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall
review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by state and federal laws have been
obtained. No permit shall be issued until this determination has been
made.
C. During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as are necessary.
D. In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
§ 300-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-9
1:87
§ 300-10. Application procedures and requirements.
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
E. In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall
revoke the permit and issue a stop work order and report such fact to
the Council of the Borough of Etna for whatever action it considers
necessary.
F. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain all records associated with
the requirements of this chapter, including, but not limited to, finished
construction elevation data, permitting, inspection and enforcement.
G. The Floodplain Administrator is the official responsible for submitting a
biennial report to the FEMA concerning community participation in the
National Flood Insurance Program.
H. The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments
of the Floodplain Administrator can be delegated from the person
identified. However, the ultimate responsibility lies with the person
identified in the floodplain ordinance as the floodplain administrator/
manager.
I. The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of the 34
Pa. Code and the 2009 IBC, or latest revisions thereof.
A. Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms supplied by the Borough of Etna.
Such application shall contain the following:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
(3) Name and address of contractor.
(4) Site location, including address.
(5) Listing of other permits required.
(6) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a
breakout of flood-related cost and the market value of the building
before the flood damage occurred where appropriate.
(7) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
§ 300-9 ETNA CODE § 300-10
1:88
B. If any proposed new construction or new development is located
entirely or partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for
permits shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail
and clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances;
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage;
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards;
(4) Structures will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement;
(5) Building materials are flood-resistant;
(6) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used;
and
(7) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain
Administrator to make the above determination:
(1) A completed permit application form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale, and date;
(b) Topographic contour lines, if available;
(c) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and development;
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives and other
accessways; and
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water including
direction and velocities.
§ 300-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-10
1:89
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale, showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(b) The elevation of the base flood;
(c) Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa.
Code, the 2009 IBC, or latest revision thereof.
(4) The following data and documentation:
(a) If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with a base flood; and
(b) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations.
(c) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within an AE Area/District with floodway (see
§ 300-19A), when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the base flood
elevation at any point.
(d) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within any identified floodplain area (see
§ 300-18), when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not cause any increase in the
base flood elevation.
(e) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood.
Such statement shall include a description of the type and
extent of floodproofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
(f) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§§ 300-25F, Storage, and 300-26, Development which may
endanger human life, including:
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§ 300-25F and 300-26 which are
intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
§ 300-10 ETNA CODE § 300-10
1:90
§ 300-11. Review by County Conservation District.
A copy of all applications and plans for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
shall be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to the County
Conservation District for review and comment prior to the issuance of
a permit. The recommendations of the Conservation District shall be
considered by the Floodplain Administrator for possible incorporation into
the proposed plan.
§ 300-12. Review of application by others.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
may be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any other appropriate
agencies and/or individuals (e.g., planning commission, municipal engineer,
etc.) for review and comment.
§ 300-13. Changes.
After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without
the written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator. Requests
for any such change shall be in writing and shall be submitted by the
applicant to the Floodplain Administrator for consideration.
§ 300-14. Placards.
In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a placard,
which shall be displayed on the premises during the time construction is in
progress. This placard shall show the number of the permit, the date of its
issuance, and be signed by the Floodplain Administrator.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in § 300-26
during a base flood.
(g) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's Planning Module for Land
Development.
(h) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
D. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the
municipality, based upon the estimated cost of the proposed
construction as determined by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 300-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-15
1:91
§ 300-15. Start of construction.
§ 300-16. Enforcement.
A. Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within
180 days after the date of issuance and shall be completed within 12
months after the date of issuance of the permit, or the permit shall
expire unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain
Administrator. The actual start of construction means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as
the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it
include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds, not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of
construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
B. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted
by the applicant, which sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for
the Floodplain Administrator to approve such a request.
A. Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this
chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain
Administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter
provided and issue a stop work order. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(3) Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for the
performance of any act it requires;
(4) Be served upon the property owner or his agent, as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required by the laws of this state;
(5) Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 300-15 ETNA CODE § 300-16
1:92
§ 300-17. Appeals.
B. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order of direction of the Floodplain
Administrator or any other authorized employee of the Borough of Etna
shall be in violation of the statute and shall pay a fine to Borough of
Etna of not less than $25 nor more than $600 for each day the violation
continues. In addition to the above penalties, all other actions are
hereby reserved, including an action in equity for the proper
enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any
violation of or noncompliance with this chapter shall not excuse the
violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue. All such persons
shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and
noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development initiated or
any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered
or relocated in noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by the
Council of the Borough of Etna to be a public nuisance and abatable as
such.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this
chapter, may appeal to the Council of the Borough of Etna. Such appeal
must be filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision,
determination or action of the Floodplain Administrator.
B. Upon receipt of such appeal the Council of the Borough of Etna shall set
a time and place, within not less than 10 days or not more than 30 days,
for the purpose of considering the appeal. Notice of the time and place
at which the appeal will be considered shall be given to all parties and
shall be advertised in a paper of general circulation. All neighboring
properties will also be notified of such hearing.
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Council of the Borough of
Etna may seek relief therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the
laws of this state including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management
Act.
§ 300-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-17
1:93

ARTICLE III
Identification of Floodplain Areas
§ 300-18. Identification.
§ 300-19. Description and special requirements of identified
floodplain areas.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
A. The identified floodplain area shall be:
(1) Any areas of the Borough of Etna classified as special flood hazard
areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated
September 26, 2014, and issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA), or the most recent revision thereof,
including all digital data developed as part of the Flood Insurance
Study.
B. The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions
and amendments, are hereby adopted by the Borough of Etna and
declared to be a part of this chapter.
A. The floodway area/district identified as floodway in the FIS, which
represents the channel of a watercourse and the adjacent land areas
that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation by more than one
foot at any point. This term shall also include floodway areas which
have been identified in other available studies or sources of information
for those special flood hazard areas where no floodway has been
identified in the FIS.
(1) Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development,
shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment
would not result in any increase in flood levels within the
community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) No new construction or development shall be allowed, unless a
permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection Regional Office.
B. The AE Area/District shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone on
the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood
elevations have been provided.
(1) The AE Area adjacent to the floodway shall be those areas
identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared
§ 300-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-19
1:95
§ 300-20. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Council of
the Borough of Etna where studies or information provided by a qualified
agency or person documents the need for such revision. However, prior
to any such change to the special flood hazard area, approval must be
obtained from FEMA. Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than
six months after the date such information becomes available, a community
shall notify FEMA of the changes to the special flood hazard area by
submitting technical or scientific data.
§ 300-21. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the Borough of Etna Planning
Commission, and any party aggrieved by this decision or determination may
appeal to the Council of the Borough of Etna. The burden of proof shall be
on the appellant.
§ 300-22. Jurisdictional boundary changes.
Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other
corporate boundary changes are proposed or have occurred, the community
shall review flood hazard data affecting the lands subject to boundary
changes. The community shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in
areas subject to annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or
exceed those in 44 CFR 60.3.
by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been provided and a
floodway has been delineated.
(2) No new construction or development shall be located within the
area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any
watercourse, unless a permit is obtained from the Department of
Environmental Protection Regional Office.
§ 300-19 ETNA CODE § 300-22
1:96
ARTICLE IV
Technical Provisions
§ 300-23. General.
§ 300-24. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
A. Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(1) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have first
been obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
Regional Office.
(2) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
(3) In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse.
B. Technical or scientific data shall be submitted by the Borough of Etna at
the cost of the applicant to FEMA for a letter of map revision (LOMR) as
soon as practicable but within six months of any new construction,
development or other activity resulting in changes in the BFE. The
situations when a LOMR or a conditional letter of map revision
(CLOMR) are required are:
(1) Any development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations
within the floodway; or
(2) Any development occurring in Zones A1-30 and Zone AE without a
designated floodway which will cause a rise of more than one foot
in the base flood elevation; or
(3) Alteration or relocation of a stream (including but not limited to
installing culverts and bridges).
C. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.
D. Within any identified floodplain area (see § 300-18), no new
construction or new development shall be located within the area
measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
A. Within any identified floodplain area any new construction or
substantial improvements shall be prohibited without a variance.
§ 300-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-24
1:97
B. If a variance is obtained for new construction or substantial
improvements in the identified floodplain area in accordance with the
criteria in Article VII, then the following provisions apply:
(1) Residential structures.
(a) In AE Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to,
or above, the regulatory flood elevation.
(b) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC), or the
most recent revisions thereof. and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code
(Chapters 401 to 405, as amended) shall be utilized.
(2) Nonresidential structures.
(a) In AE Zones any new construction or substantial improvement
of a nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory
flood elevation, or be designed and constructed so that the
space enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
[1] Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
and
[2] Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of
buoyancy.
(b) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the WI or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing
Regulations" published by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
(June 1972, as amended March 1992) or with some other
equivalent standard. All plans and specifications for such
floodproofing shall be accompanied by a statement certified by
a registered professional engineer or architect which states
that the proposed design and methods of construction are in
conformance with the above-referenced standards.
(c) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC), or the
most recent revisions thereof, and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code
(Chapters 401 to 405, as amended) shall be utilized.
(3) Space below the lowest floor.
(a) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding
basements), which will be used solely for the parking of a
vehicle, building access, or incidental storage in an area other
§ 300-24 ETNA CODE § 300-24
1:98
than a basement, shall be designed and constructed to allow
for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters for the purpose
of equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior walls. The term
"fully enclosed space" also includes crawl spaces.
(b) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or
exceed the following minimum criteria:
[1] A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
space.
[2] The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
[3] Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(4) Historic structures. Historic structures undergoing repair or
rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial improvement, as
defined in this chapter, must comply with all ordinance
requirements that do not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure. Documentation that a specific
ordinance requirement will cause removal of the structure from the
National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of
Historic Places must be obtained from the Secretary of the Interior
or the State Historic Preservation Officer. Any exemption from
ordinance requirements will be the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure.
(5) Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building
need not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry but shall
comply, at a minimum, with the following requirements:
(a) The structure shall not be designed or used for human
habitation but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles or to
the storage of tools, material and equipment related to the
principal use or activity.
(b) Floor area shall not exceed 400 square feet.
(c) The structure will have a low damage potential.
(d) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(e) Power lines, wiring and outlets will be elevated to the
regulatory flood elevation.
(f) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
§ 300-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-24
1:99
§ 300-25. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
(g) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(h) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation
or movement and shall be designed to automatically provide
for the entry and exit of floodwater for the purpose of
equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for meeting
this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
[1] A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
space.
[2] The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
[3] Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or
other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
[4] Sheds or toy structures of 50 square feet or less shall be
exempt from these requirements.
A. Fill. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in Article
VII, then the following provisions apply:
(1) If fill is used, it shall:
(a) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from
all points;
(b) Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills
shall not be permitted;
(c) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and
resistance to erosion, scouring or settling;
(d) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to
and approved by the Floodplain Administrator; and
(e) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect
adjacent properties.
B. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall ensure proper drainage along streets and provide positive
§ 300-24 ETNA CODE § 300-25
1:100
drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to
prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities.
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within any
identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all state
and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or
contamination from it, during a flood.
(3) The applicable design and construction provisions of the UCC and
FEMA #348, "Protecting Building Utilities from Flood Damages,"
and the International Private Sewage Disposal Code shall be
utilized.
D. Other utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than
one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or in
times of flooding could be injurious to human, animal or plant life, and
not listed in § 300-26, Development which may endanger human life,
shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation or
floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
H. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
§ 300-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-25
1:101
perpendicular to the flooring grain, without causing structural
damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
J. Paints and adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a marine
or water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
K. Electrical components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
base flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
L. Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating
units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or
apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to
prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges
from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made
for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater
infiltration occurs.
N. Uniform Construction Code coordination.
(1) The standards and specifications contained 34 Pa. Code (Chapters
401 to 405), as amended, and not limited to the following
provisions, shall apply to the above and other sections and
subsections of this chapter to the extent that they are more
restrictive and supplement the requirements of this chapter.
§ 300-25 ETNA CODE § 300-25
1:102
§ 300-26. Development which may endanger human life.
(2) International Building Code (IBC) 2009, or the latest edition
thereof: Sections 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and
Appendix G.
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, and
the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially
improved structure, which:
(1) Will be used for the production or storage of any of the following
dangerous materials or substances; or
(2) Will be used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply
of more than 550 gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the
following dangerous materials or substances on the premises; or
(3) Will involve the production, storage or use of any amount of
radioactive substances;
(4) Shall be subject to the provisions of this section, in addition to all
other applicable provisions. The following list of materials and
substances are considered dangerous to human life:
(a) Acetone.
(b) Ammonia.
(c) Benzene.
(d) Calcium carbide.
(e) Carbon disulfide.
(f) Celluloid.
(g) Chlorine.
(h) Hydrochloric acid.
(i) Hydrocyanic acid.
(j) Magnesium.
(k) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(l) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(m) Phosphorus.
(n) Potassium.
(o) Sodium.
(p) Sulphur and sulphur products.
§ 300-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-26
1:103
§ 300-27. Special requirements for subdivisions.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50
lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in identified floodplain
areas where base flood elevation data are not available, shall be supported
by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by
a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
conditional letter of map revision or letter of map revision. Submittal
requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
§ 300-28. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
(q) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and
rodenticides).
(r) Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
B. Within any identified floodplain area any structure of the kind described
in Subsection A above shall be prohibited.
(1) If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in Article
VII, then the following provisions apply:
C. Within any floodway area any structure of the kind described in
Subsection A above shall be prohibited.
D. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any new or
substantially improved residential structure of the kind described in
§ 300-26A above shall be elevated to remain completely dry up to at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation.
E. Nonresidential structures.
(1) Where permitted within any identified floodplain area any new or
substantially improved nonresidential structure of the kind
described in § 300-26A above shall be:
(a) Elevated or designed and constructed to remain completely
dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation; and
(b) Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity
during the course of a base flood.
(2) Any such structure or part thereof that will be built below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards for completely dry floodproofing
contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing Regulations" (U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972, as amended March 1992), or
with some other equivalent watertight standard.
§ 300-26 ETNA CODE § 300-28
1:104
§ 300-29. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
A. Within any identified floodplain area manufactured homes shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in
Article VII, then the following provisions apply:
B. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, all manufactured
homes and any improvements thereto shall be:
(1) Placed on a permanent foundation.
(2) Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation.
(3) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
C. Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with
the manufacturers' installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above
information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009 International
Residential Building Code or the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development's "Permanent Foundations for Manufactured
Housing," 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto, and 34 Pa. Code
Chapters 401 to 405 shall apply.
D. Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC or the most recent revisions thereto and 34
Pa. Code, as amended, where appropriate and/or applicable to units
where the manufacturers' standards for anchoring cannot be provided
or were not established for the proposed units' installation.
A. Within any identified floodplain area, recreational vehicles shall be
prohibited.
B. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in Article VII,
then the following provisions apply:
C. Recreational vehicles in Zone AE must either:
(1) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and
(2) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use.
§ 300-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-29
1:105

ARTICLE V
Prohibited Activities
§ 300-30. General.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, the following activities shall be
prohibited within any identified floodplain area.
A. The commencement of any of the following activities, or the
construction, enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
(1) Hospitals.
(2) Nursing homes.
(3) Jails or prisons.
B. The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision.
§ 300-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-30
1:107

ARTICLE VI
Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas
§ 300-31. Existing structures.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements
to be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement
is made to any existing structure, the provisions of § 300-32 shall apply.
§ 300-32. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to
an existing structure located within any identified floodplain area:
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any floodway area/district that would cause any increase in BFE.
B. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within an AE Area/District without floodway that would, together with
all other existing and anticipated development, increase the BFE more
than one foot at any point.
C. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure to an extent or amount of 50% or more of
its market value shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall be
undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
D. The above activity shall also address the requirements of the 34 Pa.
Code, as amended, and the 2009 IBC, or the most recent edition.
E. Within any floodway area/district (see § 300-19A), no new construction
or development shall be allowed, unless a permit is obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
F. Within any AE Area/District without floodway (see § 300-19B), no new
construction or development shall be located within the area measured
50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse, unless a
permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
Regional Office.
§ 300-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-32
1:109

ARTICLE VII
Variances
§ 300-33. General.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in an
exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner, the
Borough of Etna may, upon request, grant relief from the strict application
of the requirements.
§ 300-34. Variance procedures and conditions.
A. Requests for variances shall be considered by the Borough of Etna in
accordance with the procedures contained in § 300-17 and the
following:
(1) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use or activity within any floodway area/district that would cause
any increase in the BFE.
(2) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use or activity within any AE Area/District without floodway that
would, together with all other existing and anticipated
development, increase the BFE more than one foot at any point.
(3) Except for a possible modification of the regulatory flood elevation
requirement involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the
other requirements pertaining specifically to development which
may endanger human life (§ 300-26).
(4) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
(5) In granting any variance, the Borough of Etna shall attach
whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers
necessary in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare,
and to achieve the objectives of this chapter.
(6) Whenever a variance is granted, the Borough of Etna shall notify
the applicant in writing that:
(a) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(b) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
(7) In reviewing any request for a variance, the Borough of Etna shall
consider, at a minimum, the following:
(a) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(b) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
§ 300-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-34
1:111
(c) That the granting of the variance will.
[1] Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense;
[2] Nor create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimize the
public, or conflict with any other applicable state or local
ordinances and regulations.
(8) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall
be maintained by the Borough of Etna. In addition, a report of all
variances granted during the year shall be included in the annual
report to the FEMA.
B. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
one-percent annual chance flood.
§ 300-34 ETNA CODE § 300-34
1:112
ARTICLE VIII
Definitions
§ 300-35. General.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
§ 300-36. Specific definitions.
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year (also called the "100-year flood" or "one-percent
annual chance flood").
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE — The volume of water resulting from a base
flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually expressed in
cubic feet per second (cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets and other paving; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
§ 300-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-36
1:113
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURES — Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 300-36 ETNA CODE § 300-36
1:114
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant partially enclosed area,
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental storage,
in an area other than a basement area, is not considered the lowest floor of
a building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that the
structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation-design requirements
of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and
other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MINOR REPAIR — Any repairs that equal less than 50% of the market
value of the property or are for the purpose of its routine maintenance and
upkeep.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after September 26, 2014, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. Any construction started after September
1, 1978, and before September 26, 2014, is subject to the ordinance in
effect at the time the permit was issued, provided the start of construction
was within 180 days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974, or on or after
the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated September
1, 1978, whichever is later, and as such would be required to be compliant
with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or substantial
improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974, or before the
community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated September 1,
1978, whichever is later, and as such would not be required to be compliant
with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
§ 300-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-36
1:115
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle, which is:
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) or
estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It
is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99 or AH.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days after the date of the permit and shall be completed within 12 months
after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The actual start means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such
as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds, not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
A. Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck;
C.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
D.
§ 300-36 ETNA CODE § 300-36
1:116
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition or other improvement of a structure, of which the cost equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the "start
of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include any project for
improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary
to assure safe living conditions.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999, applicable to new
construction in all municipalities whether administered by the municipality,
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, the UCC adopted the International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC) by
reference as the construction standard applicable with the state floodplain
construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
§ 300-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-36
1:117

ARTICLE IX
Enactment
§ 300-37. Adoption.
This chapter shall be effective on September 26, 2014, and shall remain
in force until modified, amended or rescinded by the Borough of Etna,
Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
§ 300-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-37
1:119
Chapter 325
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
§ 300-37 ETNA CODE § 300-37
1:120
ARTICLE I
Reimbursement for Cleanup Costs
[Adopted 7-20-1993 by Ord. No. 1228]
§ 325-1. Authority to recover costs.
The Borough of Etna through its various emergency services is authorized
to clean up, dispose or abate, or cause to be cleaned up, disposed or abated,
the effects of any hazardous materials or substances deposited upon or
into properties or facilities within the municipal boundaries of the Borough
of Etna or having a direct or identifiable effect on person or property
within the municipal boundaries of the Borough of Etna, including, but
not limited to, traffic control, evacuation, relocation, substance monitoring,
establishment of medical care facilities and all other costs incurred in
the mitigation of the emergency situation; and any person or persons,
partnership, corporation or corporations who intentionally or accidentally
or negligently caused such deposit shall be liable for all costs incurred by
the Borough of Etna as a result of such cleanup, disposal or abatement
activity. The remedy provided by this chapter shall be in addition to any
other remedies provided by other laws or ordinances of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania and the Borough of Etna.
§ 325-2. Definition.
For the purpose of this chapter, "hazardous materials" shall be defined
as any substances or materials in a quantity or form which, in the
determination of the Emergency Management Coordinator or his
authorized representative, poses an unreasonable and imminent risk to the
life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of
the environment, and shall include, but not be limited to, such substances
as explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum products or gases, poisons,
etiologic (biologic) agents, flammables, corrosives or materials listed in the
Hazardous Substances List of the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and
Industry.
§ 325-3. Recoverable costs.
For the purposes of this chapter, costs incurred by the Borough of Etna
in obtaining emergency services shall include, but not be limited to, the
following: actual labor costs of Borough personnel, including workers'
compensation benefits, fringe benefits, administrative overhead, cost of
equipment operation, cost of special fire-extinguishing agents used, and
cost of any contracted labor and materials.
§ 325-4. Limited authority.
The authority to recover costs under this chapter shall not include actual
fire-suppression services which are normally or usually provided by the Fire
Department.
§ 325-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-5
1:121
§ 325-5. Repealer.
Any ordinance or resolution or part of any ordinance or resolution
conflicting with the provisions of this chapter is rescinded insofar as the
conflict exists.
§ 325-6. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are severable and, if any of its provisions shall
be held invalid, illegal or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect or
impair any of the remaining provisions of this chapter. It is hereby declared
to be the intention of the Board of Supervisors that this chapter would have
been adopted if such invalid, illegal or unconstitutional provisions had not
been included herein.
§ 325-5 ETNA CODE § 325-6
1:122
Chapter 334
HOUSING
§ 325-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-6
1:123

ARTICLE I
Landlord and Utility Company Reports
[Adopted 12-10-1962 by Ord. No. 943 (Ch. XII of the 1974 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 334-1. Landlords to report names and addresses of tenants and
termination of lease or rental arrangement.
§ 334-2. Public utility companies to report names and addresses of
customers.
All public utility companies furnishing or rendering any utility services such
as gas, electric and telephone within the Borough of Etna shall report to
the Borough Secretary within 10 days the name and address of each of
their customers who receives services within the Borough of Etna and shall
report to the Borough Secretary within 10 days the name and address of any
addition to or deletion from their list of customers who received services
within the Borough of Etna.
§ 334-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates any provision of
§§ 334-1 and 334-2 shall for every such violation, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $50 and costs of prosecution
and, in default of payment of fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for
not more than 10 days, provided that failure to report any name shall be
considered a separate offense.
A. All persons or corporations leasing or renting living accommodations,
such as apartments, dwellings, furnished or unfurnished rooms, hotel
space, or similar facilities, within the limits of the Borough of Etna shall
report to the Borough Secretary the names and addresses of the tenant
or lessee whenever such tenant occupies said facilities for a term of one
month or more. Said report shall be filed within 10 days after the 30th
day of occupancy of the facilities.
B. Said person or corporation shall also report to the Borough Secretary
the termination of any lease or rental arrangement for facilities as
above described. Said report shall be made within three days of the
receipt of actual or constructive notice of the termination of the
tenancy.
§ 334-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-3
1:125
Chapter 347
INSURANCE
§ 334-3 ETNA CODE § 334-3
1:126
ARTICLE I
Fire Insurance Claims
[Adopted 10-20-1998 by Ord. No. 1257]
§ 347-1. Designated officer; definition.
§ 347-2. Statutory requirements.
A. The Borough Secretary/Manager or such official's designee is hereby
appointed as the designated officer who is authorized to carry out all
responsibilities and duties of the Borough of Etna stated herein.
B. A "fire loss" or claim for fire damage is defined as any loss occurring
after the effective date of this article and covered under a policy of fire
insurance, including any endorsements or riders to the policy.
A. No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter the
"insurer") doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall
pay a claim of a named insured for fire damage to a structure located
within the Borough of Etna where the amount recoverable for the fire
loss to the structure under all policies exceeds $7,500, unless the
insurer is furnished by the municipal officer with a municipal certificate
pursuant to Section 508(b) and unless there is compliance with Section
508(c) and (d) and the provisions of this article.19
B. After full compliance with the requirements of Section 508(b)(1)(i), the
insurer shall pay the claim of the named insured; provided, however,
that if the loss as agreed upon by the named insured and the insurer
equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of liability on all fire
policies covering the building structure, the following procedures shall
be followed:
(1) The insurer shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to the
Borough Secretary/Manager or such official's designee the
aggregate of $2,000 for each $15,000 of a claim and for each
fraction of that amount of a claim, provided:
(a) That this article is to be applied such that, if the claim is
$15,000 or less, the amount transferred to the Borough of Etna
shall be $2,000; and
(b) That, if at the time of a loss report the named insured has
submitted a contractor's signed estimate of the costs of
removing, repairing or securing the building or other structure
in an amount less than the amount calculated under the
foregoing transfer formula, the insurer shall transfer to the
Borough of Etna from the insurance proceeds the amount
based upon the estimate.
19.Editor's Note: Reference is to Section 508 of the Insurance Company Law of 1921, as
added by Act 98 of 1992 and amended Act 93 of 1994; see 40 P.S. § 638.
§ 347-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-2
1:127
(2) The transfer of proceeds shall be on pro rata basis by all
companies, associations or exchanges insuring the building or
other structure. Policy proceeds remaining after the transfer to the
Borough of Etna shall be disbursed in accordance with the policy
terms.
C. After the transfer, the named insured may submit a contractor's signed
estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or securing the building or
other structure, and the Borough Secretary/Manager or such official's
designee shall return the amount of the funds transferred to the
Borough of Etna in excess of the estimate to the named insured if the
Borough of Etna has not commenced to remove, repair or secure the
building or other structure.
D. Upon receipt of proceeds under this article, the Borough of Etna shall
do the following:
(1) The Secretary/Manager or such official's designee shall place the
proceeds in the separate fund to be used solely as security against
the total costs of removing, repairing or securing the building or
structure which are incurred by the Borough of Etna. Such costs
shall include, without limitation, any engineering, legal or
administrative costs incurred by the Borough of Etna in connection
with such removal, repair or securing of the building or any
proceedings related thereto; and
(2) It is the obligation of the insurer when transferring the proceeds to
provide the Borough of Etna with the name and address of the
named insured. Upon receipt of the transferred funds and the name
and address of the named insured, the Borough Secretary/Manager
or such official's designee shall contact the named insured, certify
that the proceeds have been received by the Borough of Etna, and
notify the named insured that the procedures under this subsection
shall be followed; and
(3) When repairs, removal or securing of the building or other
structure have been completed in accordance with all applicable
regulations and orders of the Borough of Etna and the required
proof of such completion received by the Borough Secretary/
Manager or such official's designee, and if the Borough of Etna has
not incurred any costs for repairs, removal or securing, the funds
shall be returned to the named insured. If the Borough of Etna has
incurred costs for repairs, removal or securing of the building or
other structure, the costs shall be paid from the funds and, if excess
funds remain, the Borough of Etna shall transfer the remaining
funds to the named insured; and
(4) To the extent that interest is earned on proceeds held by the
Borough of Etna pursuant to this article and retained by it, such
interest shall belong to the Borough of Etna. To the extent that
proceeds are returned to the named insured, interest earned on
§ 347-2 ETNA CODE § 347-2
1:128
§ 347-3. Effect on authority of Borough.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit the ability of the Borough
of Etna to recover any deficiency. Furthermore, nothing in this article shall
be construed to prohibit the Borough of Etna and the named insured from
entering into an agreement that permits the transfer of funds to the named
insured if some other reasonable disposition of the damaged property has
been negotiated.
§ 347-4. Adoption of procedures, regulations and fees.
The Council of the Borough of Etna may by resolution adopt procedures
and regulations to implement Section 50820 and this article and may by
resolution fix reasonable fees to be charged for municipal activities or
services provided pursuant to Section 508 and this article, including but not
limited to issuance of certificates and bills, performance of inspections and
opening separate fund accounts.
§ 347-5. Violations and penalties.
Any owner of property, any named insured or any insurer who violates this
article shall be subject to a penalty of up to $1,000 per violation.
§ 347-6. Severability.
The provisions of this article shall be severable and, if any of the provisions
hereof shall be held to be invalid or unenforceable, the remaining provisions
of this article shall remain in effect.
§ 347-7. Repealer.
Ordinance No. 1225, adopted 12-15-1992, is repealed. All ordinances or
parts of ordinances conflicting with any of the provisions of this article are
hereby repealed insofar as same affects this article.
§ 347-8. When effective; filing.
such proceeds shall be distributed to the named insured at the time
that the proceeds are returned.
A. This article shall become effective immediately.
B. A certified copy of this article shall be filed with the Department of
Economic and Community Development on or before its effective date.
20.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638.
§ 347-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-8
1:129
Chapter 390
NOISE
§ 347-8 ETNA CODE § 347-8
1:130
ARTICLE I
Loudspeakers and Other Sound Devices
[Adopted 3-11-1929 by Ord. No. 619 (Ch. XIV, Part 3, of the 1974
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 390-1. Loudspeakers and similar devices not to be located out of
doors for commercial purposes. [Amended 3-8-1954 by Ord. No.
810]
No person, partnership, association, firm or corporation, for commercial
purposes, shall erect or locate any device or apparatus in front of his
premises in the Borough of Etna, which shall by mechanical or electrical
means emit any loud sounds or noises so as to annoy or disturb passersby
on the public thoroughfares.
§ 390-2. Exceptions to loudspeaker ban.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any announcement or
broadcasting of any international, national or state events of public interest.
§ 390-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-8-1954 by Ord. No.
810; 12-11-1989 by Ord. No. 1208]
Any person, partnership, association, firm or corporation who or which
violates any provision of this article shall for every such violation, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and costs
of prosecution and, in default of payment of fine and costs, to undergo
imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
§ 390-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-3
1:131
Chapter 396
NUISANCES
§ 390-3 ETNA CODE § 390-3
1:132
ARTICLE I
General Nuisances
[Adopted 12-20-1973 by Ord. No. 1076 (Ch. XVII, Part 1, of the 1974
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 396-1. Definition and interpretation. [Amended 9-17-1985 by Ord.
No. 1176; 1-20-2004 by Ord. No. 1298]
The following words, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereby
respectively ascribed thereto:
A. NUISANCE – Any use of property within the Borough of Etna, or any
condition upon property within the said Borough that, other than
infrequently, shall cause or result in: (1) annoyance or discomfort to
persons beyond the boundaries of such property; (2) interference with
the health and/or safety of persons beyond the boundaries of such
property or of persons who might reasonably be expected to enter upon
or be in such property; and/or (3) disturbance to or interference with
the peaceful use of the property of others within the Borough, in any
case taking into consideration the location of the use or condition and
the nature and condition of the surrounding neighborhood. Specifically,
the word "nuisance" shall include but shall not be limited to the
following:
(1) Loud playing of radios, television sets, amplifiers and other sound
devices so as to be heard beyond the premises from which the same
shall emanate.
(2) Operation of gasoline-powered lawn mowers or gasoline-powered
chain saws on any weekday before 8:00 a.m. or on any Sunday
before 12:00 noon.
(3) Operating model airplanes equipped with gasoline engines on any
public street or on any public ground, including any playground.
(4) Keeping or harboring of any dog or other animal or fowl which, by
frequent howling or barking or other noise or odor, shall annoy or
disturb the neighborhood or a number of persons.
(5) Maintaining or permitting the maintenance of any of the following
dangerous conditions, structures or premises:
(a) Open wells or cisterns.
(b) Open excavations.
(c) Unfinished buildings, foundations or other structures.
(d) Buildings or structures damaged or partially destroyed or in a
state of disrepair or danger.
(e) Dangerous placement of materials or equipment.
§ 396-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 396-1
1:133
(f) Lakes, ponds or swimming pools not properly safeguarded.
(g) Stagnant water in pools in which mosquitoes, flies or insects
multiply.
(6) Carrying on any building or road construction, excavation or
trenching, or the operation of heavy equipment or trucks in
connection therewith at any time on Sunday or a legal holiday, or
on any other day of the year at any time between 7:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m., without a special permit issued by the Borough
Secretary. Such special permit shall be issued only if it is shown
that the construction work must proceed as a matter of emergency
or that it can be carried on in a manner or in such place that the
public or residents will not be annoyed or disturbed by such
construction work.
(7) Carrying on construction work in such a manner that dirt is carried
by wind onto adjacent properties or that mud is tracked or drained
into streets adjacent to the project.
(8) Washing, tracking or otherwise depositing dirt, mud, soil, stone or
debris upon or onto the pavement of any street without removing
the same before 5:00 p.m. of the day on which the same was
deposited thereupon.
(9) Using any property or operating any business or other activity so as
to permit or cause smoke, soot, cinders, fly ash, dust, mud, dirt,
acid, noxious or offensive fumes, gases or odors to be discharged
into the air, or to be carried off the premises, or to cause any water
to become polluted by sewage, industrial wastes, acid or other
substance, or to cause a glare from lights, or noise of such
character as to cause annoyance to residents or interference with
the normal use of adjacent properties.
(10) The planting or placing of trees, shrubs or other obstructions which
would prevent persons driving vehicles on public streets from
obtaining a clear view of traffic.
B. Enumeration of animal nuisances; prohibitions.
(1) Any dog, cat or other animal which fulfills any of the following
conditions is hereby declared to be a nuisance:
(a) The animal is kept in a manner so as to create offensive odors
or unsanitary conditions which are a menace to the health,
comfort or safety of the public.
(b) The animal habitually barks, howls, screeches, yelps or bays
thereby disturbing the quiet of any person or the community.
(c) The animal scratches, digs or defecates upon any lawn, tree,
shrub, plant, building or any other public or private property
§ 396-1 ETNA CODE § 396-1
1:134
§ 396-2. Unlawful to create or maintain nuisances.
It shall be unlawful for any person to create, continue, cause, maintain or
permit to exist any nuisance at any place within the Borough of Etna.
§ 396-3. Removal or abatement of nuisances.
Any person who shall create, continue, cause, maintain or permit to exist
any nuisance at any place within the Borough of Etna shall, within 10 days
after notice from the Borough Council to do so, remove or abate such
nuisance. If such person shall fail, neglect or refuse to abate such nuisance
within such time limit, the Borough Council shall have authority, in person
or by its agents and/or employees, to remove or abate such nuisance and, in
so doing, shall have authority to enter upon the property of such person in
default. Thereupon, the Borough Council shall collect the cost and expense
of such abatement or removal from the person who created, continued,
caused or maintained such nuisance and/or permitted the same to exist,
such person having failed, neglected or refused to remove or abate such
nuisance, with an additional amount of 10%, in the manner provided for the
collection of municipal claims or by an action in assumpsit, provided such
cost and expense may be in addition to any penalty imposed under § 396-4
of this article.
other than the property of the owner or person in charge or
control of such animal.
(2) No person shall keep or harbor a dog, cat or other animal in a
manner which constitutes a nuisance. No person shall permit a
dog, cat or other animal to commit a nuisance upon any school
grounds or other public property or upon any private property
other than that of the owner or person in charge of such animal;
provided, however, that if the owner or person in charge of such
animal immediately removes all feces deposited by such animal and
disposes of same in a sanitary manner, such type of nuisance shall
be considered abated.
(3) Any person with defective eyesight or hearing who relies upon a
dog specifically trained for such purposes shall be exempt from
compliance with this article.
C. PERSON – Any natural person, partnership, association, firm or
corporation.
(1) In this article, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine
and the neuter.
§ 396-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 396-4
1:135
§ 396-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-17-1985 by Ord. No.
1176; 12-11-1989 by Ord. No. 1208]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall for every such
violation, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$1,000 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of fine and costs,
to undergo imprisonment for not more than 30 days, provided that each
day's continuance of the maintenance of any nuisance after the expiration
of 10 days following the issuance of the notice referred to in § 396-3 of this
article, shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 396-5. Exceptions.
This article shall not be construed to be the sole means for abatement
of nuisances within the Borough of Etna, and nothing shall preclude any
person from proceeding individually or with other injured persons to effect
the abatement of a private nuisance. Furthermore, in the exercise of the
powers herein conferred, the Borough may institute proceedings in equity.
§ 396-6. Severability of provisions.
The provisions of this article shall be severable, and if any of its provisions
shall be held to be unconstitutional, illegal or otherwise invalid, such
decision shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining provisions of
this article. It is hereby declared as a legislative intent that this article
would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or otherwise
invalid provision not been included herein.
§ 396-4 ETNA CODE § 396-6
1:136
ARTICLE II
Obscene, Pornographic and Lewd Activities and Materials
[Adopted 5-17-1978 by Ord. No. 1110 (Ch. XVII, Part 2, of the 1974
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 396-7. Purpose; policy; authority; exclusion.
The Borough Council find that the crass commercial exploitation of explicit
sexual conduct through the public exhibition of lewd films, the display and/
or sale of lewd publications, and the use of so-called "massage" parlors
and model studios for purposes of lewdness, assignation or prostitution
constitutes a debasement and distortion of a sensitive key relationship
of human existence, central to family life, community welfare and the
development of human personality; is indecent and offensive to the senses
and to public morals; and interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life
and property, in that such interferes with the interest of the public in the
quality of life and total community environment, the tone of commerce in
the Borough, property values, and the public safety; and that the continued
operation of such activities is detrimental to the best health, safety,
convenience, good morals and general welfare of the Borough of Etna and
of the residents, citizens, inhabitants and businesses thereof. The Borough
Council hereby declares such activities to be a public nuisance and herein
establishes procedures for the abatement thereof. This article shall apply to
existing establishments which are presently engaged in the type of activity
herein declared to be a public nuisance.
§ 396-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
KNOWLEDGE or KNOWLEDGE OF SUCH NUISANCE — Having knowledge
of the contents and character of the patently offensive sexual conduct or
demonstration which appears in the film or publication, or knowledge of the
acts of lewdness, assignation, or prostitution which occur on the premises.
LEWD MATTER — Any matter:
Which the average person, applying contemporary community
standards, would find, when considered as a whole, appeals to the
prurient interest; and
A.
Which depicts or describes patently offensive representations or
descriptions of:
(1) Ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated; or
(2) Masturbation, excretory functions, or exhibition of the genitals.
B.
§ 396-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 396-8
1:137
MASSAGE — Any method of treating the superficial soft parts of the human
body for remedial, hygienic or other purposes, consisting of rubbing,
stroking, kneading or any similar treatment, accomplished by hand or by
the use of any instrument.
MASSAGE PARLOR — Any building or structure or portion thereof located
within the Borough which is open to members of the general public, with or
without the payment of a fee, at which massage services are offered.
MATTER — A motion-picture film or a publication, or both.
MODEL STUDIO —
MOTION-PICTURE FILM — Includes any:
Nothing herein contained is intended to include or proscribe any
matter which, when considered as a whole, and in the context in
which it is used, possesses serious literary, artistic, political or
scientific value.
Any premises on which there is conducted the business of furnishing
models who pose in the nude for the purpose of being observed or
viewed by any person or of being sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured,
photographed or otherwise similarly depicted for persons who pay a
fee, or other consideration or compensation, or a gratuity for the right
or opportunity so to depict the figure model or for admission to or as a
condition for remaining upon the premises; or
A.
Any premises where there is conducted the business of furnishing
or providing or procuring, for a fee or other consideration or
compensation or gratuity, figure models who pose in the nude to be
observed or viewed by any person or to be sketched, painted, drawn,
sculptures, photographed or otherwise similarly depicted.
B.
Exception. The words "model studio" do not include:
Any studio which is operated by any state college or junior college,
public school or any governmental agency, wherein the person,
firm, association, partnership or corporation operating it has met
the requirements established by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania for the issuance or conferring of, and is in fact
authorized thereunder to issue and confer, a diploma or honorary
diploma; or
(1)
Any business where there is conducted the business of furnishing,
providing or procuring figure models solely for any studio
described in Subsection C(1) of this definition; or
(2)
Any studio operated by a tax-exempt, nonprofit corporation devoted
to the development of art and its appreciation.
(3)
C.
A. Film or plate negative;
B. Film or plate positive;
§ 396-8 ETNA CODE § 396-8
1:138
NUDE — Includes:
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation, or
other legal entity.
PLACE — Includes, but is not limited to, any building, structure or space,
or any separate part or portion thereof, whether permanent or not, or the
ground itself.
PUBLICATION — Includes any book, magazine, article, pamphlet, writing,
printing, illustration, picture, sound recording, or a motion-picture film
which is displayed in an area open to the public, offered for sale or exhibited
in a coin-operated machine.
SALE — A passing of title or right of possession from a seller to a buyer for
valuable consideration and shall include, but is not limited to, any lease or
rental arrangement or other transaction wherein or whereby any valuable
consideration is received for the use of or transfer of possession of lewd
matter.
§ 396-9. Lewd films and theaters exhibiting the same declared
public nuisance; abatement thereof.
C. Film designed to be projected on a screen for exhibition;
Films, glass slides or transparencies, either in negative or positive
form, designed for exhibition by projection on a screen;
D.
Videotape or any other medium used to electronically reproduce images
on a screen.
E.
A. Completely without clothing; or
With the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with
less than a full opaque covering or the showing of the female breast
with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below the
top of the nipple or the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid
state.
B.
A. Any and every place in the Borough of Etna where lewd films are
publicly exhibited or possessed for the purpose of such exhibitions, and
any and every place in the Borough of Etna where a lewd film is publicly
or repeatedly exhibited or possessed for the purpose of such
exhibitions, is a public nuisance.
B. Any and every lewd film which is publicly exhibited or possessed for
such purpose at a place which is a public nuisance under § 396-9A
above is a public nuisance per se.
C. From and after service on the theater or its manager or acting manager,
or person then in charge of such place, of a true and correct copy of this
article and a true and correct copy of the resolution and order of
summary abatement provided for in § 396-13 hereof, all monies paid
thereafter as admission price to such exhibitions are also declared to be
§ 396-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 396-9
1:139
§ 396-10. Place of business in which lewd publications constitute
principal part of the stock-in-trade, lewd publications possessed
therein, and valuable consideration received for sales thereof,
declared public nuisance; abatement thereof.
§ 396-11. Massage parlors or model studios used for purposes of
lewdness, assignation or prostitution declared a public nuisance;
abatement thereof.
§ 396-12. Knowledge of nuisance presumed from notice of order of
abatement; responsibility therefor; abatement.
a public nuisance as personal property used in conducting and
maintaining a declared public nuisance.
A. Any and every place in the Borough of Etna in which lewd publications
constitute a part of the stock-in-trade is a public nuisance.
B. Any and every lewd publication possessed at a place which is a public
nuisance under Subsection A above is a public nuisance per se.
C. From and after service on the place or its manager or acting manager,
or person then in charge of such place, of a true and correct copy of this
article and a true and correct copy of the resolution and order of
summary abatement provided for in § 396-13 hereof, all valuable
consideration received for the sale of such lewd publications is also
declared to be a public nuisance as personal property used in
conducting and maintaining a declared public nuisance.
A. Every massage parlor or model studio, which as a regular course of
business is used for the purpose of lewdness, assignation or
prostitution, and every such massage parlor or model studio in or upon
which acts of lewdness, assignations or prostitution, are held or occur,
or every massage parlor where any employee operates or performs any
service in the nude is a public nuisance, which shall be enjoined, abated
and prevented.
B. From and after service on the place or its manager or acting manager,
or person then in charge of such place, of a true and correct copy of this
article and a true and correct copy of the resolution and order of
summary abatement provided for in § 396-13 hereof, all monies or other
valuable consideration paid for services rendered to customers are also
declared to be a public nuisance, as personal property used in
conducting and maintaining a declared public nuisance.
A. Upon and after receiving notice through service of a true and correct
copy of this article and of a true and correct copy of the resolution and
order of summary abatement provided for in 396-13 hereof, any and
every person who shall own, legally or equitably, lease, maintain,
manage, conduct or operate a place in the Borough of Etna which is
declared to be a public nuisance as set forth and stated in § 396-9,
§ 396-9 ETNA CODE § 396-12
1:140
§ 396-13. Action to be taken by Borough Council.
Upon a specific finding that a public nuisance, as defined in § 396-9, 396-10
or 396-11, exists in the Borough of Etna, the Borough Council, in applying
the provisions of this article to such nuisance, shall provide for the following
by resolution:
396-10 or 396-11 of this article, is deemed to be a person who has
knowledge of such nuisance for the purpose of this article and is,
thereafter, responsible for its maintenance and shall be liable therefor.
B. The place and subject matter declared to be public nuisances under
§ 396-9, 396-10 or 396-11 shall be abated as provided for herein.
A. Declare the fact that such nuisance exists;
B. Set forth the description or legal description and street address of the
place which constitutes the nuisance;
C. Set forth the evidentiary facts considered by the Borough Council in
arriving at its factual determination.
(1) In the case of a motion-picture film or films, such shall include a
recitation of the particular sexual conduct and acts which the
Borough Council finds are patently offensive and the basis for the
finding by the Borough Council that: (a) such films are publicly
exhibited in the course of business; or that (b) such film is publicly
or repeatedly exhibited or held for such exhibition at the place
declared to be a nuisance.
(2) In the case of a publication or publications, such shall include a
recitation of: (a) the particular publications or types of publications
considered by the Borough Council, and those which the Borough
Council finds to be patently offensive; and (b) the basis for the
finding by the Borough Council that such publications are
displayed, sold or held for sale at any place found by the Borough
Council to be a public nuisance; and (c) the basis of the finding by
the Borough Council that such publications constitute a part of the
stock-in-trade of such place of business or other place.
(3) In the case of a massage parlor or model studio, such shall include
a recitation of: (a) the particular acts of lewdness, assignation or
prostitution which have occurred; and (b) the basis for the finding
by the Borough Council that such acts occur in the course of
business.
D. Order all persons described in 396-12A hereof to summarily abate such
public nuisance within 24 hours of service of such order on any such
persons by terminating the exhibition, sale or possession for sale of
such lewd subject matter or by ceasing to use the place where the
nuisance is declared to exist, or by terminating the use of said premises
for the purposes of lewdness, assignation or prostitution or causing the
§ 396-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 396-13
1:141
same to be terminated, and notifying the Borough Secretary and
Borough Council of compliance therewith by sworn affidavit as ordered
by the action of the Borough Council in such resolution.
E. Order the Borough Solicitor to proceed as directed in § 396-15 of this
article and do all things necessary to abate such public nuisance
through judicial proceedings and to conclude such proceedings as
expeditiously as is permissible under the law, including requesting the
court to advance such proceedings on the calendar of the court.
F. Inform and give notice to persons designated in § 396-12A that:
(1) The Borough Council has determined that a public nuisance
presently exists at such place and address, and that, under
§ 396-12A of this article, they are deemed to have knowledge
thereof and are responsible therefor.
(2) In the event the order of the Borough is not complied with within 24
hours, the Borough Council has ordered the Borough Solicitor, as
provided for under § 396-15 hereof, to commence necessary legal
proceedings naming such persons as defendants in a civil action to
abate the same judicially under § 396-13 of this article, and that
under § 396-14A and B of this article, the costs of abatement of
such civil abatement action filed, including investigative costs,
court costs, attorneys' fees, and other expenses, are made a special
assessment against the parcel of land upon which such nuisance is
being maintained and, upon their determination in such court
action, will by separate legal procedure be made a lien against such
property and a personal obligation against any person, persons,
firm, association, partnership, corporation or other entity deemed
to be in violation of this article.
(3) All lewd motion-picture films or lewd publications being used in
conducting and maintaining such public nuisance are contraband
and the subject of forfeiture.
(4) From and after service on the place or its manager or acting
manager, or person then in charge of such place, of a true and
correct copy of this article and a true and correct copy of such
resolution, any and all monies paid as admission price to or for the
exhibition or exhibitions of such lewd motion-picture films, and
valuable consideration received for the sale of such lewd
publications, and all monies or other valuable consideration
received for services rendered in such massage parlors or model
studios are a public nuisance, as personal property used in
conducting and maintaining such nuisance and, as such, are the
subject of forfeiture.
G. Order that a true and correct copy of said resolution and a true and
correct copy of this article be delivered forthwith in any manner
normally used to effectuate personal service of process to all persons of
record having any legal or equitable interest in the real property and to
§ 396-13 ETNA CODE § 396-13
1:142
§ 396-14. Forfeiture to general fund of Borough; cost of abatement;
manner of collection.
§ 396-15. Action by Borough Solicitor.
Upon specific finding by resolution of the Borough Council of the fact that a
public nuisance exists at a particular location, the Borough Solicitor shall:
the regular or acting manager or persons in charge of the place therein
declared a public nuisance.
A. Upon judgment for the Borough of Etna in legal proceedings brought
pursuant to this article, an accounting shall be made by such defendant
or defendants of all monies or valuable consideration received by them
which have been declared to be a public nuisance under § 396-9C,
396-10C or 396-11B of this article. Such monies or their equivalent and
any valuation considerations received shall be forfeited to the general
fund of the Borough of Etna, or to the Borough of Etna as property of
the Borough of Etna if any valuable consideration received be not
money.
B. The cost of abatement shall include the following:
(1) Investigative costs;
(2) Court costs;
(3) Reasonable attorneys' fees arising out of the preparation for and
trial of the case and appeals therefrom, and other costs allowed on
appeal;
(4) Printing costs of trial and appellate briefs and all other papers filed
in such proceedings.
C. Such cost of abatement is hereby made a special assessment against
the parcel of land upon which such nuisance is maintained. Upon its
determination in a civil action, such shall by separate legal proceeding
be made a lien against such property and a personal obligation against
any person, persons, firm, association, partnership, corporation or
other entity and shall be collected at the same time and in the same
manner as ordinary borough taxes are collected, and shall be subject to
the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in the case of
delinquency as provided for ordinary borough taxes. All laws applicable
to the levy, collection and enforcement of borough taxes shall be
applicable to such special assessment.
A. Not later than three days after passage of said resolution, commence
legal proceedings by the filing of a civil action seeking the following
relief:
(1) A declaratory judgment that the matter named by the Borough
Council is lewd, as defined herein.
§ 396-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 396-15
1:143
§ 396-16. Severability clause.
If any court shall determine that any word, clause, phrase, sentence,
paragraph or subsection of this article is unconstitutional as worded, the
court shall first attempt to construe or interpret such unconstitutional
provisions so as to enable the same to be constitutional as so narrowed or
construed. If the court cannot so limit or construe such word or provision
narrowly so as to render the same unconstitutional, it shall strike or modify
only the minimum number of words, phrases, clauses, sentences or
paragraphs as will be absolutely necessary to render the remainder
constitutional. In no case shall a clause or phrase or word or other portion
hereof render any other word, clause, phrase, sentence, paragraph or
section unconstitutional, but instead shall be severed therefrom entirely,
(2) A declaratory judgment that the matter found to be lewd is or are
public nuisances per se under this article and such resolution.
(3) A declaratory judgment that such place named by the Borough
Council is a public nuisance under this article and such resolution.
(4) An accounting of all monies paid as admission price to or for the
exhibition or exhibitions of such lewd motion-picture films, and
valuable consideration received for the sale of such lewd
publications, and all monies or other valuable considerations
received for services rendered in such massage parlors or model
studios from and after the time the persons maintaining said
nuisance receive notice of the finding by the Borough Council by
resolution that the public nuisance exists, and a judgment that such
monies or valuable consideration are a public nuisance under this
article.
(5) An order that all admission price monies or valuable consideration
received and enumerated in the court-ordered accounting be
forfeited as contraband to the general fund of the Borough of Etna
or as property belonging to the Borough of Etna.
(6) An injunction enjoining and restraining all persons responsible for
maintaining said nuisance from possessing or publicly exhibiting
said lewd motion-picture films, or from selling or possessing for
sale said lewd publications, or from committing acts of lewdness,
assignation or prostitution at any time in the future in the Borough
of Etna and such other injunctive relief as the court may order.
(7) An order that all positive prints of the named lewd films and all
lewd publications or copies or reproductions thereof be forfeited as
contraband under this article.
(8) Judgment for the Borough of Etna that all costs therein expended,
including investigative costs, court costs, reasonable attorney's
fees, and such other expenses as provided for herein.
(9) All other relief as that court may deem proper.
§ 396-15 ETNA CODE § 396-16
1:144
with the balance of this article in its entirety remaining in full force and
effect.
§ 396-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 396-16
1:145

ARTICLE III
Neighborhood Blight
[Adopted 9-15-2015 by Ord. No. 1358]
§ 396-17. Statutory authority.
The Borough of Etna, in order to be in compliance with the Neighborhood
Blight Reclamation and Revitalization Act (Act 90 of 2010), which was
signed into law on October 27, 2010, and made effective April 25, 2011,
hereby adopts this article to be referred to as the "Neighborhood Blight
Protection and Enforcement Ordinance."
§ 396-18. Purpose.
The Borough Council finds it to be in the best interests of the residents of
the Borough of Etna, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, to provide for certain
protections and safeguards in order to address deteriorated properties,
public nuisances and properties in serious violation of state law or
municipal codes. Such protections and safeguards include denial of permits
and actions at law and in equity in order to address deteriorated properties
which have an impact upon crime, the quality of life of our residents
and require expenditures of public funds in order to abate and correct
nuisances, violations and delinquent municipal services accounts.
§ 396-19. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD — A zoning hearing board or other body granted jurisdiction to
render decisions in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, the state Borough Code, the Code of the Borough of Etna,
or a board authorized to act in a similar manner by law.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Etna, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH CODE — A building, housing, property maintenance, fire, health
or other public safety ordinance enacted or adopted by the Borough,
including those ordinances, regulations and resolutions that establish and
assess fees for municipal services and privileges such as sewer, water,
refuse collection and parking/parking arrangements. For purposes of this
article, the term does not include a subdivision and land development
ordinance or a zoning ordinance enacted by the Borough.
BUILDING — A residential, commercial or industrial building or structure
and the land appurtenant to it.
MUNICIPAL PERMIT(S) — Privileges related to real property granted by
a municipality such as the Borough, including, but not limited to, building
permits, parking permits, occupancy permits, and special exceptions or
variances from zoning ordinances. The term includes approvals pursuant to
§ 396-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 396-19
1:147
land use ordinances other than decisions on the substantive validity of a
zoning ordinance or map or the acceptance of a curative amendment.
MUNICIPAL SERVICE(S) — Services provided at a cost by the Borough
of other municipal entity, including water service, sanitary sewer service,
refuse collection and parking allotments/facilities, which benefit individual
properties and also serve to benefit the overall welfare, safety and health of
all residents of the Borough.
OWNER — A holder of title to residential, commercial or industrial real
estate, other than a mortgage lender, who possesses and controls the real
estate. The term includes, but is not limited to, heirs, assigns, beneficiaries
and lessees, provided this ownership interest is a matter of public record.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Property which, because of its physical condition or
use, is regarded as a public nuisance at common law or has been declared
by the appropriate Borough official a public nuisance in accordance with
the Code of the Borough of Etna, as amended.
SERIOUS VIOLATION — A violation of a state law or Borough code (as both
terms are defined herein) or other applicable code that poses an imminent
threat to the health and safety of the dwelling occupant, occupants in
surrounding structures or passersby. Property found to be a public nuisance
is also considered to be a serious violation.
STATE LAW — A statute of the commonwealth or a regulation of an agency
charged with the administration and enforcement of commonwealth law.
SUBSTANTIAL STEP — An affirmative action as determined by a Borough
official or officer of the court on the part of the property owner or managing
agent to remedy a serious violation of state law or Borough code, including,
but not limited to, physical improvements or repairs to the property.
TAX DELINQUENT PROPERTY — Tax delinquent real property, as defined
under the Real Estate Tax Sale Law (P.L. 1368, No. 542),21 the Municipal
Claim and Tax Lien Law (P.L. 207, No. 153)22 or the Second Class City
Treasurers' Sale and Collection Act (P.L. 876, No. 171)23 located in any
municipality in this commonwealth.
§ 396-20. Legal action to be taken against owners.
In addition to any other remedy available at law, including those remedies
available under the Neighborhood Blight Reclamation and Revitalization
Act (Act 90 of 2010), remedies available in equity or other remedies as
provided for in the Code of the Borough of Etna, the Borough may institute
the following actions against the owner of any property that is in serious
violation of a Borough code or for failure to correct a condition which causes
the property to be regarded as a public nuisance:
21.Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5860.101 et seq.
22.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
23.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 27101 et seq.
§ 396-19 ETNA CODE § 396-20
1:148
§ 396-21. Out-of-state owners, service of process upon associations
and trusts.
A. An in personam action may be initiated for a continuing violation for
which the owner takes no substantial step to correct within the six
months following receipt of an order by the Borough to correct the
violation, unless the order is subject to a pending appeal before an
administrative agency or court. Notwithstanding any law limiting the
form of action for the recovery of penalties by a municipality for the
violation of a Borough code, the Borough may recover, in a single action
under this section, an amount equal to the penalties imposed against
the owner and any costs of remediation lawfully incurred by or on
behalf of the Borough to remedy any code violation.
B. A proceeding in equity.
C. A lien may be placed against the assets of an owner of real property that
is in serious violation of Borough code or is regarded as a public
nuisance after a judgment, decree or order is entered by a court of
competent jurisdiction against the owner of the property for an
adjudication under either an in personam action or a proceeding in
equity as set forth above. In the case of an owner that is an association
or trust, this does not authorize a lien to be placed upon the individual
assets of the general partner, trustee, limited partner, shareholder,
member or beneficiary of the association or trust except as otherwise
allowed by law.
A. A person who lives or has a principal place of residence outside this
commonwealth who owns property in this commonwealth against which
Borough code or other applicable code violations have been cited and
the person is charged under Title 18 Pa.C.S.A. (relating to crimes and
offenses), and who has been properly notified of the violations, may be
extradited to this commonwealth to face criminal prosecution to the full
extent allowed and in the manner authorized by 42 Pa.C.S. Ch. 91
(relating to detainers and extradition).
B. Where after reasonable efforts service of process for a notice or citation
for any Borough code or other applicable code violations for any real
property owned by an association or trust cannot be accomplished by
handing a copy of the notice or citation to an executive office, partner
or trustee of the association or trust or to the manager, trustee or clerk
in charge of the property, the delivery of the notice or citation may
occur by registered, certified or United States Express Mail,
accompanied by a delivery confirmation:
(1) To the registered office of the association or trust;
(2) Where the association or trust does not have registered offices, to
the mailing address used for real estate tax collection purposes, if
accompanied by the posting of a conspicuous notice on the
§ 396-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 396-21
1:149
§ 396-22. Permit denials.
property and by handing a copy of the notice or citation to the
person in charge of the property at that time.
A. The Borough or a board may deny issuing to an applicant a municipal
permit if the applicant owns real property in any municipality in this
commonwealth for which there exists on the real property:
(1) Tax and/or municipal services delinquencies on account of the
actions of the owner; or
(2) A serious violation and the owner has taken no substantial step to
correct the serious violation within six months following
notification of the violation and for which fines, penalties or a
judgment to abate or correct were imposed by a Magisterial
District Judge or municipal court or a judgment at law or in equity
was imposed by a court of common pleas. No denial shall be
permitted if a judgment is subject to stay or supersedes by order of
court, of if the municipal permit is necessary to correct a violation
of state law or Borough code.
B. The municipal permit denial as above described shall not apply to an
applicant's delinquency on taxes and/or municipal services charges that
are under appeal or otherwise contested through a court or
administrative process.
C. In issuing a denial of a municipal permit, the Borough or the board shall
indicate the street address, the municipality and county in which the
property is located and the court and docket number for each parcel
cited as a basis for the denial. The denial shall also state that the
applicant may request a letter of compliance from the appropriate state
agency, municipality or school district in the form specified by such
entity.
D. All municipal permits denied in accordance with this section may be
withheld by the Borough until an applicant obtains a letter of
compliance from the appropriate state agency, municipality or school
district indicating the following:
(1) The property in question has no tax or municipal services
delinquencies;
(2) The property in question is now in compliance with state law,
Borough code or other applicable codes; or
(3) The owner of the property has presented and the appropriate entity
has accepted a plan to begin remediation of a serious violation of
state law, Borough code or other applicable codes.
E. If a letter of compliance or a letter of noncompliance, as the case may
be, is not issued within 45 days of the request, the property shall be
§ 396-21 ETNA CODE § 396-22
1:150
§ 396-23. Inherited property relief.
Where property is inherited by will or intestacy, the devisee or heir shall
be given the opportunity to make payments on reasonable terms to correct
code violations or to enter into a remediation agreement with the Borough
to avoid subjecting the devisee's or heir's other properties to asset
attachment or denial of municipal permits and approvals on other
properties owned by the devisee or heir. Such opportunity shall be given at
the Borough's discretion and subject to the revocation upon the devisee's
or heir's failure to proceed with a payment plan or to progress forward and
complete a remediation plan.
§ 396-24. Miscellaneous provisions.
deemed to be in compliance for the purposes of this section. The
appropriate state agency, municipality or school district shall specify
the form in which the request for a compliance letter shall be made.
Such letters shall be verified by the appropriate municipal officials
before issuing to the applicant a municipal permit.
F. Boards, including the Borough Zoning Hearing Board, may deny
approval of municipal permits – which includes special exception
approval and variance relief – if warranted as set forth above to the
extent that approval of such a municipal permit is within the
jurisdiction of the board.
G. The Borough may appear to present evidence that the applicant is
subject to denial by a Board in accordance with this section.
H. A municipal permit may only be denied to an applicant other than an
owner if the applicant is acting under the direction or with the
permission of the owner and that owner owns real estate that is subject
to denial as set forth herein above.
A. If any sentence, clause, section or part of this article is for any reason
found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality,
illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining
provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or parts hereof. It is hereby
declared as the intent of Borough Council that this article would have
been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence,
clause, section or part thereof not been included herein.
B. All ordinances or parts of ordinances conflicting or inconsistent
herewith are hereby repealed.
C. The appropriate officers of the Borough are authorized to take
whatever actions are necessary and appropriate to carry out the
purpose and intent of this article.
D. This article shall become effective upon enactment as provided by law.
§ 396-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 396-24
1:151

ARTICLE IV
Nuisance Properties
[Adopted 7-17-2007 by Ord. No. 1311]
§ 396-25. Purpose.
Borough Council hereby finds that nuisance properties place a substantial
and unacceptable threat and burden on the common health, safety and
welfare of the residents of the Borough of Etna. To this end, Borough
Council directs the Code Enforcement Officer, as provided in the following
sections, to charge the cost of abatement of nuisance properties to the
property owner in an effort to deter repeated violations of state and local
laws and to ensure restoration of the common health, safety and welfare of
Borough residents.
§ 396-26. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — That official of the Borough of Etna
charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance
of the Borough of Etna.
COST OF ABATEMENT — The reasonable cost of abatement of an
enumerated infraction as calculated by the Code Enforcement Officer,
including but not limited to the costs of Police Department and/or the
costs of the Code Enforcement Officer response associated with abating an
enumerated infraction.
COST SCHEDULE — The complete list of costs associated with abating each
enumerated infraction.
NUISANCE PROPERTY — Any property being used as a residence within
the Borough of Etna with five or fewer units that causes to be issued
three citations and/or legal complaints from the police and/or the Code
Enforcement Officer for any enumerated infraction on three separate
occasions within any 120-day period, or any property being used as a
residence with more than five units that causes to be issued at least three
citations and/or filings of legal complaints from one unit or five citations
and/or filings of legal complaints from the entire building from the police
and/or Code Enforcement Officer for any enumerated infraction on separate
occasions within any 120-day period.
PROPERTY OWNER — Any person or business entity, profit or not-for-profit,
owning an interest in any property within the boundaries of the Borough of
Etna.
§ 396-27. Enumerated infractions.
A. An enumerated infraction is any of the following activities, behavior or
conduct, whenever engaged in by the owner(s), operator(s), tenant(s),
§ 396-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 396-27
1:153
§ 396-28. Procedure.
occupant(s) or their invitee(s) occurring within the boundary lines of
the property or 100 feet or less outside the boundary lines of the
property, including but not limited to:
(1) Violations of Articles I and II of this chapter;
(2) Violation of Borough of Etna ordinances pertaining to the Uniform
Construction Code;
(3) Violation of Chapter 448, Article I (Ord. No. 1289 of 2002),
pertaining to the International Property Maintenance Code;
(4) Under the law of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, any violation
designated as a summary offense, a misdemeanor, or a felony.
B. Under the law of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, any violation
designated as a summary offense, a misdemeanor, or a felony.
A. Reports and notices.
(1) All enumerated infractions will be reported by the citing police
officer to the Code Enforcement Officer within 72 hours of its
occurrence. The Code Enforcement Officer shall notify the property
owner by first-class mail to the property owner's last known
address or cause to be hand-delivered a notice to the property
owner's residence or usual place of business.
(2) The notice shall be deemed to be properly delivered if sent either
by first-class mail to the property owner's last known address or if
delivered in person to the property owner. If the property owner
cannot be located, the notice shall be deemed to be properly
delivered if a copy of it is personally served upon a competent
member of the property owner's family at least 17 years of age or a
competent adult currently residing there. If a current address
cannot be located, notice shall be deemed sufficient if posted on the
potential nuisance property, and a copy of the notice is sent via
first-class mail to the last known address of the property owner.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer is herewith charged with keeping a log
of such enumerated infractions. The log shall be maintained for the
purposes of recording enumerated infractions from diverse sources
who would not otherwise know of other departments' activities with the
subject property.
C. Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer determines that an owner of a
property being used as a residence with five or fewer units has been
cited or a legal complaint has been filed for an enumerated infraction at
least three times on separate occasions within any 120-day period or an
owner of a property being used as a residence within more than five
units has been cited or a legal complaint has been filed for an
§ 396-27 ETNA CODE § 396-28
1:154
enumerated infraction at least three times from one unit or at least five
times from the entire building on separate occasions within any 120-day
period, the Code Enforcement Officer shall notify the property owner in
writing that the property has been designated as a nuisance property.
D. The notice shall be deemed to be properly delivered if sent either by
first-class mail to the property owner's last known address or if
delivered in person to the property owner. If the property owner cannot
be located, the notice shall be deemed to be properly delivered if a copy
of it is personally served upon a competent member of the property
owner's family at least 17 years of age or a competent adult currently
residing there. If a current address cannot be located, notice shall be
deemed sufficient if posted on the potential nuisance property and a
copy of the notice is sent via first-class mail to the last known address of
the property owner.
E. The notice required by Subsections A and C shall contain:
(1) The street address or legal description sufficient for identification
of the property;
(2) A description of the enumerated infraction(s) that have occurred at
the property and a statement indicating that the property is
declared as a nuisance property as a result of said enumerated
infraction(s);
(3) Notice of the property owner's right to appeal pursuant to § 396-30;
and
(4) A statement that the property owner shall within 10 days respond
to the Code Enforcement Officer, in writing, with either:
(a) The intent of the property owner to appeal the finding of the
Code Enforcement Officer; or
(b) A proposal detailing a course of action by which enumerated
activities will be abated at the property. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall, within 10 days of receipt of said proposal, either
approve or disapprove of the proposal. In the event the Code
Enforcement Officer disapproves of the proposal, the property
owner may appeal pursuant to § 396-30.
F. Whenever Code Enforcement Officer determines that an additional
enumerated infraction has occurred at a property for which notice has
been issued pursuant to Subsection C of this section, and either the
enumerated infraction has occurred not less than 13 days after notice
has been issued or an approved course of action under Subsection E(2)
has not been completed, the Code Enforcement Officer shall charge the
cost of abatement of the enumerated infraction to the property owner
pursuant to § 396-29 for this and any additional enumerated infraction,
exceptions notwithstanding.
§ 396-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 396-29
1:155
§ 396-29. Costs charged to owner.
§ 396-30. Appeal.
Appeal of the determination of the Code Enforcement Officer pursuant to
§ 396-28C shall be submitted to the Borough Council within 10 days of
service of the notice of enumerated infraction.
§ 396-31. Exceptions.
§ 396-32. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this
article are hereby repealed.
§ 396-33. Severability.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Borough of Etna that the
several provisions of this article are separable. If any court of competent
jurisdiction shall declare any words, sections, sentences or provisions of
this article to be invalid, such ruling shall not affect any other words,
sections, sentences or provisions of this article not specifically intended in
said ruling.
A. On an annual basis, the Code Enforcement Officer shall recommend a
cost schedule for each enumerated infraction to the Borough Council,
and Borough Council shall adopt such cost schedule as recommended
by the Code Enforcement Officer or adopt a different cost schedule, as
the Council deems appropriate, by resolution, which will be filed in the
Borough Secretary's office.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall impose upon the owner of a
nuisance property the cost of abatement of any enumerated infraction
consistent with § 396-27. Any cost imposed upon the property owner
shall constitute a lien against the property.
C. Each subsequent incident of any enumerated infraction shall be
deemed a separate violation subject to this article.
A. In the event any Property Owner, after implementation of a
§ 396-28E(4)(b) plan, demonstrates that Code Enforcement Officer or
police have not responded to an enumerated infraction at a nuisance
property for at least a period of six months, and all other requirements
of this article have been complied with, that property shall no longer be
considered a nuisance property.
B. Any citation or complaint issued to a tenant who is already in the
process of being evicted shall not count towards the number of citations
or complaints that have been issued or filed necessary to be deemed a
"nuisance property," if the property owner can prove that an eviction
action has been commenced in a court of law and if the property owner
is actively prosecuting said eviction action against the tenant.
§ 396-29 ETNA CODE § 396-33
1:156
Chapter 403
OCCUPANCY PERMITS
§ 403-1. Permit required.
All owners of buildings in the Borough of Etna shall be required to register
with the Secretary of the Borough a statement of the kinds and classes
of occupancy existing in any building or buildings owned by said owners.
No dwelling house, apartment or other living quarters, commercial or
industrial establishments may be occupied by new occupants until such
time as the owner has secured an occupancy permit to be issued by the
Secretary of the Borough or the Borough Building Inspector, as designated
by Council.
§ 403-2. Registration forms.
The Secretary of the Borough is authorized and directed to prepare and
forward to owners the necessary registration forms required to effectuate
the intention of this chapter and to administer its provisions. The
application for the occupancy permit shall disclose the following
information:
§ 403-3. Inspections.
No permit shall be issued until such time as the premises are deemed to
be in a livable and habitable condition after an inspection by the Building
Inspector, Fire Marshal and/or other such persons as the Council of the
Borough may require from time to time.
§ 403-4. Violations and penalties.
Any owner of a building or other persons found guilty of wilfully evading
or violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to a fine of not more than $50 for each violation, and each day's
violation shall be considered a separate offense. All ordinances or parts of
ordinances inconsistent herewith are repealed.
A. Address of the premises.
B. Name and address of the owner.
C. Number of apartments.
D. Number of rooms.
E. Bathroom facilities.
F. General condition of premises.
G. The application shall also disclose the names and occupations of all
occupants.
§ 396-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 403-4
1:157
Chapter 412
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
§ 412-1. Adoption of rules and regulations. [Amended 5-19-2020 by
Ord. No. 1383]
The rules and regulations adopted by the Etna Borough Recreation
Committee be and the same are hereby adopted by this chapter the same as
if they were set forth herein.
§ 412-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-11-1989 by Ord. No.
1208; 5-19-2020 by Ord. No. 1383]
Any person who violates any provision of the rules and regulations of the
Etna Borough Recreation Committee shall be guilty of an offense and, for
every such offense, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $600 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of fine
and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than 30 days, provided
that a separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed on each
calendar day during or on which the violation occurs or continues.
§ 412-3. Penalty for entering playground after closing hours or
placing foreign matter into swimming pool. [Amended 12-11-1989
by Ord. No. 1208]
Any person who enters the playground after the same has been closed, or
any person who places any type of foreign matter into the swimming pool
shall be guilty of an offense and, for every such offense, upon conviction,
shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and costs of
prosecution and, in default of payment of fine and costs, to undergo
imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
§ 412-4. Violators may be evicted from playground.
In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided for, any person or persons
violating any of the provisions of this chapter may be removed and
physically evicted from the playground premises by the person or persons
in charge thereof or by any Etna Borough policeman when such person or
persons have been asked to leave the premises and refuse to so do.
Chapter 418
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
§ 403-4 ETNA CODE § 412-4
1:158
ARTICLE I
Disorderly Conduct and Disturbance of Peace
[Adopted 12-20-1973 by Ord. No. 107024 (Ch. VI, Part 4, of the 1974
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 418-1. Disorderly conduct prohibited.
Disorderly conduct is hereby prohibited within the Borough of Etna. Any
person who shall wilfully make or cause to be made any loud, boisterous and
unseemly noise or disturbance to the annoyance of the peaceable residents
nearby, or near to any public street or alley or public ground within the
Borough, whereby the public peace is broken or disturbed or the traveling
public annoyed, shall be guilty of disorderly conduct.
§ 418-2. Disturbance of peace prohibited.
Disturbance of the peace is hereby prohibited within the Borough of Etna.
Any person who shall be guilty of any wilful act causing or tending to cause
a disturbance of the peace and good order of the Borough, or causing or
tending to cause any danger, discomfort or annoyance to inhabitants of the
Borough or to users of any of the public streets or alleys in the Borough; or
who shall fight or quarrel or incite others to fight or quarrel; or who shall
congregate upon any of the public streets or alleys or public grounds in the
Borough to the annoyance of peaceable residents nearby or traveling upon
any street or alley or being lawfully upon any of the public grounds in the
Borough, whereby the public peace is broken or disturbed or the traveling
public annoyed, shall be guilty of disturbance of the peace.
§ 418-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-11-1989 by Ord. No.
1208]
Any person who violates any provision of this article, or who causes, helps,
aids or abets any person to violate any such provision, shall for every such
violation, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600
and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of fine and costs, to
undergo imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
24.Editor's Note: Section 4 of this ordinance repealed Ord. Nos. 749, 821, and 951.
§ 418-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 418-3
1:159

ARTICLE II
Public Conduct
[Adopted 11-23-1868 by Ord. No. 10 (Ch. VI, Part 5, of the 1974
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 418-4. Bathing in creek or river without proper clothing
prohibited. [Amended 3-8-1954 by Ord. No. 799; 12-11-1989 by Ord.
No. 1208]
It shall be unlawful for any person to bathe, swim or wash in the Allegheny
River or Pine Creek within the limits of the Borough of Etna unless that
person is wearing a bathing suit or other suitable garment to protect his or
her person from exposure. Any such person who violates any provision of
this section shall, for every such violation, upon conviction, be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than $600 and costs of prosecution and, in default of
payment of fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than 30
days.
§ 418-5. Banana skins and other dangerous matter not to be placed
on or allowed to fall onto sidewalks. [Added 1-10-1944 by Ord. No.
726; amended 6-12-1950 by Ord. No. 772; 3-8-1954 by Ord. No. 815]
No person, firm or corporation shall throw or permit to fall upon any
sidewalk in the Borough any banana skin or other vegetable or other matter
liable to endanger any person or persons using such sidewalk.
§ 418-6. Use of firearms restricted; balls and other missiles not to
be thrown on street or sidewalk. [Added 1-10-1944 by Ord. No. 726;
amended 6-12-1950 by Ord. No. 772; 3-8-1954 by Ord. No. 815]
No person shall wilfully discharge any gun or other firearm within the limits
of the Borough, except in necessary defense of person or property, nor shall
any person throw any snowball, football, metal, stone, brick or other missile
in or on any of the streets, sidewalks or alleys in the Borough.
§ 418-7. Violations and penalties. [Added 1-10-1944 by Ord. No.
726; amended 12-20-1973 by Ord. No. 1058; 12-11-1989 by Ord. No.
1208]
Any person, whether principal or agent, who violates any provision of this
article shall, for every such violation, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of not more than $600 and costs of prosecution and, in default of
payment of fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than
30 days, provided that each day on which any person, firm or corporation
violates any provision of this article shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 418-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 418-8
1:161
§ 418-8. Additional actions or proceedings authorized to secure
compliance. [Added 1-10-1944 by Ord. No. 726]
In addition to the penalties herein provided, the Borough of Etna may
institute appropriate actions or proceedings at law or in equity to secure
compliance with the provisions of this article. By reason of the dangerous
character of any structure or its unsanitary or noxious condition, the
enforcing officer may order the building vacated and kept vacant until such
dangerous, unsanitary or noxious condition is corrected.
§ 418-9. Severability. [Added 1-10-1944 by Ord. No. 726]
If any of the provisions of this article shall be held by any court to be invalid
or unconstitutional, such judgment shall not be held to invalidate any other
provisions of this article.
§ 418-8 ETNA CODE § 418-9
1:162
Chapter 426
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
§ 418-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 418-9
1:163

ARTICLE I
Soliciting and Transient Merchants
[Adopted 7-19-1983 by Ord. No. 114525 (Ch. XIV, Part 5, of the 1974
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 426-1. Legislative intent.
It is the purpose of this article to control and correct certain conditions
connected with activities of persons entering upon private residential
properties for the purpose of soliciting, as herein defined, and the Borough
Council having first determined that solicitation can and does lead to crime,
fraud and invasion of privacy of Borough residents in the quiet enjoyment
of their homes before and after normal working hours. This article is
also intended to prevent similar abuses by transient merchants, as herein
defined.
§ 426-2. Definitions.
When used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION — An organization which has been granted
an exemption by the United States Internal Revenue Service under Section
501(c) or Section 509(a) of the Internal Revenue Code.
SOLICITOR — Includes any person:
TRANSIENT MERCHANT — Includes any person who temporarily and for
a short time hires, rents or obtains a definite place of business, whether a
storeroom or a market stand, or a private residence for the sale of goods,
wares, merchandise, or to offer or expose the same for sale or for future
Who goes from private house to house, conveying or transporting
goods, wares or merchandise, or offering or exposing the same for sale,
or making sales or delivering articles, goods, wares or merchandise to
purchasers;
A.
Who goes from private house to house, soliciting or attempting to take
orders from individuals for the sale of goods, wares or merchandise,
including magazines, books, periodicals or personal property of any
nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be performed
at that time or in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries
or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such order, whether or not
he is collecting advance payments on such orders;
B.
Who goes from private house to house soliciting donations or money
for themselves or any organization for any purpose, whether or not
anything of value is given in return.
C.
25.Editor's Note: The headings of this article are part of this ordinance as enacted. This
ordinance repealed all conflicting ordinances and parts of ordinances to the extent of
conflict and specifically repealed Ord. No. 1074.
§ 426-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 426-2
1:165
delivery, and sale. ("Temporarily" and "short time" have been construed as
three months or less.)
§ 426-3. Exemption.
The terms of this article shall not be held to include the acts of merchants or
their employees or agents in delivering goods or services as in the regular
course of business; nor shall it apply to any manufacturer or producer in
the sale of bread and bakery products, meat and meat products, or milk and
milk products.
§ 426-4. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any solicitor or transient merchant, as defined in
§ 426-2 of this article, to engage in any such business within the Borough
of Etna without first obtaining a license therefor in compliance with the
provisions of this article.
§ 426-5. Application.
A. Applicants for a license under this article must file with the Police
Department of the Borough an application in writing on a form to be
furnished by the Borough, which shall give the following information:
(1) The name and physical description of the applicant.
(2) Complete and permanent house and local address of the applicant
and, in the case of transient merchants, the local address from
which proposed sales will be made.
(3) A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be
sold or the organization on behalf of which funds are solicited.
(4) If employed, the name and address of the employer.
(5) The source who will supply the goods or property proposed to be
sold or orders taken for the sale thereof, and the proposed method
of delivery.
(6) Two recent photographs of the applicant, which shall be
approximately two inches, showing the head and shoulders of the
applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner.
(7) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted
of any felony or crime involving moral turpitude.
(8) Applications involving solicitation for charitable institutions shall
be accompanied by a copy of the grant of exemption issued by the
Internal Revenue Service.
B. This application completed as to all matters inquired of shall be turned
over to the Police Department of the Borough, together with the initial
§ 426-2 ETNA CODE § 426-5
1:166
§ 426-6. Investigation and issuance of license.
§ 426-7. Charitable organization (fee exemption).
Solicitors for charitable organizations shall comply with the provisions of
this article, but no application or license fee shall be charged.
§ 426-8. Application to business and public places; restrictions on
time and place.
fee to cover the expenses of investigation, payable to the Borough of
Etna.
A. Upon receipt of each application, it shall be immediately reviewed by
the Police Department for accuracy.
B. If as a result of such review the application is found to be true, the Chief
of Police or his designee shall endorse on the application his approval
and return the application to the Borough Secretary or designee, who
shall, upon payment of the prescribed initial license fee, deliver to the
applicant his or her license within 24 hours after payment of the fee,
provided that no license shall be issued to any convicted felon or person
convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude.
C. Such license shall contain the signature of the issuing officer, and shall
show the name, address and photograph of the said licensee, the class
license issued, and the kind of goods or organization involved, the
amount of fee paid, the date of issuance and the expiration date, as well
as the license number and other identifying description of any vehicle
used in such licensed business. Each solicitor or transient merchant
must secure an individual license. No license shall be used at any time
by any person other than the one to whom it is issued. The Borough
Secretary shall keep a permanent record of all licenses issued and
those rejected.
A. No licensee shall solicit private residences on Sunday, nor before 9:00
a.m. or after 5:00 p.m., prevailing time, on weekdays.
B. No licensee shall solicit at any private residence exhibiting a sign
reading "No Solicitors" or words of the same meaning.
C. Residents may erect "No Solicitors" or similar signs not to exceed 120
square inches in size, which for the purposes of this article shall be
conspicuously displayed near their entrance, walk or doorway.
D. Solicitors may solicit a business property in the Borough during all
business hours and may solicit in Borough streets and other public
places from 9:00 a.m., prevailing time, to sunset, provided that such
solicitors obtain a license as required by this article, and they shall be
subject to all of the other provisions of this article.
§ 426-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 426-9
1:167
§ 426-9. Exhibition of license.
Licensees shall exhibit their license at the request of any resident or police
officer.
§ 426-10. Revocation of permit; notice of hearing.
§ 426-11. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police or his designee in
the denial of an application approval as provided for in § 426-6 of this article
or in the action of the revocation provided in § 426-10 of this article, shall
have the right to appeal to the Borough of Etna Council. Such appeal shall
be taken by filing with the Council, within 14 days after notice of the action
complained of has been mailed to such person's last known address, a
written statement setting forth fully the grounds for such appeal. Hearings
shall be governed by the Local Agency Law.26
§ 426-12. Expiration of permits.
All permits expire on the date specified on the permit.
§ 426-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-11-1989 by Ord.
No. 1208]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates any provision of this
article shall, for every such violation, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
A. Licenses issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked by
the Chief of Police or his designee with respect to such persons, after
notice and opportunity for a hearing, for any of the following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the
application for license.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in the course of
carrying on his business as solicitor or transient merchant.
(3) Any violation of this article.
(4) Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
(5) Conducting solicitation or business in an unlawful manner or in
such a manner as to constitute a breach of peace.
(6) Refusing to leave premises when asked to do so by the occupant.
B. Notice of revocation of license shall be given in writing, setting forth
specifically the grounds of complaint and the opportunity for a hearing.
Such notice shall be transmitted by certified mail, postage prepaid, to
the permittee at his last known address.
26.Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 551 et seq. and 751 et seq.
§ 426-9 ETNA CODE § 426-13
1:168
a fine of not less than $50 or more than $600 and costs of prosecution and,
in default of payment of fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not
more than 30 days, provided that each day's continuance of a violation shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 426-14. Fees.
Every applicant for a license as a solicitor or transient merchant under this
article shall pay a license fee as established by this article.
§ 426-15. Amount of fee. [Amended 10-20-1992 by Ord. No. 1224]
§ 426-16. Severability.
The provisions of this article are declared to be severable, and if any
section, sentence, clause or phrase of this article shall for any reason be
held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining sections, sentences, clauses and phrases of this
article, but they shall stand notwithstanding the invalidity of any part.
A. The application fee for solicitors and transient merchants as required
by § 426-5 of this article is set at $5 per application.
B. The license fee for solicitors and transient merchants as required by
§ 426-14 of this article shall be as follows:
(1) $50 per day for no longer than three consecutive days in any
calendar month.
C. Monthly and yearly permits shall not be issued.
§ 426-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 426-16
1:169
Chapter 445
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
§ 426-16 ETNA CODE § 426-16
1:170
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Standards
[Adopted 7-16-2002 by Ord. No. 1289]
§ 445-1. Code adopted.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Secretary/Manager of the Borough of Etna, being marked and designated
as "The International Property Maintenance Code, 2000," as published
by the Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., the
International Conference of Building Officials, and the Southern Building
Code Congress International, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the Property
Maintenance Code of the Borough of Etna, in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, and all future revisions of same as published and authorized
by the aforementioned publisher, for the control of buildings and structures
as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance Code are
hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in
this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in § 445-4 of this article.
§ 445-2. Repealer.
All other ordinances or parts of ordinances of the Borough of Etna in conflict
herewith are hereby repealed.
§ 445-3. Affect on current proceedings.
Nothing in this article or in the Property Maintenance Code hereby adopted
shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court,
or any rights acquired or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited
in § 445-2 of this article; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any
character be lost, impaired or affected by this article.
§ 445-4. Amendments.
The International Property Maintenance Code adopted by § 445-1 is hereby
changed by enactment, repeal or amendment of certain provisions, which
changes are on the following pages, with the location in the code for the
page noted by the heading "Change(s)-Page(s)."27
§ 445-5. Effective date.
The Secretary/Manager of the Borough of Etna shall certify to the adoption
of this article and cause the same to be published as required by law, and
this article shall take effect and be in force on July 16, 2002.
27.Editor's Note: See Attachment 1 to this chapter.
§ 445-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 445-5
1:171
Chapter 451
PUBLIC PROPERTY
§ 451-1. Unlawful to tamper with public property or property on
street, alley, sidewalk or public ground.
No person or persons shall destroy or injure in any way whatsoever, or
tamper with or deface any public property in the Borough of Etna, or any
grass, walk, lamp, ornamental work, building, street light, fire hydrant or
water or gas stop box in or on any street, alley, sidewalk or public ground in
the Borough.
§ 451-2. Unlawful to tamper with stakes, posts or monuments.
No person or persons shall in any manner interfere with or meddle with
or pull, drive, change, alter or destroy any stake, post, monument or other
evidence of any elevation, grade, line, location, corner or angle in the
Borough of Etna, made, placed or set, or hereafter made, placed or set, or
caused to be done by the authorities of the Borough in any survey of or in
any street, alley or public ground in the Borough, to evidence the location,
elevation, line, grade, corner or angle of any public street, alley, sidewalk,
bridge, curb, gutter, drain or other public work, matter or thing.
§ 451-3. Unlawful to tamper with warning lamps, flares, signs or
barricades.
No person or persons shall wilfully or maliciously destroy or remove or
deface or obliterate or cover up any lamp, flare, warning sign or barricade
erected by the authorities of the Borough or by any person, firm or
corporation doing work by permission of the authorities of the Borough on
any street, alley, sidewalk, bridge or public ground in the Borough as a
warning of danger.
§ 451-4. Unlawful to take material from street, alley or public
ground.
No person or persons shall take any earth, stone or other material from any
street, alley or public ground in the Borough of Etna.
§ 451-5. Certain activities not unlawful.
This chapter shall not apply to normal activities in connection with the
construction, maintenance and repair of the streets, alleys, bridges,
sidewalks and public grounds and the structures and fixtures thereon or
therein upon permit from or by authority of the Borough.
§ 445-5 ETNA CODE § 451-6
1:172
§ 451-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-11-1989 by Ord. No.
1208]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall for every such
violation, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600
and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of fine and costs, to
undergo imprisonment for not more than 30 days, provided that the fact
that a violator has been penalized after hearing, as herein provided, shall
not preclude the Borough or other injured party from taking proper legal
action to recover damages resulting from that violation.
Chapter 457
RENTAL PROPERTY
§ 451-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 451-6
1:173

ARTICLE I
Rental Unit and Tenant Reports
[Adopted 5-17-1994 by Ord. No. 1230; amended in its entirety
12-21-1999 by Ord. No. 1272]
§ 457-1. Landlord responsibilities.
A. Purpose. This article is enacted to provide the uniform and equitable
distribution of the tax levies in the Borough of Etna and upon the
inhabitants thereof and to promote the welfare of the inhabitants of the
Borough of Etna by ensuring that all residential rental properties
conform to the International Property Maintenance Code.28
B. Definitions and interpretation. As used in this article, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated, unless a different meaning
clearly appears from the context:
BUSINESS UNIT — A parcel of real estate, with or without
improvements located thereon, utilized by any person or persons for
any activity carried on or experienced for gain or profit in the Borough
of Etna.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms used for living and sleeping
purposes arranged for occupancy by one family or by one or more
persons.
LANDLORD — A lessor, or person who acts as legal agent for the lessor,
of any parcel of real estate located in the Borough of Etna; or a lessor,
or person who acts as legal agent for the lessor, of any improvements
on real estate or any building located in the Borough of Etna.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, firm or
corporation.
TENANT — A person who has the use, either by himself or with others,
of a dwelling unit or a business unit owned by a person other than
himself for a period exceeding 30 days.
C. Reports by landlords. Within 90 days from the effective date of this
article each landlord shall submit to the Borough Secretary/Manager,
on a report form supplied by the Borough Secretary/Manager, which
includes the following information.
(1) A list of the dwelling units and business units owned by the
landlord located within the Borough of Etna limits, whether
occupied or not occupied;
(2) Address of each dwelling unit and business unit;
(3) Lot and block number of each dwelling unit and business unit;
28.Editor's Note: See Ch. 445, Property Maintenance, Art. I, of this Code.
§ 457-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 457-1
1:175
§ 457-2. Inspection and issuance of certificate.
(4) Whether or not said dwelling unit or business unit is inhabited or
utilized by tenants;
(5) Name of all tenants utilizing each aforementioned dwelling unit or
business unit, if any;
(6) Name and address of any tenant's employment, if known;
(7) Social security number of each tenant, if known.
D. Reports by persons upon becoming landlords. After the effective date of
this article, any person who becomes a landlord shall, within 30 days
thereafter, report to the Borough Secretary/Manager the information
and data set forth in Subsection C above and on forms to be provided by
the Borough Secretary/Manager.
E. Reports of changes in use or occupancy. After the effective date of this
article, each and every landlord of property within the Borough of Etna
shall report to the Borough Secretary/Manager on a report from to be
supplied by the Borough Secretary/Manager any change in the
occupancy of any dwelling unit or business unit owned by such
landlord. The reported change shall include the name or names of all
new tenants of such dwelling unit or business unit, the date when such
change was effected, and the forwarding address of the previous tenant
or tenants, if known. The report shall also contain the name and
address of tenant's employer, if known, and tenant's social security
number, if known. In the event that a dwelling unit or business unit was
used or utilized by a tenant and then becomes vacant, this change shall
also be reported to the Borough Secretary/Manager. All reports
required by this section shall be made within 30 days after a landlord
has knowledge that such a unit has had a change in use or occupancy or
has become vacant.
A. Purpose. This article is enacted to provide for the health, safety, and
welfare of the inhabitants of the Borough of Etna by calling for the
inspection of all residential rental properties in the Borough of Etna.
B. Occupancy permit (renewable). A renewable occupancy permit shall be
required for each building within the Borough of Etna that is deemed to
be a residential rental unit. A fee of $60 shall be paid by the landlord to
cover the inspection provided for by this article and the issuance of the
certificate. [Amended 12-17-2013 by Ord. No. 1350]
C. Application. An application for such permit shall be made to the Code
Enforcement Officer by the landlord of the property or the owner's legal
agent as per § 457-1D of this article. An inspection fee for each is to be
paid to the Borough Manager for general revenues of the Borough to
defray the costs of the inspection of the building by the Code
Enforcement Officer. The annual inspection fee shall be billed to the
property owner and shall become due and payable on or before March
§ 457-1 ETNA CODE § 457-2
1:176
31, of the year of the required inspection or upon completion of the
inspection, whichever occurs sooner. Every three years thereafter,
another application shall be made by the owner or owner's legal agent
with the inspection fee becoming due and payable on or before March
31 of that year. On a ward-by-ward basis, all residential rental
properties shall be obligated to file an application and be subject to
inspection every three years thereafter. The Code Enforcement Officer
shall enter and inspect all structures for which an application for an
occupancy permit has been made. The inspection shall be based upon
compliance with the Property Maintenance Code as adopted through
Ordinance No. 1289 of 2002. The Code Enforcement Officer shall refuse
issuance of an occupancy permit or the renewal thereof to the owner
or owner's legal agent of any building or occupancy if the fee has not
been paid or when the inspection discloses the building or occupancy
to be substandard and detrimental to the health and safety of the
tenants and other residents of the Borough of Etna until alterations and
improvements have been made to eliminate the substandard condition.
[Amended 5-19-2020 by Ord. No. 1383]
D. Inspection schedule by wards.
(1) For the purposes of beginning the inspection process in the
Borough of Etna, the First Voting Ward will be inspected during the
year 2000, the Second Voting Ward shall be inspected in the year
2001 and the Third Voting Ward shall be inspected in the year
2002.
(2) Any residential rental property within the Borough of Etna, upon
proper cause shown and upon complaint of the Code Enforcement
Officer, will be subject to an inspection at anytime.
E. Penalties. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article,
including failure to file required reports; filing inaccurate, untimely or
incomplete reports; or failure to apply for an occupancy permit or
renewal thereof or for any other violation, shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300. For the
purpose of this section, each day a person is in violation of any provision
of this article shall be considered a separate offense.
F. Repealer. All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent
herewith are hereby repealed.
G. Effective date. This article shall become effective on the 1st day of
January 2000.
§ 457-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 457-2
1:177
Chapter 470
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
§ 457-2 ETNA CODE § 457-2
1:178
ARTICLE I
Sewer Construction
[Adopted 3-17-1914 by Ord. No. 395 (Ch. XX, Part 1, § 1, of the 1974
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 470-1. Borough to pay one-third cost of sewer construction.
Whenever the construction of any sanitary sewer shall hereafter be
authorized by the Borough of Etna, the Borough of Etna shall assure and
pay one-third of the total cost and expense thereof.
§ 470-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-1
1:179

ARTICLE II
Private Sewers
[Adopted 7-12-1906 by Ord. No. 253 (Ch. XX, Part 1, §§ 8 through
12, of the 1974 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 470-2. Private sewers to be connected to available public sewers.
Any person now owning or that may hereafter own real estate with
improvements thereon abutting on any street, avenue or alley along which
a public sewer has been or shall be constructed is hereby compelled and
required on personal service of a three-months' notice in writing on the
owner or his or their agent of the passage by Council of a resolution so to
do, etc., to construct and connect their private sewer with the said public
sewer from the street line of their property to the said public sewer; and
the same shall be constructed wholly at the cost of the property owner and,
on failure to make the sewer connection as herein directed after the service
of said notice, the said private sewer shall be constructed by said Borough
at the expense of said owner or owners, with 20% of the cost thereof to
be added thereto as a penalty for such neglect. In default of the payment
thereof for a period of 30 days after completion by said Borough of said
work, the same shall be collected either by suit at law or the filing of a
lien therefor against said property in the Prothonotary's Office of Allegheny
County.
§ 470-3. Conditions under which private sewers may be
constructed.
Any person or corporation owning real estate with improvements thereon,
not abutting on any street, avenue or alley, having or which shall have a
public sewer thereon but within 50 feet thereof, may, after obtaining the
permission of Council and upon payment of $10, construct a private sewer
for the use of their property, as in § 470-2 of this article mentioned, subject
to the conditions hereinafter provided.
§ 470-4. Manner of constructing private sewers.
All of said private sewers within the limits of said streets, avenues or alleys
shall be made of such material as Council may determine, and the same
shall be laid and constructed in the manner directed and by and under the
supervision and control of the Street Committee of Council and the Borough
Engineer. The earth of the excavations made in said work shall be replaced
and thoroughly tamped or flooded, or both, as may be directed, and to the
level of the said street grade. Whenever the street is improved and paved, or
about to be improved or paved, the property owner shall, to the level of the
subgrade of said street, make a concrete bed of eight inches' thickness with
a shoulder on each side of said drain or excavation of 1/4 the width thereof.
All street improvements, if any, disturbed by reason of said work shall be
replaced in as good condition and in the same manner as they were before
being disturbed, and all surplus material shall be removed by the owner.
§ 470-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-5
1:181
§ 470-5. Uses of private sewers.
Said connections shall be used only for the purpose of carrying roof water,
waste water used in buildings, and sewage.
§ 470-6. Penalty for violation of provisions on private sewers.
[Amended 12-20-1973 by Ord. No. 1056; 12-11-1989 by Ord. No.
1208]
Any person who violates any provision of §§ 470-3, 470-4 and 470-5 of this
article shall for every such violation, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of not more than $600 and costs of prosecution and, in default of
payment of fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than 30
days.
§ 470-5 ETNA CODE § 470-6
1:182
ARTICLE III
Sewer Connections
[Adopted 9-11-1944 by Ord. No. 729 (Ch. XX, Part 1, §§ 2 through 6,
of the 1974 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 470-7. Properties to be connected to available sewer.
All owners of property abutting on or adjoining any street or alley in which
there is a sewer are hereby required to make connections with such sewer
for the purpose of discharge of drainage consisting of all household waste
liquids and human excreta, as customary in a system of sanitary sewers.
This does not include the discharge of oils, grease, tar, gasoline, or any
other liquids that are not of the usual household nature. This does not
include stormwater or drainage due to rain or snow.
§ 470-8. Property owners to maintain sewer connections in
workable condition.
All owners of property, which has been connected with any sanitary sewer
for the purpose of discharging customary household sanitary sewage, shall
keep and maintain all such connections in good workable condition, and if
any part at any time becomes broken, damaged, destroyed, clogged up, or
for any reason fails to function properly and adequately, the same shall be
promptly and properly repaired and/or renewed.
§ 470-9. Property owners to make or repair connections upon
notice.
The owners shall be given 30 days' written notice of this article requiring
the sewer connection and five days' written notice requiring the repair or
renewal of said connection, and upon his, her or its failure to make, repair
or renew such connection, the Borough may make, repair or renew the
same and collect the cost thereof from the owner or owners by a municipal
claim or in an action of assumpsit.
§ 470-10. Penalty for violation of sewer connection regulations.
[Amended 3-8-1954 by Ord. No. 816; 12-11-1989 by Ord. No. 1208]
Any person, firm or corporation, who or which violates any provision of this
article by failing to comply with notice to originally make connection or
subsequently to properly repair or renew the same, shall for every offense
and each separate violation, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $600 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment
of fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than 30 days,
provided that each daily act of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 470-11. Manner of giving notice.
The owner or owners will have received written notice under the provisions
of this article if a written notice is given to them personally, left at their
§ 470-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-11
1:183
residence with an adult member of their family, left at their place of
business with the person in charge of the same, sent by registered mail
addressed to their residence, or by fastening a notice upon a conspicuous
part of the said property.
§ 470-11 ETNA CODE § 470-11
1:184
ARTICLE IV
Sewer Use
[Adopted 12-15-1958 by Ord. No. 882 (Ch. XX, Part 2A, of the 1974
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 470-12. Certain substances not to be discharged or infiltrated into
sewer system.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association or corporation to
discharge or to permit the discharge or infiltration into any Borough sewer
which is connected directly or indirectly with the Sanitary Authority's
sewage disposal system or into a sewer connected to such a Borough
sewer or into the Sanitary Authority's sewage disposal system of any of the
following substances:
A. Mineral acids, waste acid, pickling or plating liquors from the pickling
or plating of iron, steel, brass, copper or chromium, or any other
dissolved or solid substances which will endanger health or safety, or
interfere with the flow in sewers, attack or corrode sewers or sewage
structures or equipment, or otherwise interfere with the operation of
the sewers or other facilities of the Borough or the Sanitary Authority.
B. Cyanides or cyanogen compounds capable of liberating hydrocyanic gas
on acidification.
C. Fats, entrails and the like from meat processing plants, rendering
plants and similar industries and establishments.
D. Gas tar, phenols, residues from petroleum storage, refining or
processing, fuel or lubricating oil, gasoline, naphtha, benzene or
explosive or inflammable liquids, solids or gases.
E. Ashes, cinders, sand, mud, lime or acetylene sludges, straw, shavings,
metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, sawdust, paunch
manure, hair, hides, dead animals, spent mash and grain, pulp from
food processing, water or wastes containing grease in excess of 100
parts per million, or any other solids or viscous substances capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the
proper operation of the Borough's or the Sanitary Authority's facilities.
F. Sludges or other materials from septic tanks or similar facilities or from
sewage or industrial waste treatment plants or from water treatment
plants; provided, however, that until March 1, 1959, but not thereafter,
the discharge of such sludges and other materials may be permitted,
subject to existing legal restrictions and subject also to the regulations
and orders of the Borough, the Allegheny County Health Department
and the Sanitary Authority.
G. Garbage, whether ground or not, except properly shredded garbage in
a private dwelling, apartment building, hotel, commercial restaurant or
retail food store, resulting from the proper use of a garbage grinder or
§ 470-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-12
1:185
§ 470-13. Unlawful discharge or infiltration to be discontinued.
Any person, firm, association or corporation discharging or permitting the
discharge or infiltration of any of the foregoing wastes or materials into a
Borough sewer which is connected directly or indirectly with the Sanitary
Authority's sewage disposal system or into a sewer connected to such
Borough sewer or into the Sanitary Authority's sewage disposal system shall
immediately cease to discharge or permit the discharge of such materials
or wastes thereinto; provided, however, that temporary permission for the
discharge of neutralized acid wastes only may be granted by the Borough,
subject to the approval of the Sanitary Authority, for a period expiring not
later than December 31, 1958, upon submission to them of satisfactory
evidence of the installation and operation of proper neutralizing facilities
and of steps taken to provide for the separate disposal or treatment and
disposal of such acid wastes upon expiration of the temporary permit.
disposer of a type approved by the Borough, the Allegheny County
Health Department and the Sanitary Authority and maintained in good
operating condition; provided, however, that no retail food store shall
operate more than one grinder or disposer which shall be not greater
than three horsepower in size and, when so required by the Allegheny
County Health Department, shall be equipped with an approved water
meter and limited in use to the consumption of an average of not more
than 1,500 gallons of water per day; and provided, further, that the
foregoing restrictions shall not apply to any existing installation in a
retail food store of a garbage grinder or disposer larger than three
horsepower in size until such time as the equipment now in use can
no longer be kept in good operating condition by ordinary maintenance
and repair, at which time such larger than three horsepower grinder or
disposer shall be abandoned and shall not be renewed or replaced.
H. Water or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0, or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment or personnel of the Borough or the
Sanitary Authority.29
29.Editor's Note: The preamble to this article stated that, in order to comply with the
Pennsylvania Pure Streams Law and the orders of the Sanitary Water Board issued
thereunder, the Borough, pursuant to Ordinance 766, had entered into long-term service
agreements with the City of Pittsburgh and the Allegheny County Sanitary Authority to
construct and operate a sewage collection, treatment and disposal system to serve the City
and 69 adjacent municipalities, including this Borough; that the Sanitary Authority was
completing construction of the system and had already connected many municipal outfall
sewers, including some that were used or would be used by the Borough, to structures and
facilities that were a part of the sewage disposal system; that certain harmful wastes then
being discharged into the Borough sewers would damage and clog not only the Borough's
sewers but also the structures and other facilities of the sewage disposal system or might
interfere with the proper operation thereof; that some of such harmful wastes are
dangerous to the health and life of operating personnel and the public and some create
offensive nuisance conditions; and that the sewage service agreement requires the
Borough to carry into effect the purposes and intent of such agreement.
§ 470-12 ETNA CODE § 470-14
1:186
§ 470-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-11-1989 by Ord.
No. 1208]
Any person, firm, association, or corporation who or which violates any
provision of this article shall, for every such violation, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and costs of prosecution
and, in default of payment of fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for
not more than 30 days, provided that each day that a violation is continued
shall constitute a separate violation; and provided, further, that, in the case
of firms or associations, the penalty may be imposed upon the partners or
members thereof and, in the case of corporations, upon the officers thereof.
§ 470-15. Severability.
The provisions of this article are severable, and the invalidity of any section,
clause, sentence or provision of this article shall not affect or impair the
validity of any other part of the ordinance which can be given effect without
the invalid part or parts.
§ 470-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-15
1:187

ARTICLE V
Sewer Rates and Charges
[Adopted 8-29-1961 by Ord. No. 911 (Ch. XX, Part 3, of the 1974
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 470-16. Sewer services and charges of Allegheny County Sanitary
Authority. [Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 1297]
The charges of the Allegheny County Sanitary Authority for sewage service
to properties located in the Borough of Etna, the sewage from which enters
the sewer system of the Allegheny County Sanitary Authority, are:
A. Metered Water Users. The following schedule of rates shall be
applicable to each user of metered water and the charges shall be
based upon the quantity of water delivered to each such user as
measured by the most recent available water meter reading:
Water Used for Quarter Year
____________
For each 1,000 gallons of water
Sewage Charge
____________
$12.81
An environmental surcharge shall also be assessed bimonthly of
$19.07.30
B. Other water users. The quantity of water used by water users other
than those referred to in Subsection A of this section shall be estimated
by the Borough of Etna, and each water user's charge shall be
calculated by applying the schedule to total charges set forth in said
Subsection A to the estimated quantity.
C. Household garbage grinders.
(1) For each household garbage grinder in a private dwelling unit
there will be a charge equal to the charge assessed upon it by the
Allegheny County Sanitary Authority.
(2) (2) For all garbage grinders other than household garbage grinders
in a dwelling unit, there will be a charge equal to the charge
assessed upon it by the Allegheny County Sanitary Authority; said
charge will be proportionately higher or lower for each grinder
other than household garbage grinder of lesser or greater
horsepower capacity.
D. Bio-oxygen demand. For each establishment that is assessed a biooxygen
demand, there will be a charge assessed equal to the charge
assessed upon it by the Allegheny County Sanitary Authority
30.Editor's Note: Resolution No. 1382B, adopted 12-17-2019 by the Borough Council,
increased the sewage rate to $12.81 per 1,000 gallons of water, and assessed an
environmental surcharge bimonthly of $19.07.
§ 470-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-16
1:189
§ 470-17. Water not reaching sewer.
Water not reaching sewer, if metered separately, not included in quantity
on which sewage charge calculated. The quantity of water which does not
reach a metered water user's sewer, if separately metered, will not be
included in the quantity upon which the sewage charge is calculated.
§ 470-18. Conditions for installation of sewage meters.
With the prior written approval of the Allegheny County Sanitary Authority,
a water user may install a sewage meter, in which event the sewage charges
will be based upon the quantity of sewage so metered.
§ 470-19. Billing. [Amended 5-15-1984 by Ord. No. 1151]
Bills for the sewage service based on the sewage rates of the Allegheny
County Sanitary Authority shall be rendered quarter-annually by the
Borough Secretary on the basis of the most recent quarter water meter
reading or sewage meter reading, as the case may be. All sewage charges
billed to water users shall be payable at the net rate within 30 days from the
billing date. All sewage charges paid after the expiration of said thirty-day
period but prior to the expiration of 60 days from the billing date shall be
payable at the gross rate. If the bill remains unpaid after 60 days from the
billing date, a penalty of 10% shall be payable plus interest at the rate of 1%
per month or part thereof upon 105% of the sewage charge, which interest
shall begin on the 60th day after the due date.
§ 470-20. Unpaid sewer rental.
Any sewer rental or charge not paid within 30 days from the billing date
shall be a lien upon the property charged with the payment thereof from the
first day of the following month. Such sewer rentals or charges, if not paid
after 30 days' notice, may be collected as provided by law, by an action of
assumpsit, or by distress of personal property on the premises, or by lien
filed in the nature of a municipal lien.
§ 470-21. Nonliability of Borough.
The Borough of Etna shall not be liable for any damage resulting from leaks,
broken pipe or any other cause occurring to or within any house or building
or in connection with the sewer system between the sewer line and any
house or building, and the Borough of Etna shall not be liable to any owner
for any claim for damages arising by reason of any leaking or breaking
of any minor main, trunk, interceptor, lateral or collecting sewer or any
building connection, sewer line or any attachment to the sewer.
E. The Council of the Borough of Etna is hereby authorized to increase,
decrease or change all sewage rates with the Borough of Etna by
resolution. [Added 12-18-2007 by Ord. No. 1315]
§ 470-16 ETNA CODE § 470-22
1:190
§ 470-22. Access to premises.
The duly authorized agents of the Borough of Etna shall be granted access
at all reasonable hours of the day to all parts of the premises to which sewer
service is supplied to make necessary inspection.
§ 470-23. Severability.
The provisions of this article are severable, and if any of its provisions
are held to be illegal, such illegality shall not affect or impair any of the
remaining provisions of this article. It is hereby declared to be the intent
of the Borough that this article would have been ordained and enacted had
such illegal provision not been included therein.
§ 470-24. Allegheny County Sanitary Authority authorized to
discontinue individual billing for sewerage charge and to bill
Borough. [Added 7-10-1961 by Res. No. 909]
The Sanitary Authority of Allegheny County be and the same is hereby
authorized to discontinue the individual billing to the Borough's water
consumers and in place thereof, the Sanitary Authority is hereby authorized
to bill the Borough of Etna for the sanitary sewerage charges levied in the
Borough.
§ 470-25. Borough Secretary to collect individual sewerage charges.
[Added 7-10-1961 by Res. No. 909]
The Secretary of the Borough of Etna be and is hereby authorized to assume
the collection of the individual Sanitary Authority sewerage charges in the
Borough of Etna.
§ 470-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-25
1:191

ARTICLE VI
Grease Traps and Separators
[Adopted 6-16-1998 by Ord. No. 1252]
§ 470-26. Definitions.
FOOD PREPARATION FACILITY — Includes any food establishment in any
building, room or place or any portion thereof or appurtenance thereto,
where human food or drink is mixed, cooked or otherwise prepared, offered
for sale, sold, served or given with or without charge to patrons, customers
or guests for consumption on the premises; provided, however, that this
does not include the mixing, cooking, or other preparation and serving of
food in residential dwellings.
GREASE INTERCEPTOR — An interceptor whose rated flow exceeds 35
gpm and which is located underground outside the building.
GREASE TRAP — An interceptor whose flow rate is 35 gpm or less and
which is located inside the building. Grease traps shall be rated for a
minimum 22.5 gpm.
RESTAURANT — Includes any public eating place where regular meals are
prepared, offered for sale, sold and served to patrons, customers or guests
for compensation based on the price charged for and generally paid at
the conclusion of each meal. The words "regular meals," as used herein,
mean meals generally consisting of courses embracing some kind of meat
or its equivalent, vegetables, bread, pastry, beverage and accompaniments,
served at more or less regular intervals.
§ 470-27. Plumbing to be in good repair.
Every building or room occupied or used as a public eating place or
restaurant shall be well drained. All soil pipes, waste pipes, drains or other
plumbing fixtures shall be of adequate size to enable a passage of any waste
intended to pass through it to the main public sewer. All drains, sewers,
waste and soil pipes, traps and water in gas pipes shall, at all times, be kept
in good repair and order so that no gases or odor shall escape therefrom
and so that the same shall not leak, and all vent pipes shall be kept in good
order and repair and free from obstructions.
§ 470-28. Installation of grease interceptors and traps.
A. Every building, room or space or part thereof used as a restaurant or
food preparation facility, whether new or existing, shall install or cause
to be installed a grease interceptor or grease trap. The type of
installation shall be determined by the total fixture flow-through rate of
potential grease-laden fixtures discharging through the building
sewage lines as determined by the Allegheny County Health
Department Plumbing Division. For flow-through rates, 35 gpm or less,
an internal grease trap may be installed in certain existing structures
used as restaurants and food preparation facilities. For flow-through
rates exceeding 35 gpm, an external underground grease interceptor
§ 470-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-28
1:193
§ 470-29. Maintenance of grease interceptors and grease traps.
must be installed in all new structures or changes of use involving
restaurants or food preparation facilities.
B. Said grease trap or interceptor shall be installed at an appropriate
location along the sewer line between the restaurant and/or food
preparation facility and the lines entry into the main public sewer line.
An inspection site tee shall be installed between the interceptor
discharge and connect to the public sewer system. All installations shall
be in accordance with Article 15 of the Allegheny County Health
Department Plumbing Code and Regulations.
C. No solid waste devices, such as waste grinders, disposals, potato
peelers, etc., shall discharge through the grease trap or grease
interceptor. Only potential grease-laden fixture may discharge through
the trap or interceptor.
D. All new restaurants or food preparation facilities shall be required to
install an exterior, underground grease interceptor of a minimum 1,000
gallons' capacity, regardless of flow-through rate.
E. In all existing restaurants or food preparation facilities, there shall be
installed a grease interceptor or grease trap as determined by flowthrough
rate, as detailed above. In existing facilities where it is
determined by the Borough that a grease trap is not sufficient, the
Borough may require that a grease interceptor (as detailed above) be
installed. Such insufficiency shall be evidenced by excessive amounts of
grease being discharged into the public sewer system by a facility. All
existing restaurants or food preparation facilities shall, at a change of
ownership or alteration, install an exterior, underground grease
interceptor of a minimum 1,000 gallons' capacity. In all existing
structures, building or parts thereof in which there is a change of use or
occupancy to that of a restaurant or food preparation facility there shall
be installed a grease interceptor, minimum 1,000 gallons' capacity,
regardless of flow-through rate.
A. All grease interceptors and grease traps shall be maintained and kept in
good working order at all times. The interceptor or trap shall limit the
amount of grease discharged into the public sewer system to levels not
exceeding those permitted by the Allegheny County Sanitary Authority
(ALCOSAN). Oil/grease discharge shall not exceed 200 ppm
downstream of the interceptor or trap.
B. It shall be the duty and responsibility of any owner, lessee or agent of
any restaurant or food preparation facility to, at a minimum of annually,
inspect the grease interceptor or trap. A written record shall be kept of
all inspections. The inspection record shall, at a minimum, list the name
(inspector and company), address, phone number of the inspection/
disposal company, the method and frequency of cleaning schedule and
the date of the cleaning/inspection. Such records shall be presented to
§ 470-28 ETNA CODE § 470-29
1:194
§ 470-30. Violations and penalties.
Whosoever violates any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of up to $1,000. Each day that
a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 470-31. Right of entry.
In the discharge of duties, the Borough Code Enforcement Officer or
authorized representative shall have the authority to enter, at any
reasonable hour, any restaurant or food preparation facility in the
jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this article.
§ 470-32. Severability.
If any sentence, clause, section or part of this article is for any reason found
to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality
or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this article. It is hereby declared as
the intent of the Council of the Borough of Etna that this article would have
been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause,
section or part thereof had not been included herein.
§ 470-33. Repealer.
Any ordinance or resolution or part of any ordinance or resolution in conflict
herewith is hereby repealed to the extent of that conflict.
the Borough upon request. A more frequent cleaning/inspection
schedule may be ordered to be performed by the facility when it is
determined by the Borough that the facility is discharging excessive
amounts of grease to the public sewer system.
§ 470-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-33
1:195

ARTICLE VII
Prohibited Discharges
[Adopted 9-15-1998 by Ord. No. 1255]
§ 470-34. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
hereafter designated:
ALCOSAN — Allegheny County Sanitary Authority, including its treatment
facility and any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment,
recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a
liquid nature.
CORROSIVE WASTE — A waste or substance which has any of the following
properties:
HAZARDOUS WASTE — All wastes that are defined as hazardous under the
regulations enacted pursuant to the Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act (RCRA), as specified in 40 CFR 261, or under the regulations
promulgated pursuant to the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act,31
as specified in 25 Pa. Code Chapter 261.32
IGNITABLE WASTE — A waste or substance which can create a fire hazard
in the sewage collection system or the ALCOSAN treatment facility, which
has any of but is not limited to the following properties:
INTERFERENCE — A discharge originating in the Borough which, along or
in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both:
It is aqueous and has a pH of less than or equal to 5 or greater than or
equal to 10, as determined by pH meter.
A.
It is a liquid and corrodes steel (SAE1020) at a rate greater than 6.35
mm (0.250 inch) per year at a test temperature of 55° C. (130° F.).
B.
It is liquid with a flash point less than 60° C. (140° F.) using the test
methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
A.
B. It is an oxidizer as defined in 49 CFR 173.151.
Inhibits or disrupts the ALCOSAN facilities, its treatment processes or
operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore
A.
Is a cause of a violation of any requirement of ALCOSAN's National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (hereinafter referred to as
"NPDES") permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration
of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal
by ALCOSAN in compliance with the following statutory provisions
and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state
or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid
B.
31.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. 6018.101 et seq.
32.Editor's Note: See now 25 Pa. Code Ch. 261a.
§ 470-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-34
1:197
PASS-THROUGH — Any discharge of a pollutant through ALCOSAN into
the waters of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in quantities or
concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with other discharge from
other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the ALCOSAN's
NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation).
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity, or any other legal entity, or its legal representative, agents or
assigns.
PH — The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of
hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, emissions, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand,
cellar dirt or other industrial, municipal or agricultural waste discharged
into water.
POLLUTION — The man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological, and/or radiological integrity or water.
REACTIVE/EXPLOSIVE WASTE — A waste or substance which can create
an explosion hazard in the sewage collection system or the ALCOSAN
treatment facility, which has any of but is not limited to the following
properties:
Waste Disposal Act (including Title 2 or more commonly referred to
as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act and including state
regulations contained in the State Sludge Management Plan prepared
pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act), the Clean Air
Act, and the Toxic Substance Control Act.
It is normally unstable and readily undergoes violent change without
detonating.
A.
B. It reacts violently with water.
C. It forms potentially explosive mixtures with water.
When mixed with water, it generates toxic gasses, vapors or fumes
in a quantity sufficient to present a danger to human health or the
environment.
D.
It is a cyanide- or sulfide-bearing waste which can generate toxic
gasses, vapors or fumes in a quantity sufficient to present a danger to
human health or the environment.
E.
It is capable of detonation or explosive or explosive reaction if it is
subjected to a strong initiating source or if heated under confinement.
F.
It is readily capable of detonation, explosive decomposition or reaction
at standard temperature and pressure.
G.
§ 470-34 ETNA CODE § 470-34
1:198
THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the
Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as
toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA, pursuant to Section 307A of
the Act.
WASTE WATER — The liquid and water carrying industrial or domestic
wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and
institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater
that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed
directly or indirectly into the facilities of ALCOSAN.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems, and other bodies or accumulations of water,
surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are
contained within, flow through, or border upon the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or any portion thereof.
§ 470-35. Prohibition.
No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced directly or indirectly
into the facilities of ALCOSAN or into any sewer, pipe or other conveyance
located in the Borough/Township and transmitting substances into the
facilities of ALCOSAN any toxic pollutant or other wastewater, which will:
§ 470-36. Prohibited substances.
No person shall introduce, permit or cause to be introduced, directly or
indirectly, into the facilities of ALCOSAN or into any piped sewer, pipe or
other conveyance located in the Borough and transmitting substances into
the facilities of ALCOSAN any of the following:
It is a forbidden explosive as defined in 40 CFR 173.51, or a Class A
explosive as defined in 49 CFR 173.53, or a Class B explosive as defined
in 49 CFR 173.88.
H.
A. Cause interference with the operation or performance of ALCOSAN's
treatment plant or other facilities; or
B. Pass through ALCOSAN's treatment plant or other facilities.
A. Any substance which will endanger the life, health or safety of the
treatment plant sewer maintenance and plant operations personnel or
which would preclude safe entry into the sewer system or any portion of
the treatment plant.
B. Any ignitable, reactive, explosive, corrosive or hazardous waste, except
as provided for by ALCOSAN's Rules and Regulations.
C. Any wastewater with a temperature greater than 140° F. (60° C.).
§ 470-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-36
1:199
§ 470-37. Rules and regulations of ALCOSAN and County Sanitary
Authority to be followed.
D. Any waste which exceeds the naturally occurring background levels for
either alpha, beta or gamma radiation and/or any wastewater
containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration not in compliance with applicable state or federal
regulations.
E. Any solids or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the
flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operations of
ALCOSAN's facility or facilities discharging into the ALCOSAN system.
F. Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gasses or solids which either singly
or by interaction with other wastes may create a public nuisance or
adversely affect public health or safety.
G. Pathological wastes from a hospital or other medical establishment.
H. Garbage, whether ground or not, except properly shredded food waste
garbage resulting from the proper use of a garbage grinder or disposer
type approved by ALCOSAN and maintained in good operating
condition.
I. Sludges or other materials from septic tanks or similar facilities or from
sewage or industrial waste treatment plants or from water treatment
plants, unless the discharge of such sludges and other materials is
specifically approved by ALCOSAN.
J. Any pollutant including oxygen-demanding pollutants released in a
discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause
interference with the ALCOSAN facilities.
K. Any substance which will cause ALCOSAN's effluent or any other
product of the ALCOSAN facilities, such as residues, sludges or scums,
to be unsuitable for reclamation processes, including any substance
which will cause the ALCOSAN facility to be in noncompliance with
sludge use or disposable criteria, guidelines or regulations developed
under Section 405 of the Act, any criteria, guidelines or regulations
promulgated pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air
Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or state laws or regulations
applicable to the treatment or disposal of such effluent or such product.
A. No person shall take any action or do or cause to be done anything in
violation of any rule or regulation of ALCOSAN.
B. The Pretreatment Regulations of the Allegheny County Sanitary
Authority are incorporated into this article by reference as though fully
set forth herein.
§ 470-36 ETNA CODE § 470-38
1:200
§ 470-38. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be punished by a fine not to exceed the sum of $1,000 for each offense,
recoverable with costs and, in default of payment of the fine and costs,
shall be subject to imprisonment in the Allegheny County Jail for a period
not exceeding 30 days. Each day a violation is continued shall constitute
separate offense. In addition, any person violating any provision of the
ALCOSAN Pretreatment Regulations may be subject to administrative and
civil penalties as provided for by the Pretreatment Regulations and
administered by ALCOSAN. Such penalties may include, but are not limited
to, injunctive relief and penalties of up to $25,000 per day, per violation,
as provided for by the Publicly Owned Treatment Works Penalty Law, 35
P.S. § 752.1 et seq. Authority to so enforce the Pretreatment Regulations
is granted to ALCOSAN and is in addition to but not in place of any other
remedy available to the Borough.
§ 470-39. Severability.
The provisions of this article are severable, and the invalidity of any section,
clause, sentence or provision of this article shall not affect or impair the
validity of any other part of the ordinance which can be given effect without
the invalid part or parts.
§ 470-40. Repealer.
Any ordinance or part of ordinance conflicting with the provisions of this
article is hereby repealed, so far as the same conflicts with this article.
§ 470-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-40
1:201

ARTICLE VIII
Residential Downspout Disconnection
[Adopted 11-20-2012 by Ord. No. 1341]
§ 470-41. Definitions.
The following definitions apply to terms and concepts used in the
Residential Downspout Disconnection Program.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer which carries both sanitary sewage and
stormwater.
DISCONNECTION — Physically plugging or capping the direct rain drain
connection of a downspout to the combined sewer and redirecting the roof
water onto the property either on the surface of the property or under the
ground. This may require alterations to gutters and downspouts.
DOWNSPOUT — The conductor that conveys stormwater from the gutter on
the exterior of a building or other structure to another place of discharge.
DRY WELL (or SEEPAGE PIT) — A variation on an infiltration system that is
designed to temporarily store and infiltrate rooftop runoff.
ELIGIBLE PROPERTY — Property which has been determined by Etna
Borough Public Works staff and/or engineers that would allow for safe and
effective disconnection with the following guidelines:
The point of discharge must be:
(1) A minimum of two feet from a building without a basement;
A minimum of six feet from a building with a basement (10 feet if
installing a dry well);
(2)
(3) Not less than five feet from a neighbor's property;
(4) Not less than 10 feet from a neighbor's building;
(5) Not less than 10 feet from a retaining wall.
A.
The slope in the direction of discharge must be less than 10% and drain
away from any structure.
B.
The discharge water shall not discharge to a street, alley or other public
way;
C.
The discharge water shall not create an icy condition on any pedestrian
walkways/sidewalks within or adjacent to the subject premises lot lines.
Downspouts will be disconnected to program standards under
direction of municipal staff and meet the requirements of the
Allegheny County Plumbing Code, Sections AC1101.2 and AC1104.2
and utilize Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection,
Bureau of Watershed Management, Best Management Practices and
all appropriate Borough of Etna ordinances and permit requirements.
D.
§ 470-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-41
1:203
RAIN GARDEN (also called BIORETENTION) — A rain garden is an
excavated shallow surface depression planted with specifically selected
native vegetation to treat and capture runoff.
RAIN LEADER — The conductor that conveys stormwater from the roof on
the exterior of a building or other structure to another place of disposal.
§ 470-42. Establishment of program.
§ 470-43. Community engagement and education.
§ 470-44. Permit requirements and fee.
A. A program is established to remove stormwater connections to the
combined sewer system from existing roof drains having downspouts or
rain leaders located on the exterior of eligible properties with direct
connections to the property's external sanitary sewer lateral. The
existence of a direct connection will be determined by qualified staff
through verification by site survey of eligible properties.
B. Property owners will be provided with free technical assistance in the
determination of eligibility.
C. Exceptions. The Borough may decline to approve disconnection of a
connected downspout upon determination that the disconnection would
not meet the guidelines for safe disconnection. This includes situations
where disconnection could result in possible damage to the property or
adjoining properties, and/or create a possible nuisance situation or
involve excessive cost.
A. The Borough intends to engage property owners, community members
and groups and stormwater professionals to create awareness of the
downspout disconnection program and stormwater management. The
program will create economic incentives for meeting the Borough's
stormwater goals.
B. The Borough will provide educational opportunities on downspout
disconnection and stormwater management in active outreach areas as
appropriate, including direct mail, public events, websites and utility
bill stuffers.
C. Technical assistance strategies include, but are not limited to, on-site
technical assistance, property record research, site planning, design
guidance and management of municipal staff.
A. The Borough of Etna requires a permit for the disconnection of any
downspout currently connected to the combined sewer system.
B. Prior to any disconnection of downspout or roof leader, a permit
application, downspout disconnection instruction sheet, hold-harmless
and indemnification agreement must be submitted by the owner of the
property. These can be obtained at the Municipal Building during
§ 470-41 ETNA CODE § 470-44
1:204
§ 470-45. Inspections.
§ 470-46. Incentive for eligible disconnections.
normal business hours, Monday through Friday, 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.
(except holidays).
C. Upon submittal of the foregoing documents, an appointment will be
scheduled with qualified personnel for a site inspection of said
disconnection. Appointments are to be scheduled during normal
business hours, Monday through Friday (except holidays) between the
hours of 7:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m.
D. After review by qualified personnel, if the disconnection is found to be
eligible, a permit shall be issued upon permit fee payment.
E. Fee. The Borough will charge a permit fee of $10 for each eligible
household/property approved for disconnection. Fee can cover multiple
disconnections if applied for at the same time for the same building/
property and deemed eligible for disconnection. This includes one
appointment for site review for all potential downspout disconnections.
A. Upon completion of eligible disconnection(s), the property owner will
contact the Borough for inspection of disconnection(s) and approval of
such. This inspection is required for incentive credit on environmental
sewer surcharge.
B. Inspections would be performed by the Public Works Director, the
Borough's Engineer or the Borough Manager.
C. Disconnections made prior to the adoption of this article need not be
inspected, unless a nuisance has been created and/or reported, unless
the property owner wishes to apply for incentive rebate on the
environmental surcharge. At that time the owner must schedule and
pass an inspection of eligible subsurface or surface device.
A. The Borough will provide a quarterly credit of $5 per household/
property with permitted downspout disconnection on the quarterly
environmental sewer surcharge on the quarterly sewer bill.
B. The $5 quarterly credit will continue for three years from the time of
permitted disconnection.
C. Upon request, the property owner will receive a sign at no charge to
display on their front yard that advertises that their property helps Pine
Creek and the Allegheny River.
D. Once a downspout is disconnected and has received a satisfactory
inspection, the property owner shall be responsible for ensuring that
the new subsurface or surface device is not removed and is properly
maintained and operated to continue eligibility for incentive rebate.
§ 470-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-47
1:205
§ 470-47. Enforcement.
§ 470-48. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence or clause of this article is held, for any
reason, to be invalid, such decision or decisions shall not affect the validity
of the remaining portions of this article.
A. Disconnection is not permitted without a permit.
B. Failure to properly maintain permitted device may result in a public
nuisance. If disconnection causes a public nuisance to adjoining
property or public property, sidewalk or roadway or neighboring
property, correction(s), which may include reconnection to the
combined sewer system, must be made within 30 days upon
reinspection and notification by inspector(s). Failure to follow
inspection directives for corrective action will result in a fine of $25 a
day, payable to the Borough of Etna.
§ 470-47 ETNA CODE § 470-48
1:206
ARTICLE IX
Tapping Fees and Lateral Inspections
Adopted 5-16-2018 by Ord. No. 1377
§ 470-49. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms, including kitchen, designed as
a unit for occupancy by one family for the purpose of cooking, living and
sleeping.
NONDWELLING UNIT — A property which is not occupied by a dwelling
unit.
§ 470-50. Requirement to connect.
All owners of any improved premises located or to be constructed within the
Borough and situate so that the property lines of the improved premises are
within 150 feet of a public sewer line owned by the Borough of Etna and
operated by the Borough shall be required to connect thereto. Where such
service is temporarily not available, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
design and enforce regulations consistent with state standards for on-site
systems. At such time as sewer service becomes available, the owner of the
improved premises shall be required to connect to the sewer system.
§ 470-51. Tapping fee.
A. All owners of any improved premises shall pay a "tapping fee,"
comprised of a connection fee, customer facility fees, and tapping fee
pursuant to the following schedule of fees:
Fee per Dwelling Unit
Connection fee Actual Cost
Customer facility fees Actual Cost
Tapping fee
Capacity component $925.60**
Collection component $3,374.40***
Special purpose component As applicable
Reimbursement component As applicable
____________
Tap fee = $4,300
NOTES:
** Fee calculated in Exhibit No. 1.33
*** Fee calculated in Exhibit No. 2.34
§ 470-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-51
1:207
§ 470-52. Inspection of laterals.
§ 470-53. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 and, in default of payment, to imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 30 days.
§ 470-54. Repealer.
All ordinances or resolutions or parts of ordinances or resolutions which are
inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed to the extent that the same are
inconsistent with the terms of this article.
§ 470-55. Severability.
If any sentence, clause, section or part of this article is for any reason found
to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality
or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this article. It is hereby declared
B. Fee per nondwelling unit. All nondwelling units shall be charged a
multiple of the tap fee based upon projected flows of 200 gallons per
day.
A. No sewer lateral shall be covered until it has been inspected and
approved by the Borough. If any part of the sewer lateral is covered
before so being inspected and approved, it shall be uncovered for
inspection, at the cost and expense of the owner of the improved
property to be connected to the sewer mains.
B. Every sewer lateral of any improved property shall be maintained in a
sanitary and safe operating condition by the owner of such improved
property.
C. Every excavation for sewer lateral shall be guarded adequately with
barricades and lights to protect all persons from damage and injury.
Any street, sidewalk or other public property disturbed in the course of
installation of a sewer lateral shall be restored, at the cost and expense
of the owner of the improved property being connected, in a manner
satisfactory to the Borough.
D. The owner of an improved premises shall, at his expense, be
responsible to repair, replace and maintain the sewer lines on the
owner's property from the point at least 18 inches on the owner's side
of the street curbline or the right-of-way line where the lateral was
constructed by the Borough.
33.Editor's Note: Exhibit 1 is an attachment to this chapter.
34.Editor's Note: Exhibit 2 is an attachment to this chapter.
§ 470-51 ETNA CODE § 470-55
1:208
as the intent of the Borough that this article would have been adopted had
such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause, section or part
thereof not been included herein.
§ 470-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-55
1:209
Chapter 493
SMOKING
§ 493-1. Smoking restricted in public school buildings, prohibited
on school buses.
Smoking or carrying of a lighted pipe, cigarette, cigar or tobacco in any
form is prohibited:
§ 493-2. Designation of smoking areas in public school buildings.
The Fire Chief, with the assistance of the building principal, shall designate
specific, safe locations in any public school building in which smoking may
be permitted.
§ 493-3. Posting of signs.
The Fire Chief is authorized to order posting of "No Smoking" signs in or on
locations described in § 493-1A and B of this chapter. The content, lettering,
size and location of said signs shall be subject to the approval of the Fire
Chief.
§ 493-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-11-1989 by Ord. No.
1208]
Any person who violates any provision of § 493-1 of this chapter shall, for
every such violation, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of fine and
costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
Chapter 510
SOLID WASTE
A. In any public school building in the Borough of Etna, except as provided
in § 493-2 of this chapter.
B. On any bus specifically operated for the purpose of transporting school
pupils.
§ 470-55 ETNA CODE § 493-4
1:210
ARTICLE I
Collection Service for Residents Only
[Adopted 2-9-1970 by Ord. No. 1023 (Ch. X, Part 1, of the 1974 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 510-1. Unlawful for nonresident to transport refuse into Borough
for collection.
It shall be unlawful for any nonresident of the Borough to transport or cause
to have transported into the Borough his trash, rubbish or other refuse
material for the purpose of collection by the Borough.
§ 510-2. Unlawful for resident to permit nonresident to deposit
refuse for collection with that of resident.
It shall be unlawful for any resident of the Borough to knowingly permit
a nonresident to deposit his trash, rubbish or refuse material with the
resident's own for the purpose of collection by the Borough. The presence
of a nonresident's refuse commingled with that of a resident shall be prima
facie evidence that the resident knew of and knowingly permitted such
depositing of the nonresident's trash, rubbish or other refuse.
§ 510-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-11-1989 by Ord. No.
1208]
Any nonresident who violates any provision of § 510-1 of this article and any
resident who violates any provision of § 510-2 shall be guilty of an offense
and, for every violation, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $600 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment
of fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than 30 days,
provided that each day on which any nonresident or resident, as the case
may be, violates any provision applicable to him shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 510-4. Severability of provisions.
The provisions of this article shall be considered severable, so if any part
or parts of it be declared null and void for whatever reason, the remaining
provisions of the article shall continue in full force and effect.
§ 510-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-4
1:211

ARTICLE II
Collection Fees
[Adopted 10-15-1991 by Ord. No. 1218]
§ 510-5. Legislative intent.
It is the intent of the Borough of Etna as an exercise of its police power
to promote the general health, safety and welfare of the residents of the
Borough by enacting this local ordinance, since it is the finding of the
Borough Council that the removal of garbage and other refuse material is
paramount to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Borough,
and the improper removal of garbage or other refuse material may lead to
the development of unsanitary conditions and the creation of nuisances. It
is the further intent of the Council of the Borough of Etna to impose and/or
collect reasonable fees and charges for the removal of garbage and refuse,
since it is no longer economically feasible for the Borough to provide for the
same from the general tax revenue.
§ 510-6. Payment of garbage collection fees. [Amended 12-17-2002
by Ord. No. 1292; 12-18-2007 by Ord. No. 1316]
§ 510-7. Fees and charges. [Amended 12-17-2002 by Ord. No. 1292]
§ 510-8. Rights of Council.
The Borough Council reserves the right to regulate the individuals,
corporate entity or entities which shall perform the service of removal of
garbage and other refuse materials and shall have the right to contract with
the said entity or entities on behalf of the owners of real property in the
A. The payment of fees and charges for the care and removal of garbage
and other refuse materials shall be the responsibility of the individual
owners of real property in the Borough of Etna. The fees and charges
shall be payable quarterly and be billed with the quarterly water and
sewage bill and due within 30 days of issuance. If payment is not made
within the aforesaid time, a 10% penalty shall be added to the fees as
set forth in § 510-7 of this article.
B. Authority is hereby given to the Council of the Borough of Etna to
increase, decrease, or change in any way the garbage collection fees by
means of a resolution.
A. The fees and charges to be imposed for the care and removal of garbage
and other refuse materials, which includes the annual cost for the
"tipping fee" at the landfill site, shall be as set from time to time by
resolution of the Borough Council. A senior citizen family may qualify
for a lesser fee. [Amended 5-19-2020 by Ord. No. 1383]
B. For the purpose of this section, "senior citizen family" shall be defined
as heads of households whose age is 65 years or older or any head of
household who is totally disabled and is qualified for Medicare.
§ 510-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-8
1:213
Borough of Etna for the removal of garbage and rubbish as well as the right
to collect or impose reasonable charges for the said services.
§ 510-9. Severability.
Should any section or provision of the local ordinance be declared by the
courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect or
impair the validity of this local ordinance as a whole or any part thereof than
the particular provision so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
§ 510-10. When effective. [Amended 12-17-2002 by Ord. No. 1292]
This local ordinance shall take effect January 1, 2003.
§ 510-11. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with this article are
repealed insofar as their inconsistency with the terms of this article.
§ 510-8 ETNA CODE § 510-11
1:214
ARTICLE III
Garbage and Refuse Collection
[Adopted 12-17-1991 by Ord. No. 1219]
§ 510-12. Short title.
This article shall be known and referred to as the "Solid Waste Ordinance."
§ 510-13. Definitions.
A. The following words and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed herein, unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
ACT or ACT 97 — The Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act of
1980 (P.L. 380, No. 97, July 7, 1980).35
AGRICULTURAL WASTE — Poultry and livestock manure or residual
materials in liquid or solid form generated in the production and
marketing of poultry, livestock, fur-bearing animals and their products,
provided such waste is not hazardous waste. The term includes the
residual materials generated in producing, harvesting and marketing
of all agronomic, horticultural, silvicultural and agricultural crops or
commodities grown on what are usually recognized and accepted as
farms, forests, or other agricultural lands.
BULKY WASTE — Large items of solid waste, including but not limited
to appliances, furniture, large auto parts, trees, branches or stumps,
which may require special handling due to their size, shape or weight.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
nonmanufacturing or nonprocessing business, including, but not
limited to, stores, markets, office buildings, restaurants, shopping
centers, and theaters.
CONSTRUCTION DEMOLITION WASTE — All municipal and residual
waste building materials, grubbing waste, and rubble resulting from
construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations on houses,
commercial buildings and other structures and pavements.
DEPARTMENT — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
DISPOSAL — The incineration, deposition, injection, dumping, spilling,
leaking or placing of solid waste into or on the land or water in a
manner that the solid waste or a constituent of the solid waste enters
the environment, is emitted into the air or is discharged to the waters
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
DOMESTIC WASTE or HOUSEHOLD WASTE — Solid waste comprised
of garbage and rubbish which normally originates in the residential
private household or apartment house.
35.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 510-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-13
1:215
GARBAGE — Any solid waste derived from animal, grain, fruit or
vegetable matter that is capable of being decomposed by
microorganisms with sufficient rapidity to cause such nuisances as
odors, gases, or vectors.
HAULER or PRIVATE COLLECTOR — Any person, firm, copartnership,
association or corporation who has been licensed by the municipality or
its designated representative to collect, transport, and dispose of refuse
for a fee as herein prescribed.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any solid waste or combination of solid wastes,
as defined in the Act, which because of its quantity, concentration
or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may: 1) cause or
significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in
morbidity in either an individual or the total population; or 2) pose
a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the
environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of
or otherwise managed.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
manufacturing or processing, including but not limited to factories,
foundries, mills, processing plants, refineries, mines and
slaughterhouses.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
service, including but not limited to hospitals, nursing homes,
orphanages, schools and universities.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community
activities; any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or
hazardous waste under Act 97 from a municipal, commercial or
institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant,
or air pollution control facility. The term does not include sourceseparated
recyclable materials.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Etna, Allegheny County,
Pennsylvania.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, state institution and agency, or any
other legal entity which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and
duties. In any provisions of this article prescribing a fine, imprisonment
or penalty, or any combination of the foregoing, the term "person" shall
include the officers and directors of any corporation or other legal
entity having officers and directors.
PROCESSING — Any technology used for the purpose of reducing the
volume or bulk of municipal or residual waste or any technology used to
convert part of all of such waste materials for off-site reuse. Processing
facilities include, but are not limited to, transfer facilities, composting
facilities, and resource recovery facilities.
§ 510-13 ETNA CODE § 510-13
1:216
§ 510-14. Prohibited activities.
REFUSE — All solid waste materials which are discarded as useless.
RESIDUAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse other discarded material
or other waste, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous
materials resulting from industrial, mining and agricultural operations,
and any sludge from an industrial, mining or agricultural water supply
treatment facility, wastewater treatment facility or air pollution control
facility, provided that it is not hazardous. The term "residual waste"
shall not include coal refuse as defined in the Coal Refuse Disposal
Control Act.36 "Residual waste" shall not include treatment sludges
from coal mine drainage treatment plants, disposal of which is being
carried on pursuant to and in compliance with a valid permit issued
pursuant to the clean stream laws.37
RUBBISH — All nonputrescible municipal waste except garbage and
other decomposable matter. This category includes, but is not limited
to, ashes, bedding, cardboard, cans, crockery, glass, paper, wood and
yard cleanings.
SCAVENGING — The unauthorized and uncontrolled removal of
material placed for collection or from a solid waste processing or
disposal facility.
SEWAGE TREATMENT RESIDUES — Any coarse screenings, grit and
dewatered or air-dried sludges from sewage treatment plants and
pumpings from septic tanks or septage which are a municipal solid
waste and require proper disposal under Act 97.
SOLID WASTE — Any waste, including, but not limited to, municipal,
residual or hazardous wastes, including solid, liquid, semisolid or
contained gaseous material.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials
separated at the point of origin for the purpose of being recycled.
STORAGE — The containment of any waste on a temporary basis in
such a manner as not to constitute disposal of such waste. It shall
be presumed that the containment of any waste in excess of one year
constitutes disposal. This presumption can be overcome by clear and
convincing evidence to the contrary.
TRANSFER STATION — Any supplemental transportation facility used
as an adjunct to solid waste route collection vehicles.
TRANSPORTATION — The off-site removal of any solid waste at any
time after generation.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
36.Editor's Note: See 52 P.S. § 30.51 et seq.
37.Editor's Note: See the Clean Stream Act, 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 510-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-14
1:217
§ 510-15. Standards for storage of solid waste.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate or permit to
accumulate upon any public or private property within the municipality,
any garbage, rubbish, bulky waste, or any other municipal or residual
solid waste, except in accordance with the provisions of this article, any
Department rules and regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97 and the
Health Department Rules and Regulations, Article VIII.38
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any solid waste within the
municipality, except in accordance with the provisions of this article,
any Department rules and regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97 and
the Health Department Rules and Regulations, Article VIII.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any solid waste in the
municipality except in accordance with the provisions of this article,
any Department rules and regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97 and
the Health Department Rules and Regulations.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to haul, transport, collect, or remove
any solid waste from public or private property within the municipality
without first securing a license to do so in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge any materials from any
solid waste that is stored or deposited for collection within the
municipality without prior approval by the municipality.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person to salvage or reclaim any solid
wastes within the municipality except at an approved and permitted
resource recovery facility under Act 97 and any Department rules and
regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97.
G. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, place or deposit or cause or
permit to be thrown, placed or deposited any solid waste in or upon any
street, alley, sidewalk, body of water, public or private property within
the municipality except as provided in this article.
A. The storage of all solid waste shall be practiced so as to prevent the
attraction, harborage or breeding of insects or rodents, and to eliminate
conditions harmful to public health or which create safety hazards,
odors, unsightliness or public nuisance.
B. Any person producing municipal waste shall provide a sufficient
number of approved containers to store all waste materials generated
during periods between regularly scheduled collections and shall place
and store all waste materials therein.
38.Editor's Note: See the Allegheny County Health Department Rules and Regulations, Art. 8,
Solid Waste and Recycling.
§ 510-14 ETNA CODE § 510-15
1:218
C. Any person storing municipal waste for collection shall comply with the
following preparation standards:
(1) All municipal waste shall be drained of free liquids before being
placed in storage containers.
(2) All garbage or other putrescible waste shall be securely wrapped in
paper, plastic or similar material or placed in properly tied plastic
bags.
(3) All cans, bottles or other food containers should be rinsed free of
food particles and drained before being placed in storage
containers.
(4) Garden clippings and tree trimmings shall be placed in approved
containers or shall be cut and tied securely into bundles. Bundles
shall be not more than four feet in length, not more than two feet in
diameter, and not more than 40 pounds in weight.
(5) Newspapers and magazines shall be placed in approved containers
or shall be tied securely in bundles of not more than 40 pounds in
weight.
(6) When specified by the municipality or its designated
representative, special preparation and storage procedures may be
required to facilitate the collection and resource recovery of
certain waste materials.
D. All municipal waste shall be stored in containers approved by the
municipality or its designated representative. Individual containers and
bulk containers utilized for storage of municipal waste shall comply
with the following standards:
(1) Reusable containers shall be constructed of durable watertight,
rust- and corrosion-resistant material, such as plastic, metal or
fiberglass, in such a manner as to be leakproof, weatherproof,
insect-proof and rodent-proof.
(2) Reusable containers for individual residences shall have a tightfitting
cover and suitable lifting handles to facilitate collection.
(3) Reusable containers for individual residences shall have a capacity
of not less than 10 gallons nor more than 32 gallons, and a loaded
weight of nor more than 40 pounds.
(4) Disposable plastic bags or sacks are acceptable containers,
provided the bags are designated for waste disposal. Plastic bags
shall have sufficient wall strength to maintain physical integrity
when lifted by the top, shall be securely tied at the top for
collection, and shall have a capacity of not more than 30 gallons
and a loaded weight of not more than 35 pounds.
§ 510-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-15
1:219
§ 510-16. Standards and regulations for collection.
(5) All containers, either reusable or disposable, shall also comply with
the minimum standards established by the National Sanitation
Foundation.
E. Any person storing municipal waste for collection shall comply with the
following storage standards:
(1) Containers shall be kept tightly sealed or covered at all times. Solid
waste shall not protrude or extend above the top of the container.
(2) Reusable containers shall be kept in a sanitary condition at all
times. The interior of the containers shall be thoroughly cleaned,
rinsed, drained and disinfected, as often as necessary, to prevent
the accumulation of liquid residues or solids on the bottom or sides
of the containers.
(3) Containers shall be used and maintained so as to prevent public
nuisances. No container shall be placed at the collection point prior
to sundown on the day before the designated day of collection or
6:00 p.m., whichever comes first. All containers must be removed
from the designated collection point by midnight of the day
designated for collection. [Amended 4-20-1999 by Ord. No.
1265]
(4) Containers that do not conform to the standard of this article or
which have sharp edges, ragged edges or any other defect that may
hamper or injure collection personnel shall be promptly replaced
by the owner upon notice from the municipality or its designated
representative.
(5) Containers shall be placed by the owner or customer at a collection
point specified by the municipality or its designated representative.
(6) With the exception of pickup days when the containers are placed
out for collection, the containers shall be properly stored on the
owner or customer premises at all times.
(7) Bulk waste items, such as furniture, automobile parts, machinery,
appliances, and tires, shall be stored in a manner that will prevent
the accumulation or collection of water, the harborage of rodents,
safety hazards and fire hazards.
F. The storage of all municipal waste from multifamily residential units,
commercial establishments, institutions and industrial lunchroom or
office waste sources is subject to the regulations and standards set
forth in this article. The type, size and placement requirements for bulk
containers shall be determined by the waste generator and the waste
hauler and are subject to approval by the municipality.
§ 510-15 ETNA CODE § 510-16
1:220
A. The municipality shall provide for the collection of all garbage, rubbish
and bulky wastes from individual residences and multifamily residential
sources with less than four units, or it may contract with a private
collector or collectors to provide this essential residential collection
service.
B. All households and homeowners shall utilize the residential collection
service provided by the municipality unless they can demonstrate that
they have made alternate arrangements that are consistent with this
article and approved by the municipality.
C. All multifamily residential sources (with more than four units),
commercial, institutional and industrial establishments shall negotiate
and individually contract collection service with the municipality's
collector or any other properly licensed waste hauler of their choice.
D. All residential garbage and rubbish shall be collected at least once a
week. Bulky waste shall be collected following prior arrangement with
the municipality's collector and payment of any required special fees.
E. All commercial, institutional, public and industrial lunchroom and office
waste containing garbage shall be collected at least once a week.
Rubbish collection from these sources shall be made as often as
necessary to control health hazards, odors, flies and unsightly
conditions. The municipality reserves the right to require more
frequent collections when deemed necessary.
F. Residential collection schedules shall be published regularly by the
municipality or its contracted hauler.
G. All solid waste collection activity shall be conducted from Monday
through Friday between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. or on
Saturdays between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., unless prior
approval or any exception has been granted by the municipality. No
collection, hauling or transporting of solid waste shall be permitted on
Sunday.
H. All licensed haulers and haulers under contract with the municipality
shall comply with the following standards and regulations:
(1) All municipal waste collected within the municipality shall
ultimately be disposed only at a landfill cited in the Allegheny
County Solid Waste Plan - 1990, or subsequent revisions thereto.
(2) Any trucks or other vehicles used for the collection and
transportation of municipal waste must comply with the
requirements of Act 97 and any Department regulations adopted
pursuant to Act 97 and must be licensed by the Allegheny County
Health Department.
(3) All collection vehicles conveying domestic waste and garbage shall
be watertight and suitably enclosed to prevent leakage, roadside
§ 510-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-16
1:221
§ 510-17. Collection and disposal charges.
§ 510-18. Administrative appeals.
littering, attraction of vectors, the creation of odors and other
nuisances.
(4) Collection vehicles for rubbish and other nonputrescible solid
waste shall be capable of being enclosed or covered to prevent
roadside litter and other nuisances.
(5) All solid waste shall be collected and transported so as to prevent
public health hazards, safety hazards, and nuisances.
(6) All solid waste collection vehicles shall be operated and maintained
in a clean and sanitary condition.
A. The governing body of the municipality shall be authorized to make
funds available in accordance with the laws and procedures of the
municipality for the establishment, maintenance and operation of a
municipal solid waste collection and disposal system or for the
contracting of such service to a private collector.
B. The annual fee schedule shall be published by the municipality on any
competitively bid residential collection service contract that may be
awarded by the municipality.
C. The municipality shall be responsible for the collection of any fees for
solid waste collection and disposal from residential customers.
Licensed haulers shall be responsible for the collection of any collection
and disposal fees from commercial, institutional and industrial
customers.
A. All appeals shall be made in writing to the governing body of the
municipality.
B. Pending a reversal or modification, all decisions of the municipality
shall remain effective and enforceable.
C. Appeals may be made by the following persons:
(1) Any person who is aggrieved by a new standard or regulation
issued by the municipality may appeal within 10 days after the
municipality gives notice of its intention to issue the new standard
or regulation.
D. The notice of appeal shall be served in writing and sent by certified mail
with return receipt requested. Within 20 days after receipt of the notice
of appeal, the municipality shall hold a public hearing. Notice of the
hearing shall be sent to both parties in time to adequately prepare for
the hearing. Notice shall be sent to the parties by certified mail with
return receipt requested at the last known address in addition to
publication in the local newspaper.
§ 510-16 ETNA CODE § 510-19
1:222
§ 510-19. Injunction powers.
The municipality may petition the Court of Allegheny County for an
injunction either mandatory or prohibitive to enforce any of the provisions
of this article.
§ 510-20. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be guilty of a misdemeanor, which is punishable by a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than $300 or, in default of payment of such fine, than by
imprisonment for a period of not more than 30 days, or both. Each day of
violation shall be considered a separate and distinct offense.
§ 510-21. Severability.
In the event that any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this
article be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, the remainder
of such ordinance shall not be invalidated by such action.
§ 510-22. Conflict.
Any ordinances or any part of any ordinances which conflict with this article
are hereby repealed insofar as the same affects this article.
§ 510-23. Effective date.
This article shall take effect on January 1, 1992.
§ 510-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 510-23
1:223
Chapter 518
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
§ 510-23 ETNA CODE § 510-23
1:224
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 518-1. Purpose.
In order to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the residents
of the municipality, as well as to protect, sustain and enhance the surface
water and groundwater resources of the municipality, drainage and
stormwater management practices shall be utilized as directed herein to
achieve the following goals and objectives:
A. Accommodate site development and redevelopment in a manner that
protects public safety and that is consistent with (or reestablishes) the
natural hydrologic characteristics of each watershed and sustains
groundwater recharge, stream base flows, stable stream channel
(geomorphology) conditions, the carrying capacity of streams and their
floodplains, groundwater and surface water quality, and aquatic living
resources and their habitats.
B. Reduce and minimize the volume of stormwater generated.
C. Protect natural infiltration and groundwater recharge rates in order to
sustain groundwater supplies and stream base flows.
D. Maintain runoff characteristics of the site after completion of
development that are consistent with the carrying capacity and stable
channel conditions of the receiving streams.
E. Protect water quality by removing and/or treating pollutants prior to
discharge to groundwater and surface waters throughout the
municipality, and to protect, restore, and maintain the chemical,
physical and biological quality of groundwater and surface waters.
F. Protect against scour, aggradation, degradation in stream channels and
geomorphology conditions of the receiving streams, protect their floodcarrying
capacity and aquatic habitats and reduce in-stream erosion
and sedimentation.
G. Reduce flooding impacts and prevent a significant increase in surface
runoff rates and volumes, predevelopment to post-development, which
could worsen flooding downstream in the watershed, enlarge
floodplains, erode stream banks and create other flood-related healthwelfare-
property losses; in general, to preserve and restore the natural
flood-carrying capacity of streams and their floodplains.
H. Protect adjacent lands from adverse impacts of direct stormwater
discharges.
I. Ensure effective long-term operation and maintenance of all permanent
stormwater management facilities.
J. Maintain natural drainage patterns and encourage the use of natural
drainage systems.
§ 518-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-1
1:225
§ 518-2. Findings.
The governing body of the Borough of Etna finds that:
K. Treat and release stormwater as close to the source of runoff as
possible using a minimum of structures and maximizing reliance on
natural processes.
L. Maintain the existing water balance in all watersheds, subwatersheds,
and streams in the municipality, and protect and/or restore natural
hydrologic characteristics and habitats wherever possible throughout
the watershed systems.
M. Address certain requirements of the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer
System (MS4) National Pollution Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) Phase II Stormwater Regulations.
N. Reduce the impacts of runoff from existing developed sites undergoing
redevelopment while encouraging development and redevelopment in
urban areas and areas designated for growth.
O. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93.4a to protect and maintain
"existing uses" and maintain the level of water quality to support those
uses in all streams, and to protect and maintain water quality in
"special protection" streams.
A. Inadequate management of accelerated runoff of stormwater resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases flows and
velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the
carrying capacity of streams and storm sewers, greatly increases the
cost of public facilities to carry and control stormwater, undermines
floodplain management and flood control efforts in downstream
communities, reduces groundwater recharge, threatens public health
and safety, and increases nonpoint source pollution of water resources.
B. A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including
reasonable regulation of development and activities causing
accelerated runoff, is fundamental to the public health, safety and
welfare and the protection of people of the commonwealth, their
resources, and the environment.
C. Stormwater is an important water resource, which provides
groundwater recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams,
which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
D. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are
required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their
separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES).
§ 518-1 ETNA CODE § 518-3
1:226
§ 518-3. Statutory authority.
§ 518-4. Applicability.
The standards contained herein shall apply to all regulated activities within
the municipality. In addition, all local, county and state erosion and
sedimentation control approvals must be in place to proceed with any
regulated activity.
A. Primary authority. The municipality is empowered to regulate these
activities by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act
167), 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., as amended, the "Storm Water
Management Act," and the Borough Code.39
B. Secondary authority. The municipality also is empowered to regulate
land use activities that affect runoff by the authority of the Act of July
31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, as amended.40
A. Activities regulated by this chapter include, but are not limited to, the
following:
(1) Land development and redevelopment.
(2) Subdivision.
(3) Construction of new or additional impervious or semipervious
surfaces (driveways, parking lots, etc.).
(4) Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings.
(5) Diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream channel.
(6) Installation of stormwater management facilities or appurtenances
thereto.
(7) Any earth disturbances or any activities that involve the alteration
or development of land or removal of tree and vegetation in a
manner that may affect post-construction stormwater runoff.
B. Redevelopments shall conform to the requirements contained in
§ 518-16C(3) when more than a 2,000-square-foot area of an existing
facility is reconstructed following the demolition or partially demolition
of the existing facility. The area determination shall be made using the
footprint of the area being reconstructed, including all impervious
surfaces proposed in the reconstructed area and the area of the parking
lot required to support the reconstructed facility. The area of the
parking lot required to support the reconstructed facility shall be
determined using Chapter 615, Zoning, requirements for parking.
39.Editor's Note: See 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq., the Borough Code.
40.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 518-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-5
1:227
§ 518-5. Exemptions.
With the approval of municipality's governing body, the following activities
may be exempted from on-site stormwater runoff control. An exemption
shall apply only to the requirement for on-site stormwater facilities and
the preparation of a stormwater management plan. All other stormwater
management design elements, such as a storm sewer system, road culverts,
erosion and sedimentation control, and runoff quality, shall be required. All
exemption requests must be filed with the Municipal Zoning Officer and
approved by the Municipal Engineer.
A. Regulated activities smaller than 400 square feet are exempt from the
requirements of this chapter to implement SWM BMPs, unless the
activity is found to be a significant contributor to pollution of the waters
of this commonwealth.
B. Small project exemption. Activities having a disturbed area of less than
5,000 square feet are exempt from the peak rate control requirements
of this chapter. these projects shall comply with the water quality
volume standards contained in § 518-16C(1) and the extended
detention requirement contained in § 518-18A(1). The "Small Project
Standardized SWM Guidance" document provided in Appendix F was
prepared to assist applicants in meeting this requirement for individual
lots only. The reduced site plan requirements contained in the "Small
Project Standardized SWM Guidance" document shall apply.41
(1) Stormwater management requirements for small projects.
(a) Projects proposing less than 400 square feet of additional
impervious area are exempt from any stormwater management
plan.
(b) Projects proposing greater than 400 square feet but less than
0.25 acre of additional impervious area must submit the
following stormwater management information to the
municipality:
[1] Brief description of the proposed project, including
proposed stormwater management facilities, including
types of materials to be used and an approximation of the
square footage of additional impervious areas.
[2] Sketch plan showing location of proposed improvements
and stormwater management facilities in relation to the
property lines and existing structures, septic systems and/
or water wells and roadways.
[3] Supporting runoff volume calculations and stormwater
BMP sizing calculations, as requested.
41.Editor's Note: Appendix F is an attachment to this chapter.
§ 518-5 ETNA CODE § 518-5
1:228
(c) Projects proposing greater than 0.25 acre of additional
impervious area must comply with the requirements of
§ 518-5A(2).
(d) The Municipal Engineer will review findings from projects
greater than 400 square feet but less than 0.25 acre for
appropriate SWM BMP.
(2) Stormwater management techniques for small projects.
(a) Structural BMPs.
[1] Rain garden.
[2] Infiltration trenches, stone sumps.
[3] Rain barrels.
[4] Pervious pavements.
[5] Vegetative swales with check dams, filter straps.
[6] Other techniques as approved by the municipal staff.
(b) Nonstructural BMPs.
[1] Tree plantings.
[2] Vegetative restoration.
[3] Roof disconnection to vegetative surface.
[4] Other techniques as approved by the Municipal Engineer.
C. Emergency exemption. Emergency maintenance work performed for
the protection of public health, safety and welfare may be exempted
from the requirements in this chapter to obtain approval for a
stormwater management plan before commencement of the activity;
however, a written description of the scope and extent of any
emergency work performed shall be submitted to the municipality
within two calendar days of the commencement of the activity. If the
municipality finds that the work is not an emergency, then the work
shall cease immediately and may not resume until a written stormwater
management plan is submitted and approved.
D. Maintenance exemption. Any maintenance to an existing stormwater
management system made in accordance with plans and specifications
approved by the Municipal Engineer or the municipality.
E. Gardening. Use of land for gardening for home consumption.
F. Agricultural activities. Agriculture when operated in accordance with a
conservation plan; nutrient management plan or erosion and
sedimentation control plan approved by the Allegheny County
Conservation District, including activities such as growing crops,
§ 518-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-5
1:229
§ 518-6. Waivers.
rotating crops, tilling of soil and grazing animals. Installation of new
or expansion of existing farmsteads, animal housing, waste storage
and production areas having impervious surfaces that result in a net
increase in impervious surface of less than 1,000 square feet are
exempt from the requirement to submit a written stormwater
management plan.
G. Forest management. Forest management operations which are
consistent with a sound forest management plan as filed with the
Municipal Zoning Officer and which follow the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection's management practices
contained in its publication "Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
Guidelines for Forestry." Such operations are required to have an
erosion and sedimentation control plan.
H. If an applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the county or its
designee that any mandatory provision of this chapter is unreasonable
or causes unique or undue unreasonableness or hardship as it applies
to the proposed Project, or that an alternate design may result in a
superior result within the context of § 518-1 and Articles II and III of
this chapter, the county or its designee, upon obtaining the comments
and recommendations of the municipality and the Allegheny County
Conservation District and/or PADEP, may grant a waiver or relief so that
substantial justice may be done and the public interest is secured,
provided that such waiver will not have the effect of nullifying the intent
and purpose of this chapter.
A. The provisions of this chapter are the minimum standards for the
protection of the public health, safety, property and welfare.
B. If an applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the county or its
designee that any mandatory provision of this chapter is unreasonable
or causes unique or undue unreasonableness or hardship as it applies
to the proposed project, or that an alternate design may result in a
superior result within the context of §§ 518-1 and 518-16A and B of this
chapter, the county or its designee, upon obtaining the comments and
recommendations of the municipality and the Allegheny County
Conservation District, may grant a waiver or relief so that substantial
justice may be done and the public interest is secured, provided that
such waiver will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose
of this chapter.
C. Applicants shall refer to the Pennsylvania Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual, Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP), No. 363-0300-002 (2006), as amended
and updated, or the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program
Manual, Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (DEP),
No. 363-2134-008 (2000), as amended and updated, or other
appropriate references, for guidance in the design of stormwater
§ 518-5 ETNA CODE § 518-6
1:230
management facilities most appropriate to individual site conditions.
References to the Maryland Manual, if not deleted, should be to specific
sections of Maryland's manual in order to minimize NPDES permitting
conflicts with the guidance provided by the Pennsylvania Stormwater
BMP Manual. The applicant shall state in full the facts of
unreasonableness or hardship on which the request is based, the
provision or provisions of the ordinance that are involved, and the
minimum waiver or relief that is necessary. The applicant shall state
how the requested waiver and how the applicant's proposal shall result
in an equal or better means of complying with the intent of § 518-1,
Purpose, § 518-16A, Design goals, and § 518-16B, General principles, of
this chapter.
D. The applicant shall submit all waiver requests to Allegheny County or
its designee for review and approval. Copies of the waiver request shall
also be submitted to the municipality.
E. The governing body shall keep a written record of all actions on waiver
requests.
F. The governing body may charge a fee for each waiver request, which
shall be used to offset the administrative costs of reviewing the waiver
request. The applicant shall also agree to reimburse the municipality,
the county and the Allegheny County Conservation District for
reasonable and necessary fees that may be incurred in any review of a
waiver request.
G. In granting waivers, the county or its designee may impose reasonable
conditions that will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives
of the standards or requirements that are to be modified.
H. The county or its designee may grant applications for waivers when the
following findings are made:
(1) That the waiver shall result in an equal or better means of
complying with the intent of §§ 518-1 and 518-16A and B of this
chapter.
(2) That the waiver is the minimum necessary to provide relief.
(3) That the applicant is not requesting a waiver based solely on cost
considerations.
(4) That existing off-site stormwater problems will not be exacerbated.
(5) That runoff is not being diverted to a different drainage area.
(6) That increased flooding or ponding on off-site properties or
roadways will not occur.
(7) That potential icing conditions will not occur.
§ 518-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-6
1:231
(8) That increase of post-development peak flow from the site will not
occur and will, in fact, be reduced by the appropriate amount if the
site is in a subbasin having a release rate of less than 100%.
(9) That there will be no increase in the post-development total runoff
volume for all storms equal to or less than the two-year/twentyfour-
hour storm event.
(10) That adverse impact to water quality will not result.
(11) That increased 100-year floodplain levels will not result.
(12) That increased or unusual municipal maintenance expenses will
not result from the waiver.
(13) That the amount of stormwater generated has been minimized to
the greatest extent allowed.
(14) That infiltration of runoff throughout the proposed site has been
provided where practicable and predevelopment groundwater
recharge protected at a minimum.
(15) That peak flow attenuation of runoff has been provided.
(16) That long-term operation and maintenance activities are
established.
(17) That no receiving streams and/or water bodies within 2,000 feet
downstream will be adversely impacted in flood-carrying capacity,
aquatic habitat, channel stability or erosion and sedimentation.
I. If the municipality determines that any requirement under this chapter
cannot be achieved for a particular regulated activity the municipality
may, after an evaluation of alternatives, approve measures other than
those in this chapter, subject to Subsection J. The proposed area of
disturbance shall be less than one acre. The request for a modification
or waiver shall originate with the landowner, shall be in writing, and
shall accompany the stormwater management site plan submitted to
the municipality. The request shall provide the facts on which the
request is based, the provisions of the chapter involved, and the
proposed modification. The designated plan reviewer shall review the
request to determine if it meets the requirements of the chapter,
including Subsection J below. If acceptable to the municipality, the
municipality may grant the waiver or modification.
J. Waivers or modifications of the requirements of this chapter may be
approved by the municipality if enforcement will exact undue hardship
because of unique physical circumstances or conditions peculiar to the
land in question, provided that the modifications will not be contrary or
detrimental to the public interest and will achieve the intended
outcome and that the purpose of the chapter is preserved. Hardship
must be due to such unique physical circumstances or conditions and
not to circumstances or conditions generally created by the provisions
§ 518-6 ETNA CODE § 518-6
1:232
§ 518-7. General requirements.
of this chapter. Cost or financial burden shall not be considered a
hardship. Modifications shall not substantially or permanently impair
the appropriate use or development of adjacent property. A request
for modifications shall be in writing and accompany the stormwater
management site plan submission, as directed in Subsection I above.
K. No waiver or modification of any regulated stormwater activity
involving earth disturbance greater than or equal to one acre may be
granted by the municipality. Municipalities are responsible for
reviewing proposed waivers/modifications. The waiver must come from
the landowner and be presented in writing along with a stormwater
management site plan. The designated plan reviewer shall determine if
the plan meets the requirements of the chapter including the new
paragraph in Subsection J above. If the proposed disturbance is one
acre or greater, it must be approved by the Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP) or the delegated county conservation
district.
A. The management of stormwater on site, both during and upon
completion of the disturbances associated with activities permitted
under § 518-4, shall be accomplished in accordance with the standards
and criteria of this chapter. The design of any temporary or permanent
facilities and structures and the utilization of any natural drainage
systems shall be in full compliance with this article.
B. The intent of these design standards is to encourage environmentally
sound stormwater management practices that provide necessary
drainage facilities while protecting the hydrologic characteristics and
water quality of the site and watershed. Developments shall be required
to incorporate stormwater management controls. Stormwater
management design shall blend into the natural environment and be
aesthetically integrated into the site design.
(1) Applicants shall refer to the Pennsylvania Storm Water Best
Management Practices Manual, as amended, Pennsylvania
Handbook of Best Management Practices for Developing Areas
(PACD, 1998), the 2000 Maryland Stormwater Design Manual
(MDE, 2000) or other appropriate references for guidance in the
design of stormwater management facilities most appropriate to
individual site conditions. Objectives for design are to reduce the
volume of stormwater generated, infiltrate runoff at its source to
the maximum extent possible, achieve water quality improvement
at the source or during conveyance and provide for peak flow
attenuation. Applicants shall examine design alternatives by
viewing them in a series. In addition, applicants are strongly
encouraged to use structural and nonstructural stormwater
management practices that reduce or eliminate the need for
detention basins.
§ 518-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-7
1:233
(2) All SWM design work must be completed by a qualified design
professional. All designs proposing the use of a SWM retention or
detention facility with outlet structure(s) shall be completed by a
professional engineer licensed in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(3) All development activity within a special flood hazard area
designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) shall comply with all sections of the Etna Floodplain
Ordinance No. 1353 of 201442 and this paragraph. All development
shall be designed to maintain the flood-carrying capacity of the
floodway such that the base flood elevations are not increased,
either upstream or downstream, unless an approval is received
from PADEP. The natural conveyance characteristics of the site and
the receiving floodplain shall be incorporated into the stormwater
management practices proposed for the site.
(4) The stormwater management system shall not create an adverse
impact on stormwater quantity or quality in either upstream or
downstream areas. Off-site areas which discharge to or across a
site proposed for development shall be addressed in the
stormwater management plan prepared for the development. No
stormwater management plan shall be approved until it is
demonstrated that the runoff from the project shall not adversely
impact downstream areas.
(5) Wetlands shall not be used to meet the minimum design
requirements for stormwater management or stormwater runoff
quality treatment, except when used as part of a treatment train
that incorporates a portion of the outer zone (filter strip) of the
wetland's riparian buffer as a stormwater outfall.
(6) All proposed stormwater management systems shall be designed to
prevent the pollution of groundwater resources by stormwater,
promote safety, minimize health hazards, preserve natural features
and provide infiltration and groundwater recharge where
appropriate. Neither submission of a plan under the provision
herein nor compliance with the provisions of these regulations shall
relieve any person from responsibility for damage to any person or
property otherwise imposed by law.
(7) Where deemed necessary by the Municipal Engineer, or as
addressed in an approved Act 167 stormwater management plan,
the applicant shall construct storm drains to handle on-site runoff;
to the maximum extent permitted under the Municipalities
Planning Code and Act 167, or any amendments thereto, provide
on-site/off-site drainage easements; and provide for the conveyance
of off-site runoff to an acceptable outlet in the same watershed.
42.Editor's Note: See Ch. 300, Floodplain Management, of this Code.
§ 518-7 ETNA CODE § 518-7
1:234
(8) Where watercourses traverse a development site, drainage
easements shall be provided conforming to the line of such
watercourses. The terms of the easements shall prohibit
excavation, the placing of fill or structures, except as needed for
roadways, driveways and walkways, or any alterations that may
adversely affect the flow of stormwater within any portions of the
easement and require the establishment and protection of riparian
buffers.
(9) For all regulated activities, stormwater management BMPs shall be
designed, implemented, operated and maintained to meet the
purposes and requirements of this chapter and to meet all
requirements under Pa. Code Title 25, the Clean Streams Law, and
the Storm Water Management Act.
(10) Any regulated activity that may affect the stormwater flows toward
or onto a state or county highway right-of-way or facility shall be
designed, implemented, operated, and maintained in accordance
with the regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation (PennDOT) or Allegheny County, as the case may
be.
(11) At the time of application for a building permit for any approved lot
created by a subdivision and/or improved as a land development
project, issuance of the permit shall be conditioned upon
adherence to the terms of this chapter.
(12) Stormwater discharges to critical areas with sensitive resources
(e.g., special protection waters, cold water fisheries, recharge
areas, water supply reservoirs, etc.) may be subject to additional
performance criteria or may need to utilize or restrict certain
stormwater management practices.
(13) For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment
control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated and
maintained during the regulated earth disturbance activities (e.g.,
during construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this
chapter and to meet all requirements under the Pa. Code Title 25
and the Clean Streams Law. Various BMPs and their design
standards are listed in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Program Manual (E&S Manual), Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
Department of Environmental Protection, No. 363-2134-008, as
amended and updated.
(14)No regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality
shall commence until the requirements of this chapter are met.
(15) Post-construction water quality protection shall be addressed as
required by the stormwater management requirements contained
in this chapter.
§ 518-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-7
1:235
§ 518-8. Repealer.
Any ordinance or ordinance provision of the municipality inconsistent with
any of the provisions of this chapter is hereby repealed to the extent of the
(16) Operations and maintenance of permanent stormwater BMPs shall
be addressed as required by Article III of this chapter.
(17) All best management practices (BMPs) used to meet the
requirements of this chapter shall conform to the state water
quality requirements and any more stringent requirements as
required by the municipality.
(18) Techniques described in Appendix B (Nonstructural Stormwater
Management Practices) of this chapter43 are encouraged, because
they reduce the costs of complying with the requirements of this
chapter and the state water quality requirements.
(19) In selecting the appropriate BMPs or combinations thereof, the
applicant shall consider the following:
(a) Total contributing area.
(b) Permeability and infiltration rate of the site soils.
(c) Slope and depth to bedrock.
(d) Seasonal high-water table.
(e) Proximity to building foundations and wellheads.
(f) Erodibility of soils.
(g) Land availability and configuration of the topography.
(h) Peak discharge and required volume control.
(i) Stream bank erosion.
(j) Efficiency of the BMPs to mitigate potential water quality
problems.
(k) The volume of runoff that will be effectively treated.
(l) The nature of the pollutant being removed.
(m) Maintenance requirements.
(n) Creation/protection of aquatic and wildlife habitat.
(20) Transference of runoff from one DEP-designated Act 167
watershed to another shall be prohibited unless approved by the
municipality.
43.Editor's Note: Appendix B is an attachment to this chapter.
§ 518-7 ETNA CODE § 518-8
1:236
inconsistency only; provided, however, that this repeal shall in no manner
be construed as a waiver, release or relinquishment of the right to initiate,
pursue or prosecute, as the case may be, any proceeding at law or in equity
pertaining to any act done which would have constituted a violation of such
prior ordinance or ordinance provision. All of said ordinance or ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect and are not repealed hereby
as they pertain to such acts and to the processing of such plans filed prior
to the effective date of this chapter, which are protected from the effect of
intervening ordinances by Section 508(4) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.
§ 518-9. Severability; compatibility with other ordinance
requirements.
§ 518-10. Permit requirements by other government entities.
A. Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such determination of invalidity shall
not affect the validity of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
B. Compatibility with other ordinance requirements. Permits and
approvals issued pursuant to this chapter shall not relieve the applicant
of the responsibility to comply with or to secure other required permits
or approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule,
act, statute or ordinance. This chapter shall not preclude the inclusion
in such other permit of more stringent requirements concerning
regulation of stormwater and erosion. Where a conflict exists between a
provision within this chapter and that of the PADEP Phase II NPDES
regulations, as amended, or any other ordinance of the municipality, the
more stringent requirements shall govern.
A. All regulated earth disturbance activities subject to permit
requirements by DEP under regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
B. Work within natural drainageways, subject to permit by DEP under 25
Pa. Code Chapter 105.
C. Any stormwater management facility that would be located in or
adjacent to surface waters of the commonwealth, including wetlands,
subject to permit by DEP under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105.
D. Any stormwater management facility that would be located on a state
highway right-of-way or require access from a state highway shall be
subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PennDOT).
E. Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which must pass
or convey flows from the tributary area and any facility which may
constitute a dam subject to permit by DEP under 25 Pa. Code Chapter
105.
§ 518-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-11
1:237
§ 518-11. Erosion and sediment control during regulated earth
disturbance activities.
§ 518-12. Prohibitions.
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality shall
commence until the municipality receives a copy of any required
approvals from the conservation district or DEP for an erosion and
sediment control plan.
B. DEP has regulations that require an erosion and sediment control plan
for any earth disturbance activity of 5,000 square feet or more, under
25 Pa. Code § 102.4(b).
C. In addition, under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92, a DEP NPDES construction
activities permit is required for regulated earth disturbance activities.44
D. Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance
activities from the appropriate DEP regional office or County
Conservation District must be provided to the municipality.
E. A copy of the erosion and sediment control plan and any required
permits, as required by DEP regulations, shall always be available at
the project site.
F. Additional erosion and sediment control design standards and criteria
are recommended to be applied where infiltration BMPs are proposed
and shall include the following:
(1) Areas proposed for infiltration BMPs shall be protected from
sedimentation and compaction during the construction phase to
maintain maximum infiltration capacity.
(2) Infiltration BMPs shall not be constructed nor receive runoff until
the entire contributory drainage area to the infiltration BMP has
achieved final stabilization.
A. No person in the municipality shall allow, or cause to allow, stormwater
discharges into the municipality's separate storm sewer system and/or
waters of this commonwealth which are not composed entirely of
stormwater, except: 1) as provided in Subsection B below; and 2)
discharges allowed under a state or federal permit.
B. The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to
be significant contributors to pollution to the waters of this
commonwealth:
(1) Discharges from firefighting activities.
44.Editor's Note: Former 25 Pa. Code Ch. 92 was repealed effective 10-9-2010. See now 25 Pa.
Code Ch. 92a.
§ 518-11 ETNA CODE § 518-12
1:238
§ 518-13. Enforcement and penalties.
(2) Potable water sources, including dechlorinated waterline and fire
hydrant flushings.
(3) Irrigation drainage.
(4) Routine external building washdown (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
(5) Air-conditioning condensate.
(6) Water from individual residential car washing.
(7) Spring water from crawl space pumps.
(8) Uncontaminated water from foundation or from footing drains.
(9) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(10) Lawn watering.
(11) Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used.
(12) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
(13) Uncontaminated groundwater.
(14) Rising groundwaters, springs and street wash water.
C. In the event that the municipality determines that any of the discharges
identified in Subsection B above significantly contribute to pollution of
waters of the commonwealth, or is so notified by DEP, the municipality
or PADEP will notify the responsible person to cease the discharge.
D. Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's responsibilities under
state law.
E. Existing roof drain, underdrain and sump pump discharge should be
directed to lawn area or other pervious areas. If required by the
municipality, the discharge shall be directed to a stone sump or
infiltration BMP. If approved by the municipality, the discharge may also
be directly connected to the storm sewer system.
F. No person shall alter or modify any portion of a stormwater
management BMP without written consent from the municipality.
A. Right of entry.
(1) Upon presentation of proper credentials, the municipality may
enter at reasonable times upon any property within the
municipality to inspect the condition of the stormwater structures
and facilities regarding any aspect regulated by this chapter.
§ 518-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-13
1:239
B. Inspection.
(1) SWM BMPs should be inspected by the land owner/developer
(including municipality for dedicated facilities), according to the
following list of frequencies:
(a) Annually for the first five years.
(b) Once every three years thereafter.
(c) During or immediately after the cessation of a ten-year or
greater storm.
C. Enforcement.
(1) It shall be unlawful for a person to undertake any regulated activity
except as provided in an approved SWM site plan.
(2) It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any control structure
required by the SWM site plan.
(3) Inspections regarding compliance with the SWM site plan are a
responsibility of the municipality.
D. Suspension and revocation.
(1) Any approval for a regulated activity issued may be suspended or
revoked, in whole or in part, by the municipality for:
(a) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of
the approval.
(b) A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other
applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulation relating to the
regulated activity.
(c) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act
during the regulated activity which constitutes or creates a
hazard or nuisance, pollution, or which endangers the life or
property of others.
(d) A suspended approval may be reinstated by the municipality
when:
[1] The municipality has inspected and approved the
corrections to the violations that caused the suspension.
[2] The municipality is satisfied that the violation has been
corrected.
(2) An approval that has been revoked by the municipality cannot be
reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new approval under the
provisions of this chapter. Prior to revocation or suspension of a
permit, if there is no immediate danger to life, public health, or
§ 518-13 ETNA CODE § 518-13
1:240
§ 518-14. Erroneous permit.
Any permit or authorization issued or approved based on false, misleading
or erroneous information provided by an applicant is void without the
necessity of any proceedings for revocation. Any work undertaken or use
established pursuant to such permit or other authorization is unlawful. No
action may be taken by a board, agency or employee of the municipality
purporting to validate such a violation.
property, the municipality may notify the land owner/developer to
discuss the noncompliance.
E. Penalties.
(1) Anyone violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
summary offense and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of
not more than $1,000 for each violation, recoverable with costs.
Each day that the violation continues shall be a separate offense,
and penalties shall be cumulative.
(2) In addition, the municipality may institute injunctive, mandamus or
any other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for
the enforcement of this chapter. Any court of competent
jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders,
temporary or permanent injunctions, mandamus or other
appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
F. Appeals.
(1) Any person aggrieved by any decision of the municipality relevant
to the provisions of this chapter may appeal to the County Court of
Common Pleas in the county where the activity has taken place
within 30 days of the municipality's decision.
§ 518-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-14
1:241

ARTICLE II
Stormwater Management Requirements
§ 518-15. Plan and report required.
For all regulated activities not eligible for exemptions pursuant to § 518-5 of
this chapter the applicant shall submit a stormwater management plan and
report prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, which shall contain, but not be limited to, the following.
Final copies of all plans, specifications and reports shall also be submitted
to the municipality in Adobe PDF format.
A. A suitable map of the watershed for any and all named streams within
which the project is proposed (a United States Geological Survey
quadrangle map is usually sufficient), with existing and proposed
development areas presented on the map.
B. Suitable maps and drawings showing all existing natural and
constructed drainage facilities affecting the subject property.
C. Hydrologic (watershed) and water feature boundaries, including all
areas flowing to the proposed project, existing streams (including first
order and intermittent streams), springs, lakes, ponds or other bodies
of water within the project area.
D. Sufficient topographical information with elevations to verify the
location of all ridges, streams, etc. (two-foot contour intervals within
the project's boundaries and for proposed off-site improvements; for
slopes greater than 15%, five-foot contours are acceptable).
E. Notes pertaining to and locations of existing standing water, areas of
heavy seepage, springs, wetlands, streams and hydrologically sensitive
areas. The 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93 water quality standards use
designation must also be provided on the plan.
F. General type of soils with hydrologic soil group noted, estimated
permeabilities in inches per hour, and location and results of all soil
tests and borings (if needed).
G. One-hundred-year flood elevations for any special flood hazard areas on
or within 100 feet of the property. For redevelopment sites, also show
the ten- and twenty-five-year flood elevations for any special flood
hazard areas on or within 100 feet of the property. The source of these
elevations shall also be shown on the plans.
H. Description of current and proposed ground cover and land use. The
total area and percent impervious cover shall be noted.
I. A wetland delineation report for the project site with a location map
identifying wetland areas, if any were found.
J. A plan of the proposed stormwater drainage system attributable to the
activity proposed, including runoff calculations, stormwater
§ 518-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-15
1:243
§ 518-16. Design goals, principles and standards.
management practices to be applied both during and after
development, and the expected project time schedule.
K. The design computations for all proposed stormwater drainage
systems, including storm-drain pipes, inlets, runoff control measures
and culverts, drainage channels, and other features, facilities and
stormwater management practices.
L. A grading plan, including all areas of disturbance of the subject activity.
The total area of disturbance shall be noted in square feet and acres.
Topographic contours showing the existing and proposed final contours
at an interval of two feet; in areas having slope of greater than 15%, a
five-foot contour interval may be used.
M. A plan of the erosion and sedimentation procedures to be utilized as
required by local ordinance and state regulations (25 Pa. Code Ch. 102).
N. The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes and peak flows) on
adjacent properties and on any other stormwater collection system that
may receive runoff from the project site and specifics of how erosion
and flooding impacts to adjacent properties will be avoided or
otherwise mitigated.
O. An operations and maintenance plan consistent with the requirements
of Article III of this chapter. Such a plan should clearly explain how the
proposed facilities operate and the functions they serve.
P. The name of the development, the name and address of the property
owner and applicant, and the name and address of the individual or firm
preparing the plan.
Q. A North arrow, submission date, graphic scale and revision dates, as
applicable, shall be included on each page of all plans submitted.
R. Complete delineation of the flow paths used for calculating the time of
concentration for the predeveloped and post-developed conditions.
S. Construction details sufficient to completely express the intended
stormwater design components consistent with this chapter.
T. A listing of all permits required for the site, providing the status of the
permit application(s) and approval(s).
U. All adjacent property owners shall be notified of the project and its
stormwater and BMP installation. Legal proof of this notification must
be provided to the municipality.
A. Design goals. Applicants shall adhere to a holistic design process
incorporating the goals listed below. The objective is to achieve postdevelopment
hydrologic conditions that are consistent with the
predevelopment ground cover assumption for new development (refer
§ 518-15 ETNA CODE § 518-16
1:244
to § 518-17B) and improve the runoff conditions for redevelopment
[refer to § 518-16C(3)]. The design goals are to:
(1) Minimize the volume of runoff that must be collected, conveyed,
treated and released by stormwater management facilities;
Note: Minimization of runoff generated by a proposed site is
directly related to the various land use and design standards for
site improvements required under the municipal zoning and
subdivision and land development ordinances. The effect that these
requirements have on generating stormwater should be taken into
consideration. Site design should implement runoff reduction
techniques such as those described in Appendix B.45
(2) Maintain the natural infiltration process and rate, and infiltrate
runoff at its source when appropriate;
(3) Remove and/or treat pollutants at the source or during conveyance;
(4) Provide for peak flow attenuation, as needed; and
(5) Attenuate runoff to protect the in-stream channel of the receiving
stream.
B. General principles. The following general principles apply to all
applicable activities pursuant to § 518-4:
(1) Incorporate conservation design practices to minimize the amount
of stormwater generated on a site, encourage the disconnection of
impervious land cover, and maximize the use of pervious areas for
stormwater treatment and on-site rainfall infiltration.
Note: Design standards in other sections of the municipal
subdivision and land development ordinance should be evaluated
for their impact on generating stormwater runoff. For example,
standards for parking stall sizes, quantity of parking, roadway
widths, yard and bulk area requirements for each zoning district
can inadvertently work against the minimization of stormwater
generated. Also, pervious areas such as recreation fields may be
available for the installation of stormwater facilities thereby
maximizing the use of pervious areas. A brief description of
suggested site design practices is provided in Appendix B.46
(2) Infiltration of surface water runoff at its source is to be a
mechanism for stormwater management based on hydrologic soil
group (or infiltration testing). Infiltration practices include, but are
not limited to, those referenced in § 518-18B(1) and as outlined in
the publications listed in § 518-18. Infiltration practices shall
adhere to the following criteria:
45.Editor's Note: Appendix B is an attachment to this chapter.
46.Editor's Note: Appendix B is an attachment to this chapter.
§ 518-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-16
1:245
(a) In choosing methods of infiltration, preference shall be given to
a combination of surface and subsurface infiltration methods.
(b) Applicants shall first consider minimum disturbance/minimum
maintenance techniques combined with site grading that
distributes runoff to reduce concentration. Next, applicants
shall consider depression areas combined with subsurface
infiltration practices followed by other subsurface measures,
including, but not limited to, porous paving and perforated
pipe storage.
(c) The use of multiple infiltration features and facilities that
provide for the following is encouraged:
[1] Discourage concentration of flows;
[2] Encourage disconnection of flows;
[3] Infiltrate as close to the source of runoff as possible; and
[4] Reduce visual impact.
Note: An example of promoting the concepts listed in
§ 518-16B(2)(c) is choosing a design method to address
runoff collected from rooftops and conveyed to the surface
by downspouts. The "disconnection of flows" can be
accomplished by directing the downspouts over pervious
surfaces rather than impervious surfaces. This can be
taken one step further by directing the downspouts into
infiltration facilities close to the source of the runoff. This
promotes the idea of infiltrating as close to the source of
runoff as possible and discourages the concentration of
flows.
(d) Where high water tables, subsurface contamination, slope
stability concerns, or other site constraints preclude achieving
the required infiltration volume, additional conservation
design practices and alternative stormwater management
practices should be implemented to reduce to the maximum
extent practicable the total volume of stormwater released to
streams. Applicant shall follow the stormwater runoff
hierarchy of § 518-18A(1).
(e) Infiltration areas should be designed to maintain any broad
and even infiltration pattern which existed prior to
development. Such facilities should use the natural topography
and vegetation in order to blend in with the site. Infiltration
designs which do not provide this may be used if the applicant
demonstrates to the municipality's satisfaction that alternative
approaches would be more effective, more harmonious with
their existing environment and as easily maintained.
§ 518-16 ETNA CODE § 518-16
1:246
(f) Aboveground stormwater infiltration facilities should be as
shallow as possible while still achieving the requirements of
this chapter.
(3) Water quality improvement shall be achieved in conjunction with or
as part of infiltration practices. Water quality improvements shall
also be provided for drainage areas not otherwise addressed by
infiltration practices either at the source of runoff and/or during
conveyance away from the source of runoff.
(4) To reduce the need for large retention and/or detention basins
designed to satisfy the peak flow attenuation and extended
detention requirements, other innovative stormwater management
practices located close to the source of runoff generation shall be
considered, including a combination of practices (e.g., rooftop
storage, open-vegetated channels, bioretention, pervious pavement
systems and infiltration trenches).
(5) When designing stormwater management facilities to satisfy the
peak flow attenuation and extended detention requirements [refer
to § 518-16C(2)(b)], the effect of structural and nonstructural
stormwater management practices implemented as part of the
overall site design may be taken into consideration when
calculating total storage volume and release rates.
(6) Site hydrology and natural infiltration patterns shall guide site
design, construction and vegetation decisions. All channels,
drainageways, swales, natural streams and other surface water
concentrations shall be considered and, where possible,
incorporated into design decisions.
C. Minimum performance criteria.
(1) The following minimum performance standards shall apply to all
applicable activities, whether they are new development or
redevelopment, pursuant to § 518-4A.
(a) Water quality treatment of stormwater runoff shall be provided
for all discharges prior to release to a receiving water body. If a
stormwater management practice does not provide water
quality treatment, then water quality best management
practices shall be utilized prior to the runoff entering the
stormwater management practice.
(b) Water quality management shall be provided through the use
of structural and/or nonstructural stormwater management
practices. Water quality stormwater management practices
shall be designed to reduce or eliminate solids, sediment,
nutrients and other potential pollutants from the site. It is
presumed that a stormwater management practice complies
with this requirement if it is:
§ 518-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-16
1:247
[1] Designed according to the specific performance criteria
outlined in § 518-6C.
[2] Constructed in accordance with all permits and approved
plans and specifications; and
[3] Maintained per an approved operations and maintenance
plan or agreement or, in lieu of that, in accordance with
customary practices.
(c) Stormwater discharges from land uses or activities with higher
potential for pollutant loadings (hot spots) may require the use
of specific structural stormwater management practices and
pollution prevention practices. In addition, stormwater from a
hot spot land use shall be provided with proper pretreatment
prior to infiltration. For the purpose of this chapter, the sites/
facilities listed in § 518-16C(1)(d) below are considered hot
spots.
(d) Certain industrial sites may be required to prepare and
implement a stormwater pollution prevention plan and file
notice of intent as required under the provision of the EPA
Industrial Stormwater NPDES Permit Requirements. Other
industrial sites storing significant quantities of chemicals/
wastes should also prepare a prevention plan. Sites that are
required by EPA to prepare a plan include, but are not limited
to:
[1] Vehicle salvage yards and recycling facilities;
[2] Vehicle and equipment cleaning facilities;
[3] Fleet storage areas for buses, trucks, etc.;
[4] Marinas (service and maintenance);
[5] Facilities that generate or store hazardous materials.
Note: Municipalities may add more quantifiable standards
regarding the meaning of "significant quantities of
chemicals/waste." For example, the 2000 International
Building Code Table 307.7(1) gives maximum allowable
chemicals regarding hazardous materials posing a
physical hazard. The PADEP spill prevention control
program may also provide guidance. Additional categories
of land use could be added to this list as warranted.
(e) Conveyance structures/channels shall be designed and
adequately sized to protect the properties receiving runoff
from impacts of flooding and erosion. Where necessary, and to
the maximum extent permitted under the Municipalities
Planning Code and Act 167, or any amendments thereto,
drainage easement from adjoining properties shall be obtained
§ 518-16 ETNA CODE § 518-16
1:248
to ensure the drainageway and the property and shall also
establish the operation and maintenance requirements for the
drainageway.
(f) All stormwater management practices shall have an operations
and maintenance plan pursuant to § 518-27 of this chapter, and
if to be privately owned, an enforceable operation and
maintenance agreement per § 518-28 of this chapter to ensure
the system functions as designed and to provide remedies for
system failure.
Note: This model ordinance includes a sample operation and
maintenance agreement document (refer to Appendix C47).
Municipalities should consult with their legal counsel on
contents of any agreement prepared for operation and
maintenance of stormwater management facilities. The PADEP
document titled "Guidance on MS4 Ordinance Provisions,
document number 392-0300-003, dated August 2, 2003, should
be consulted for further guidance.
(g) Stormwater runoff generated from development and
discharged directly into a jurisdictional wetland or waters of
the United States and their adjacent wetlands shall be treated
by an approved stormwater management practice prior to
release into a natural wetlands and shall not be used to meet
the minimum design requirements for stormwater
management or stormwater runoff quality treatment, except
when used as part of a treatment train that incorporates a
portion of the outer zone (filter strip) of the wetland's riparian
buffer as a stormwater outfall. In such instances, the discharge
velocity from the terminal end of a pipe or associated energy
dissipation practice shall not exceed two feet per second for
the two-year frequency storm event. Where such a
management strategy is used, all feasible methods shall be
used to convert concentrated flow to uniform, shallow sheet
flow before entering the outer zone of the wetland's riparian
buffer. In addition, it shall be demonstrated that such an
approach will not cause erosion.
(2) The following minimum performance standards shall apply to all
applicable new development activities, pursuant to § 518-4A.
(a) Water quality improvement shall be achieved in conjunction
with or as part of infiltration practices (if used). Water quality
improvements shall also be provided for drainage areas not
otherwise addressed by infiltration practices either at the
source of runoff and/or during conveyance away from the
source of runoff. Stormwater quality management practices
shall be designed to capture and treat stormwater runoff
47.Editor's Note: Appendix C is an attachment to this chapter.
§ 518-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-16
1:249
generated by the one-inch rainfall event. Refer to § 518-18A(2)
for water quality volume design standards and assumptions.
Stormwater quality management practice selection, design
and implementation shall be based upon appropriate reference
materials, as provided in § 518-6C.
(b) The post-development peak discharge rate shall not exceed the
predevelopment peak discharge rate multiplied by the
"subbasin release rate percentage" (where determined in Act
167 watersheds) for the two-year, ten-year, twenty-five-year,
and one-hundred-year twenty-four-hour storm events pursuant
to the predevelopment cover assumption described in
§ 518-17B. Refer to Appendix A for release rate percentages
information.48
(c) Facilities capable of attenuating rainfall runoff shall be
provided and be designed to attenuate the runoff volume from
the one-year twenty-four-hour storm event for at least 24
hours.
(d) Stormwater shall be infiltrated and/or discharged within the
same drainage area of the stream receiving the runoff from the
development site prior to development.
(e) Structural and nonstructural stormwater management
practices that make best possible use of infiltration on site
shall be considered in all site designs, when appropriate.
(3) The following minimum performance standards shall apply to all
applicable redevelopment activities, pursuant to § 518-4B.
Note: The intent of § 518-16C(3) is to accommodate redevelopment
that is designed to provide improved stormwater management
while recognizing that redevelopment sites have inherent physical
constraints, which may make the application of the new
development stormwater design parameters difficult to achieve.
(a) One of the following minimum performance standards shall be
accomplished. Selection of the performance standard shall be
whichever is most appropriate for the given site conditions:
[1] Reduce the total impervious cover on the site (e.g., by
using pervious pavement, replacement of pavement with
pervious planting areas or green roof systems) by at least
25%, based on a comparison of existing impervious cover
to proposed impervious cover; or
[2] Provide facilities designed to attenuate the runoff volume
from the one-year twenty-four-hour post-development
storm event for at least 24 hours; or
48.Editor's Note: Appendix A is an attachment to this chapter.
§ 518-16 ETNA CODE § 518-16
1:250
§ 518-17. Stormwater runoff calculation criteria.
In addition to the infiltration and water quality requirements of this chapter,
peak flow from those activities resulting in increases in impervious surface
and/or regrading and compaction shall be attenuated consistent with the
following stormwater calculation methods:
[3] Provide facilities to ensure that the post-development peak
discharge rate shall not exceed the predevelopment peak
discharge rate multiplied by the "subbasin release rate
percentage" (where determined in Act 167 watersheds) for
the two-year and ten-year twenty-four-hour storm events.
A predevelopment cover CN of 71 shall be assumed.
(b) In addition to the minimum performance standards for
redevelopment areas in § 518-16C(3) above, water quality
improvements shall be provided for drainage areas not
otherwise addressed by infiltration practices either at the
source of runoff and/or during conveyance away from the
source of runoff. Stormwater quality management facilities
shall be designed to capture and treat 0.25 inch of runoff from
all pavement areas (i.e., parking lots, pavements and
noncovered sidewalks). Roof area may be excluded from this
calculation.
A. Values to apply.
(1) The following design storms shall be used for analysis of the preand
post-development conditions. These values are applicable to
the Soil-Cover-Complex Method:
Return Period
(years)
24-Hour Storm
(inches)
1 2.00
2 2.35
10 3.30
25 3.91
100 4.92
(2) The precipitation values for each frequency storm listed above
were abstracted from the precipitation frequency estimates
developed by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration as set forth in NOAA Atlas 14, Volume 2 (NOAA June
2004). The NOAA data are available from the Hydrometeorological
Design Studies Center of the National Weather Service.
The NOAA Atlas 14, volume 2 report can be accessed from the
NOAA website at http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.
§ 518-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-17
1:251
B. The following assumptions shall be used for runoff calculations:
(1) For new development sites, the ground cover used as the
predevelopment assumption for runoff calculations shall be as
follows;
(a) Wooded sites shall use a ground cover of woodland in good
condition. Portions of a site having more than one viable tree of
a diameter at breast height (DBH) (the diameter of the tree
stem 4 1/2 feet above the ground) of six inches or greater per
1,500 square feet shall be considered wooded where such trees
existed within 10 years of application. If there is evidence of
logging within the ten-year period the logged area shall be
consider as woodland in good condition.
Note: The intent of Subsection B(1)(a) is to recognize woodland
conditions and not inadvertently encourage tree harvesting.
(b) Agricultural sites shall use a ground cover of pasture in good
condition.
(c) All other portions of a site shall use a ground cover of meadow
in good condition.
(d) All watershed area(s) contributing to the point of interest,
including off-site area, shall be considered.
(e) For redevelopment sites, see § 518-16C(3).
(2) The runoff curve numbers listed in the table below shall be used in
developing the runoff calculations for the ground covers noted in
Subsection B(1).These values are referenced from the Urban
Hydrology for Small Watersheds Technical Release No. 55 (USDA,
1986). Coefficients for equivalent ground cover conditions shall be
used if a runoff method other than the Soil-Cover-Complex Method
is used.
Ground Cover Hydrologic Soil Group Curve Numbers
A B C D
Woodland 30 55 70 77
Meadow 30 58 71 78
Grass 39 61 74 80
(3) Impervious cover shall have a curve number of 98.
(4) Gravel pavement shall have a curve number of 89.
(5) Average antecedent moisture conditions, or AMC II, shall be used
(for the Soil-Cover-Complex Method, only for example, TR-55,
TR-20).
§ 518-17 ETNA CODE § 518-17
1:252
(6) A type II distribution storm (for the Soil-Cover-Complex Method,
only for example, TR-55, TR-20).
(7) For time-of-concentration calculations, sheet flow lengths shall not
exceed 100 feet and shallow concentrated flow lengths shall not
exceed 1,000 feet.
(8) The kinematic "n" value in the sheet flow equation should be
applied as per the following table. (Values taken from TR-55.)
Impervious surfaces 0.011
Agricultural lands 0.17
Grass, lawn or open
space
0.24
Wooded areas 0.40
C. In all plans and designs for stormwater management systems and
facilities submitted to the Municipal Engineer for approval, stormwater
peak discharge and runoff shall be determined through the use of the
NRCS Soil-Cover-Complex Method as set forth in Urban Hydrology for
Small Watersheds, Technical Release No. 55 (USDA, 1986), with
specific attention given to antecedent moisture conditions, flood
routing, time of concentration, and peak discharge specifications
included therein and in Hydrology National Engineering Handbook,
Section 4, (USDA, 1985), both by the U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Natural Resources Conservation Service. Note that when TR-55 is used
for natural system-based approaches and practices encouraged herein,
calculations must be performed on a detailed small subarea basis. Use
of Technical Release No. 20 and other methods listed in Table 1 are also
acceptable. The design professional's selection of a specific method
shall be based on the suitability of the method for the given project site
conditions with due consideration to the limitations of the method
chosen. Table 1 herein summarizes the computational methods
available:
Table 1
Acceptable Computation Methodologies for Stormwater
Management Plans
Method Source Applicability
TR-20 or commercial
package based on
TR-20
USDA - NRCS When use of full model
is desirable or
necessary
TR-55 or commercial
package based on
TR-55
USDA - NRCS Applicable for plans
within the model's
limitations
HEC-HMS U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers
When full model is
desirable or necessary
§ 518-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-17
1:253
Table 1
Acceptable Computation Methodologies for Stormwater
Management Plans
Method Source Applicability
PSRM Penn State University When full model is
desirable or necessary
VT/PSUHM Virginia Polytechnic
Institute and Penn
State University
When full model is
desirable or necessary
Modified Rational
Method or
commercial package
based on this method
Emil Kuiching (1889) For sites less than 20
acres
SWMM or commercial
package based on
SWMM
USEPA Most applicable in
urban areas
Small Storm
Hydrology Method (as
included in SLAMM)
PV and Associates, or
the website
www.winslamm.com
Calculation of runoff
volume from urban
and suburban areas
D. A Modified Rational Method analysis may be used for drainage areas
smaller than two acres when permitted by the Municipal Engineer. The
term "Modified Rational Method" used herein refers to a procedure for
manipulation of the basic Rational Method techniques to reflect the fact
that storms with a duration greater than the normal time of
concentration for a basin will result in a larger volume of runoff even
though the peak discharge is reduced. The methodology and model
chosen for use shall be well documented as being appropriate for use in
this region, and all relevant assumptions, methodologies, calculations
and data used shall be provided to the Municipal Engineer for review.
Information on the Modified Rational Method is presented in the
"Recommended Hydrologic Procedures for Computing Urban Runoff
from Small Watersheds in Pennsylvania" (PADEP, 1982).
E. Rainfall intensities used for the Modified Rational Method shall be
based on the precipitation frequency estimates developed by the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration as set forth in NOAA
Atlas 14.
F. The Rational Method (that is, Q = CIA) shall be used for calculations of
the peak rate of runoff for the design of storm sewers and drainage
swales but not for the design of stormwater management facilities
where a full hydrograph is needed. The equation representing the
Rational Method is comprised of the following (in English units):
(1) Q = Peak flow rate, cubic feet per second (cfs).
§ 518-17 ETNA CODE § 518-17
1:254
§ 518-18. Standards for stormwater management practices.
The Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual shall
serve as a guide for the design of stormwater management practices.
Additional design guidance may also be obtained from other related
sources, including the 2000 Maryland Stormwater Design Manual, Volumes
I and II (MDE, 2000), Design of Stormwater Filtering Systems (CWP, 1996),
and the American Society of Civil Engineers Manual and Report on
Engineering Practice, No. 87, Urban Runoff Quality Management (ASCE,
1998) for the design of stormwater runoff quality control features for site
development. A list of references is provided with this chapter. The water
quality volume design measures used herein are partially based on the
methodology expressed in the Maryland manual referenced above.
Pursuant to the design options recommended in the above documents, the
following standards shall be adhered to:
(2) C = Runoff coefficient, dependent on land use/cover.
(3) I = Design rainfall intensity, inches per hour.
(4) A = Drainage area, acres.
G. Runoff characteristics of off-site areas that drain through a proposed
development shall be considered and be based on the existing
conditions in the off-site area.
A. Extended detention, water quality volume, infiltration and
nonstructural BMP credits criteria. The following sizing criteria shall be
followed at all sites required to meet the standards of this chapter.
(1) Extended detention.
(a) Detain the one-year, twenty-four-hour design storm using the
SCS Type II distribution. Provisions shall be made so that the
one-year storm takes a minimum of 24 hours to drain from the
facility from a point where the maximum volume of water from
the one-year storm is captured (i.e., the maximum water
surface elevation is achieved in the facility). Release of water
can begin at the start of the storm (i.e., the invert of the water
quality orifice is at the invert of the facility). The design of the
facility shall consider and minimize the chances of clogging
and sedimentation potential.
(b) Detention ponds shall detain the one-year storm event and
allow it to naturally infiltrate and recharge the groundwater
table. All subsequent orifices for the two-, ten-, twenty-five- and
one-hundred-year storm events shall be placed above the
maximum water surface elevation of the one-year storm.
(c) Flow from off-site areas must be considered as pass-through
flow if it is conveyed through the BMP and should be modeled
as "present condition" for the one-year storm event.
§ 518-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-18
1:255
(d) The length of overland flow used in time of concentration (Tc)
calculations is limited to no more than 100 feet for postdevelopment
conditions.
(e) The models TR-55 and TR-20 (or approved equivalent) can be
used for determining peak discharge rates.
(2) Water quality volume.
(a) Treatment of the water quality volume (WQv) of stormwater
prior to its release to receiving waters or water bodies shall be
provided at all developments where stormwater management
is required. The WQv equals the storage volume needed to
capture and treat the runoff from storms of one inch or less.
Runoff from the first one inch of rainfall transports most of the
total pollutant load.
The WQv is based on the following equation:
WQv = [(P)(Rv)(A)]/12 (acre-feet)
Where:
P = rainfall depth in inches (set to 1 inch)
Rv = volumetric runoff coefficient, 0.05 + 0.009(I)
where I is percent impervious cover
A = site area (acres).
(b) The formula assumes approximately 5% runoff from pervious
surfaces and 90% runoff from impervious surfaces. A minimum
of 0.2 inches per acre of runoff volume shall be met at sites or
in drainage areas that have less than 15% impervious cover.
(c) Drainage areas having no impervious cover and no proposed
disturbance during development may be excluded from the
WQv calculations. However, designers are encouraged to
incorporate water quality treatment practices for these areas.
(d) Stormwater quality treatment. The final WQv shall be treated
by an acceptable stormwater management practice(s) from
those described in this section or as approved by the
municipality.
(e) For new developments and redevelopments, infiltration is
considered an acceptable method of satisfying part or all of the
water quality volume.
(f) For new developments, the WQv requirements of this section
shall be sized and designed in conjunction with the standards
under § 518-18A(1).
(g) As a basis for design, the following assumptions may be made:
§ 518-18 ETNA CODE § 518-18
1:256
[1] Multiple drainage areas. When a project contains or is
divided by multiple drainage areas, the WQv volume shall
be addressed for each drainage area.
[2] Off-site drainage areas. The WQv shall be based on the
impervious cover of the proposed site. Off-site existing
impervious areas may be excluded from the calculation of
the water quality volume requirements.
(3) Infiltration volume. Where possible, all of the water quality volume
should be treated using infiltration BMPs. The following calculation
shall be used to determine the minimum recharge goal for the site:
Recharge volume (Rev), (acre-feet)
Fraction of WQv, depending on soil hydrologic group.
Rev = (S)(Ai); where: S = soil specific recharge factor in inches
Ai = the measured impervious cover
Hydrologic Soil Group Soil Specific Recharge Factor (S)
A 0.40 inches
B 0.25 inches of runoff
C 0.10 inches of runoff
D 0.05 inches of runoff
(a) Infiltrated volume may be subtracted from the total site WQv.
(b) Infiltration should not be considered for sites or areas of sites
that have activities that may allow pollution to be infiltrated.
For example, the use of infiltration for the runoff of a service
station's paved lot would not be appropriate, although roof
water from the service station may be infiltrated.
(c) Infiltration should only be used when, in the opinion of a
professional engineer, it will not contribute to slope instability
or cause seepage problems into basements or developed
downgradient areas.
(d) If more than one hydrologic soil group is present at a site, a
composite recharge volume shall be computed based upon the
proportion of total site area within each hydrologic soil group.
(e) All infiltration facilities shall be set back at least 15 feet from
all structures with subgrade elements (e.g., basements,
foundation walls).
(4) Credits for use of nonstructural BMPs. The developer may obtain
credits for the use of nonstructural BMPs using the procedures
outlined below. Examples of nonstructural credit calculations are
provided in Appendix E.49
§ 518-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-18
1:257
(a) Volume Reduction Method #1: natural area conservation.
[1] A water quality volume reduction can be taken when
undisturbed natural areas are conserved on a site, thereby
retaining their predevelopment hydrologic and water
quality characteristics. Under this method, a designer
would be able to subtract the conservation areas from the
total site area when computing the water quality
protection volume. An added benefit is that the postdevelopment
peak discharges will be smaller, and hence,
water quantity control volumes will be reduced due to
lower post-development curve numbers or Rational
Formula "C" values.
[2] Rule. Subtract conservation areas from total site area
when computing water quality protection volume
requirements.
[3] Criteria:
[a] Conservation area cannot be disturbed during project
construction and must be protected from sediment
deposition. The conservation area shall be protected
with a safety fence until construction has been
completed. After construction, the area shall be
posted with signage indicating that it is a conservation
area.
[b] Shall be protected by limits of disturbance clearly
shown on all construction drawings.
[c] Shall be located within an acceptable conservation
easement instrument that ensures perpetual
protection of the proposed area. The easement must
clearly specify how the natural area vegetation shall
be managed, and boundaries will be marked. [Note:
Managed turf (e.g., playgrounds, regularly maintained
open areas) is not an acceptable form of vegetation
management.]
[d] Shall have a minimum contiguous area requirement of
10,000 square feet.
[e] Rv is kept constant when calculating WQv.
[f] Must be forested or have a stable, natural ground
cover.
(b) Volume Reduction Method #2: stream buffers.
49.Editor's Note: Appendix E is an attachment to this chapter.
§ 518-18 ETNA CODE § 518-18
1:258
[1] This reduction can be taken when a stream buffer
effectively treats stormwater runoff. Effective treatment
constitutes treating runoff through overland flow in a
naturally vegetated or forested buffer. Under the proposed
method, a designer would be able to subtract areas
draining via overland flow to the buffer from total site area
when computing water quality protection volume
requirements. The design of the stream buffer treatment
system must use appropriate methods for conveying flows
above the annual recurrence (one-year storm) event.
[2] Rule. Subtract areas draining via overland flow to the
buffer from total site area when computing water quality
protection volume requirements.
[3] Criteria.
[a] The minimum undisturbed buffer width shall be 50
feet from top of bank.
[b] The maximum contributing length shall be 150 feet for
pervious surfaces and 75 feet for impervious surfaces.
[c] The average contributing slope shall be 3% maximum,
unless a flow spreader is used. In no case shall the
average contributing slope be greater than 10%.
[d] Runoff shall enter the buffer as overland sheet flow. A
flow spreader can be installed to ensure this.
[e] Buffers shall remain as naturally vegetated or forested
areas and will require only routine debris removal or
erosion repairs.
[f] Rv is kept constant when calculating WQv.
[g] Not applicable if overland flow filtration/groundwater
recharge reduction is already being taken.
(c) Volume Reduction Method #3: enhanced swales.
[1] This reduction may be taken when enhanced swales are
used for water quality protection. Under the proposed
method, a designer would be able to subtract the areas
draining to an enhanced swale from total site area when
computing water quality protection volume requirements.
An enhanced swale can fully meet the water quality
protection volume requirements for certain kinds of lowdensity
residential development (see Volume Reduction
Method #5). An added benefit is the post-development
peak discharges will likely be lower due to a longer time of
concentration for the site.
§ 518-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-18
1:259
[2] Rule. Subtract the areas draining to an enhanced swale
from total site area when computing water quality
protection volume requirements.
[3] Criteria.
[a] This method is typically only applicable to moderateor
low-density residential land uses (three dwelling
units per acre maximum).
[b] The maximum flow velocity for water quality design
storm shall be less than or equal to one foot per
second.
[c] The minimum residence time for the water quality
storm shall be five minutes.
[d] The bottom width shall be a maximum of six feet. If a
larger channel is needed, use of a compound cross
section is required.
[e] The side slopes shall be 3:1 (horizontal: vertical) or
flatter.
[f] The channel slope shall be 3% or less.
[g] Rv is kept constant when calculating WQv.
(d) Volume Reduction Method #4: overland flow filtration/
groundwater recharge zones.
[1] This reduction can be taken when overland flow filtration/
infiltration zones are incorporated into the site design to
receive runoff from rooftops or other small impervious
areas (e.g., driveways, small parking lots, etc.). This can be
achieved by grading the site to promote overland
vegetative filtering or by providing infiltration or rain
garden areas. If impervious areas are adequately
disconnected, they can be deducted from total site area
when computing the water quality protection volume
requirements. An added benefit will be that the postdevelopment
peak discharges will likely be lower due to a
longer time of concentration for the site.
[2] Rule. If impervious areas are adequately disconnected,
they can be deducted from total site area when computing
the water quality protection volume requirements.
[3] Criteria.
[a] Relatively permeable soils (hydrologic soil groups A
and B) should be present.
[b] Runoff shall not come from a designated hot spot.
§ 518-18 ETNA CODE § 518-18
1:260
[c] The maximum contributing impervious flow path
length shall be 75 feet.
[d] Downspouts shall be at least 10 feet away from the
nearest impervious surface to discourage
reconnections.
[e] The disconnection shall drain continuously through a
vegetated channel, swale or filter strip to the property
line or structural stormwater control.
[f] The length of the disconnection shall be equal to or
greater than the contributing length.
[g] The entire vegetative "disconnection" shall be on a
slope less than or equal to 3%.
[h] The surface impervious area tributary to any one
discharge location shall not exceed 5,000 square feet.
[i] For those areas draining directly to a buffer, reduction
can be obtained from either overland flow filtration or
stream buffers. (See Method #2.)
[j] Rv is kept constant when calculating WQv.
(e) Volume Reduction Method #5: environmentally sensitive large
lot subdivisions.
[1] This reduction can be taken when a group of
environmental site design techniques are applied to lowand
very-low-density residential development (e.g., one
dwelling unit per two acres or lower). The use of this
method can eliminate the need for structural stormwater
controls to treat water quality protection volume
requirements. This method is targeted towards large lot
subdivisions and will likely have limited application.
[2] Rule. Targeted towards large lot subdivisions (e.g., twoacre
lots and greater). The requirement for structural
facilities to treat the water quality protection volume may
be waived.
[3] Criteria:
[a] For single lot development.
[i] Total site impervious cover is less than 15%.
[ii] Lot size shall be at least two acres.
[iii] Rooftop runoff is disconnected in accordance with
the criteria in Method #4.
§ 518-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-18
1:261
[iv] Grass channels are used to convey runoff versus
curb and gutter.
[b] For multiple lots:
[i] Total impervious cover footprint shall be less than
15% of the area.
[ii] Lot areas should be at least two acres, unless
clustering is implemented. Open space
developments should have a minimum of 25% of
the site protected as natural conservation areas
and shall be at least 1/2 acre average individual
lot size.
[iii] Grass channels should be used to convey runoff
versus curb and gutter (see Method #3).
[iv] Overland flow filtration/infiltration zones should
be established (see Method #4).
Note: The following sections provide minimum design standards for stormwater management
facilities.
B. Stormwater infiltration practices.
(1) In selecting the appropriate infiltration BMPs, the applicant shall
consider the following:
(a) Permeability and infiltration rate of the site soils.
(b) Slope and depth to bedrock.
(c) Seasonal high-water table.
(d) Proximity to building foundations and wellheads.
(e) Erodibility of soils.
(f) Land availability and topography.
(g) Slope stability.
(h) Effects on nearby properties and structures.
(2) A detailed soils evaluation of the project site shall be performed to
determine the suitability of infiltration BMPs. The evaluation shall
be performed by a qualified professional and, at a minimum,
address soil permeability, depth to bedrock and slope stability. The
general process for designing the infiltration BMP shall be:
(a) Analyze hydrologic soil groups as well as natural and manmade
features within the watershed to determine general
areas of suitability for infiltration BMPs.
§ 518-18 ETNA CODE § 518-18
1:262
(b) Provide field testing data to determine appropriate percolation
rate and/or hydraulic connectivity.
(c) Design infiltration BMPs for required stormwater volume
based on field-determined capacity at the level of the proposed
infiltration surface.
(d) All infiltration calculations for proposed infiltration,
bioretention and rain garden areas should be based on
Appendix C from the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection Stormwater Management BMP
Manual, latest edition.
(3) Soil characteristics, as subject to the specific considerations below:
(a) Infiltration BMPs are particularly appropriate in hydrologic soil
groups A and B, as described in the USDA Natural Resources
Conservation Manual TR-55.
(b) Low-erodibility factors ("K" factors) are preferred for the
construction of basins.
(c) There must be a minimum depth of 48 inches between the
bottom of any facility and the seasonal high-water table and/or
bedrock (limiting zones), except for infiltration BMPs receiving
only roof runoff, which shall be placed in soils having a
minimum depth of 24 inches between the bottom of the facility
and the limiting zone.
(d) There must be an infiltration and/or percolation rate enough to
accept the additional stormwater load and to drain completely
as determined by field tests.
(e) The infiltration system shall have positive overflow controls to
prevent storage within one foot of the finished surface or
grade.
(f) Infiltration rates shall not be used in computing the storage
volume of the infiltration system.
(g) Surface inflows shall be designed to prevent direct discharge
of sediment into the infiltration system.
(4) The recharge volume provided at the site shall be directed to the
most permeable hydrologic soil group available, except where
other considerations apply, such as in limestone geology.
(5) Any infiltration BMP shall be capable of completely infiltrating the
impounded water within 48 hours. The forty-eight-hour period is to
be measured from the end of the twenty-four-hour design storm.
(6) The municipality may require additional analyses for stormwater
management facilities proposed for susceptible areas, such as:
§ 518-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-18
1:263
(a) Strip mines.
(b) Storage areas for salt, chloride, other materials for winter
deicing.
(c) Unstable slopes.
(7) During the period of land disturbance, runoff shall be controlled
prior to entering any proposed infiltration area. Areas proposed for
infiltration BMPs shall be protected from sedimentation and
compaction during the construction phase so as to maintain their
maximum infiltration capacity.
(8) Infiltration BMPs shall not be constructed nor receive runoff until
the entire contributory drainage area to the infiltration BMP has
received final stabilization.
(9) Infiltration facilities shall be selected based on suitability of soils
and site conditions. Acceptable infiltration facilities include, but
are not limited to, filter strips or stormwater filtering systems (for
example bioretention facilities, sand filters), open vegetated
channels (that is, dry swales and wet swales), infiltration trenches,
dry wells, infiltration basins, porous paving systems, retention
basins, wet extended detention ponds, riparian corridor
management, riparian forested buffers, rooftop runoff management
systems, and sand filters (closed or open).
(10) Where sediment transport in the stormwater runoff is anticipated
to reach the infiltration system, appropriate permanent measures
to prevent or collect sediment shall be installed prior to discharge
to the infiltration system.
(11) All infiltration facilities shall be set back at least 15 feet from all
structures with subgrade elements (e.g., basements, foundation
walls).
(12) All infiltration facilities that serve more than one lot and are
considered a common facility shall have a drainage easement. The
easement shall provide to the municipality the right of access.
(13) If detailed infiltration study is required, the following guidance
shall be followed:
(a) Soil evaluations shall be performed to determine the feasibility
and extent to which infiltration systems can be used. The
evaluation shall be performed by a qualified, licensed
geologist, geotechnical/civil engineer or soil scientist and, at a
minimum, address soil types, soil permeability, depth to
bedrock, limitations of soils, presence/absence of carbonate
geology susceptibility to subsidence and/or sinkhole formation
and subgrade stability. The testing and evaluation should be
completed at the preliminary design stage.
§ 518-18 ETNA CODE § 518-18
1:264
(b) Infiltration requirements shall be based on the portions of the
site that are permeable prior to disturbance and the degree to
which development will reduce the permeability of the site.
Permeability of the site shall be determined based on the
detailed evaluations described herein. Use of stormwater
management facilities to retain stormwater for infiltration
should be applied to all areas where the soils evaluation
indicates favorable conditions. Areas generally not favorable
for infiltration shall still be provided with an appropriate water
quality practice.
(c) Soil infiltration tests shall be performed to an equivalent depth
or elevation of the bottom of the proposed infiltration areas.
These tests shall follow the procedures of percolation test
holes, as established by the Allegheny County Health
Department (ACHD), for on-lot septic systems. The testing
shall include a test pit and percolation test holes. The test hole
shall be excavated to a depth so that the presence or absence
of bedrock and/or seasonal high-water table can be
determined. A soil log describing the soils present in each test
pit shall be performed. All test holes used for evaluating the
percolation rate shall be presoaked in accordance with the
procedures established by the ACHD. The location and number
of test pits and percolation holes shall be determined based on
the type(s) of stormwater management facilities being
designed. Acceptability of infiltration rates shall be based on
sound engineering judgment and recommended design
considerations described in the design manuals listed in the
references or other source material acceptable to the
Municipal Engineer.
(14) The following design and construction standards shall be followed
when planning and constructing infiltration BMPs.
(a) The lowest elevation of the infiltration area shall be at least two
feet above the seasonal high-water table and bedrock.
(b) Where roof drains are designed to discharge to infiltration
facilities, they shall have appropriate measures to prevent
clogging by unwanted debris (for example, silt, leaves and
vegetation). Such measures shall include, but are not limited
to, leaf traps, gutter guards and cleanouts.
(c) All infiltration facilities shall have appropriate positive
overflow controls to prevent storage within one foot of the
finished surface or grade, unless a specific amount of surface
storage away from pedestrian and vehicular traffic is provided
and such areas infiltrate the stored volume within 48 hours
after the end of the twenty-four-hour design storm.
§ 518-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-18
1:265
(d) All infiltration facilities shall be designed to infiltrate the
stored volume within 48 hours after the end of the twenty-fourhour
design storm.
(e) All surface inflows shall be treated to prevent the direct
discharge of sediment into the infiltration practice;
accumulated sediment reduces stormwater storage capacity
and ultimately clogs the infiltration mechanism. No sand, salt
or other particulate matter may be applied to a porous
(pervious) surface for winter ice conditions.
(f) During site construction, all infiltration practice components
shall be protected from compaction due to heavy equipment
operation or storage of fill or construction material. Infiltration
areas shall also be protected from sedimentation. Areas that
are accidentally compacted or graded shall be remediated to
restore soil composition and porosity. Adequate documentation
to this effect shall be submitted for review by the Municipal
Engineer. All areas designated for infiltration shall not receive
runoff until the contributory drainage area has achieved final
stabilization.
(g) The following procedures and materials shall be required
during the construction of all subsurface facilities:
[1] Excavation for the infiltration facility shall be performed
with equipment that will not compact the bottom of the
seepage bed/trench or like facility.
[2] The bottom of the bed and/or trench shall be scarified
prior to the placement of aggregate.
[3] Only clean aggregate with documented porosity, free of
fines, shall be allowed.
[4] The tops and sides of all seepage beds, trenches or like
facilities shall be covered with drainage fabric. Fabric shall
meet the specifications of PennDOT Publication 408,
Section 735, Construction Class 1.
[5] Perforated distribution pipes connected to centralized
catch basins and/or manholes with the provision for the
collection of debris shall be provided in all facilities. Where
perforated pipes are used to distribute stormwater to the
infiltration practice, stormwater shall be distributed
uniformly throughout the entire seepage bed/trench or like
facility.
C. Open vegetated channels.
(1) Open vegetated channels are conveyance systems that are
engineered to also perform as water quality and infiltration
§ 518-18 ETNA CODE § 518-18
1:266
facilities. Such systems can be used for the conveyance, retention,
infiltration and filtration of stormwater runoff.
(2) Open vegetated channels primarily serve a water quality function
(WQv); they also have the potential to augment infiltration.
Examples of such systems include, but are not limited to, dry
swales, wet swales, grass channels, and biofilters. Open vegetated
channels are primarily applicable for land uses such as roads,
highways, residential developments (dry swales only) and pervious
areas.
(3) Open vegetated channels shall be designed to meet the following
minimum standards:
(a) The channel shall be designed to safely convey the ten-yearfrequency
storm event with a freeboard of at least 12 inches.
Freeboard is the difference between the elevation of the design
flow in the channel and the top elevation of the channel.
(b) The peak velocity of the runoff from the ten-year storm shall be
nonerosive for the soil and ground cover provided in the
channel.
(c) The longitudinal slope shall be no greater than 4%.
(d) Channels shall be trapezoidal in cross section.
(e) Channels shall be designed with moderate side slopes of four
horizontal to one vertical. Flatter side slopes may be necessary
under certain circumstances.
(f) The maximum allowable ponding time in the channel shall be
less than 48 hours.
(g) Channels (for example, dry swales) may require an underdrain
in order to function and dewater.
(h) Channels shall be designed to temporarily store the WQv
within the system for a maximum period of 48 hours and a
minimum period of one hour.
(i) Landscape specifications shall address the grass species,
wetland plantings (if applicable), soil amendment and hydric
conditions present along the channel.
(j) Accumulated sediment within the channel bottom shall be
removed when 25% of the original WQv volume has been
exceeded. The channel shall be provided with a permanent
concrete cleanout marker that indicates the 25% loss level.
(k) Check dams along the channel length may be warranted.
(l) The bottom of dry swales shall be situated at least two feet
above the seasonal high-water table.
§ 518-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-18
1:267
(4) Additional design information for open vegetated channels is
available in Design of Roadside Channels with Flexible Linings,
HEC 15, FHWA, September 2005.
D. Retention basins.
(1) Retention basins shall be designed to create a healthy ecological
community with sufficient circulation of water to prevent the
growth of unwanted vegetation and mosquitoes or other vectors. If
circulation cannot be provided via natural means, then artificial
aeration and circulation shall be provided. Care shall be taken to
landscape retention basins in accordance with § 518-19.
(2) The retention basin shall be of sufficient size to allow the
appropriate aquatic community needed to maintain healthy pond
ecology and avoid mosquitoes capable of carrying West Nile Virus
and other diseases. The Allegheny County Health Department,
Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission, the Natural Resources
Conservation Service, the Pennsylvania Extension Service, or other
qualified professional consultant shall be consulted during the
design of these facilities in order to ensure the health of aquatic
communities and minimize the risk of creating mosquito breeding
areas.
(3) An outlet structure shall be designed to allow complete drainage of
the pond for maintenance.
(4) The design of a retention basin shall include the determination of
the proposed site's ability to support a viable permanent pool. The
design shall consider such factors as the available and required
rate and quality of dry weather inflow, the stormwater inflow,
seasonal and longer-term variations in groundwater table, and
impacts of potential pollutant loadings.
(5) Sediment storage volume equal to at least 20% of the volume of the
permanent pool shall be provided.
(6) A sediment forebay with a hardened bottom shall be provided at
each inlet into the retention basin. The forebay storage capacity
shall, at minimum, be 10% of the permanent pool storage. The
forebay shall be designed to allow for access by maintenance
equipment for periodic cleaning. A permanent concrete cleanout
marker shall be installed in the forebay to indicate the level where
25% for the forebay storage has been used.
(7) Emergency spillways shall be sized and located to permit the safe
passage of stormwater flows from an unattenuated 100-year postdevelopment
storm with one foot of freeboard. The maximum
velocities in vegetated spillways excavated in otherwise
undisturbed soil shall be analyzed based upon the velocity of peak
flow in the emergency spillway during an assumed clogged primary
outlet condition. Where maximum velocities exceed design
§ 518-18 ETNA CODE § 518-18
1:268
standards contained in the Engineering Field Manual for
Conservation Practices (USDA, SCS, July 1984) suitable lining shall
be provided. All emergency spillways placed on fill materials shall
be lined. Lining for emergency spillways shall incorporate native
colors and materials where possible, including mono slab
revetments, grass pavers, riprap and native stone.
(8) Basin and pond embankments must be designed by a professional
engineer registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The
design must include an investigation of the subsurface conditions
at the proposed embankment location to evaluate settlement
potential, groundwater impacts, and the need for seepage controls.
The submittal of a geotechnical report from a geotechnical
engineer for any embankment over 10 feet in effective height or
posing a significant hazard to downstream property or life is
required. The selection of fill materials must be subject to approval
of the design engineer. Fill must be free of frozen soil, rocks over
six inches, sod, brush, stumps, tree roots, wood, or other perishable
materials. Embankment fills less than 10 feet in fill height must be
compacted using compaction methods that would reasonably
guarantee that the fill density is at least 90% of the maximum
density as determined by standard proctor (ASTM-698). All
embankment fills more than 10 feet in fill height must be
compacted to at least 90% of the maximum density as determined
by standard proctor (ASTM-698) and must have their density
verified by field density testing. A PADEP dam permit is required
for embankments having a maximum depth of water, measured
from the upstream toe of the dam to the top of the dam at maximum
storage elevation, of greater than 15 feet; and/or for ponds having
contributory drainage area of greater than 100 acres; and/or for
impoundments of greater than 50 acre-feet.
(9) The embankment's interior slope may not be steeper than 3:1. The
exterior slope of the embankment may not exceed 2:1.
(10) The minimum embankment width shall be four feet for
embankments less than six feet in height, six feet if the
embankment is between 6.1 feet and 9.9 feet in height and eight
feet if the embankment is between 10 feet and 15 feet in height.
(11) Existing ponds or permanent pool basins can be used for
stormwater management if it can be demonstrated that the ponds
are structurally sound and meet the design requirements herein.
(12) Inlet structures and outlet structures shall be separated to the
greatest extent possible in order to maximize the flow path through
the retention basin.
(13) Retention basins shall be designed to provide a length-to-width
ratio of at least 3L:1W, as measured in plan view (for example, a
ratio of 4L:1W is too narrow).
§ 518-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-18
1:269
(14) The retention basin depth shall average three to six feet.
(15) Fencing of the facility is not required if the interior slope of the
pond is 4H:1V or flatter and the design also includes a five-footwide
bench around the pond perimeter at an elevation one foot
below the permanent water surface elevation.
(16) Any side slopes below the permanent water surface level shall not
exceed 3H:1V. Interior side slopes above the permanent water
surface level shall not exceed 3H:1V.
(17) Stabilization. Proper stabilization structures, including stilling
basins, energy dissipators, and channel lining, shall be constructed
at the outlets of all retention basins and emergency spillways. The
stabilization structures shall control water to: avoid erosion,
reduce velocities of released water, and direct water so that it does
not interfere with downstream activities.
(18) Energy dissipators and/or level spreaders shall be installed to
prevent erosion and/or initiate sheet flow at points where pipes or
drainageways discharge to or from basins. Level spreaders shall be
used only where the maximum slope between the discharge point
and the waterway does not exceed 5%. Energy dissipators shall
comply with criteria in Hydraulic Design of Energy Dissipators for
Culverts and Channels, HEC 14, FHWA, July 2006. Such facilities
shall be both functional and harmonious with the surrounding
environment; for example, native rock shall be used in constructing
dissipators where practical.
(19) Discharge points. The minimum distance between a proposed basin
discharge point (including the energy dissipator, etc.) and a
downstream property boundary shall in no case be less than 15
feet. Where there is discharge onto or through adjacent properties
prior to release to a stream, designers shall demonstrate how
downstream properties are to be protected. The Municipal
Engineer may require that the setback distance be increased based
upon factors such as topography, soil conditions, the size of
structures, the location of structures, and discharge rates. A
drainage easement may also be required.
(20) Outlet structures. Outlet structures shall meet the following
specifications:
(a) To minimize clogging and to facilitate cleaning and inspecting,
outlet pipes shall have an internal diameter of at least 15
inches and a minimum grade of 1%.
(b) Bentonite plugs shall be provided on all outlet pipes within a
constructed berm.
(c) All principal outlet structures shall be built using reinforced
concrete with watertight construction joints.
§ 518-18 ETNA CODE § 518-18
1:270
(d) The use of architecturally treated concrete, stucco, painted
surface or stone facade treatment shall be considered for
enhancing the outlet structure. Such facilities shall be both
functional and harmonious in design with the surrounding
environment.
(e) Outlet pipes shall be constructed of reinforced concrete with
rubber gaskets in conformance with AASHTO M170, M198 and
M207, or smooth interior HDPE pipe in conformance with
AASHTO M252 or M294.
(f) Basin outlet structures shall have childproofed nonclogging
trash racks over all design openings exceeding 12 inches in
diameter except those openings designed to carry perennial
stream flows. Periodic cleaning of debris from trash racks shall
be included in the operations and maintenance plan.
(g) Anti-vortex devices, consisting of a thin vertical plate normal to
the basin berm, shall be provided at the top of all circular
risers or standpipes.
E. Detention basins.
(1) The landscape standards of § 518-19 shall apply.
(2) The maximum inside side slopes shall not exceed three horizontal
to one vertical (3H:1V). The minimum required slope for the basin
bottom is 2%. A level bottom is acceptable, provided the designer
demonstrates to the municipality's satisfaction that the basin
bottom will be landscaped with appropriate wetland vegetation
pursuant to § 518-19. In addition, detention basins of sufficient size
and slope may serve other functions as well, including recreational
uses which do not hinder or conflict with the function of the
detention basin.
(3) Inlet structures. The inlet pipe invert into a basin shall be six inches
above the basin floor or lining so that the pipe can adequately drain
after rainstorms. Inlets shall discharge into areas of the basin that
slope toward the outlet structure.
(4) Inlet structures and outlet structures shall be separated to the
greatest extent possible in order to maximize the flow path through
the retention basin.
(5) Low-flow channels. Low-flow channels constructed of concrete or
asphalt are not permitted. Where low-flow channels are necessary,
they shall be composed of a natural or bioengineered material.
Low-flow channels shall be designed to promote water quality and
slow the rate of flow through the basin. Low-flow channels may also
be designed to infiltrate where practical.
§ 518-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-18
1:271
(6) Outlet structures. Outlet structures shall meet the following
specifications:
(a) To minimize clogging and to facilitate cleaning and inspection,
outlet pipes shall have an internal diameter of at least 15
inches and a minimum grade of 1%.
(b) Bentonite plugs shall be provided on all outlet pipes within a
constructed berm.
(c) All principal outlet structures shall be built using reinforced
concrete with watertight construction joints.
(d) The use of architecturally treated concrete, stucco, painted
surface or stone facade treatment shall be considered for
enhancing the outlet structure. Such facilities shall be both
functional and harmonious in design with the surrounding
environment.
(e) Outlet pipes shall be constructed of reinforced concrete with
rubber gaskets in conformance with AASHTO M170, M198 and
M207, or smooth interior HDPE pipe in conformance with
AASHTO M252 or M294.
(f) Energy-dissipation facilities that convert concentrated flow to
uniform shallow sheet flow shall be used where appropriate.
(g) Basin outlet structures shall have childproof nonclogging trash
racks over all design openings exceeding 12 inches in diameter
except those openings designed to carry perennial stream
flows.
(h) Anti-vortex devices, consisting of a thin vertical plate normal to
the basin berm, shall be provided at the top of all circular
risers or standpipes.
(i) Detention basins should drain completely within 24 to 72 hours
from the end of the storm event.
(7) Emergency spillways shall be sized and located to permit the safe
passage of stormwater flows from an unattenuated 100-year postdevelopment
storm with one foot of freeboard. The maximum
velocities in vegetated spillways excavated in otherwise
undisturbed soil shall be analyzed based upon the velocity of peak
flow in the emergency spillway during an assumed clogged primary
outlet condition. Where maximum velocities exceed design
standards contained in the Engineering Field Manual for
Conservation Practices (USDA, SCS, July 1984) suitable lining shall
be provided. In general, emergency spillways should not be located
in fill areas; all such facilities placed on fill materials shall be lined.
Lining for emergency spillways shall incorporate native colors and
§ 518-18 ETNA CODE § 518-18
1:272
materials where possible, including mono-slab revetments, grass
pavers, riprap and native stone.
(8) Basin and pond embankments must be designed by a professional
engineer registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The
design must include an investigation of the subsurface conditions
at the proposed embankment location to evaluate settlement
potential, groundwater impacts, and the need for seepage controls.
The submittal of a geotechnical report from a geotechnical
engineer for any embankment over 10 feet in effective height or
posing a significant hazard to downstream property or life is
required. The selection of fill materials must be subject to approval
of the design engineer. Fill must be free of frozen soil, rocks over
six inches, sod, brush, stumps, tree roots, wood, or other perishable
materials. Embankment fills less than 10 feet in fill height must be
compacted using compaction methods that would reasonably
guarantee that the fill density is at least 90% of the maximum
density as determined by standard proctor (ASTM-698). All
embankment fills more than 10 feet in fill height must be
compacted to at least 90% of the maximum density as determined
by standard proctor (ASTM-698) and must have their density
verified by field density testing. A PADEP dam permit is required
for embankments having a maximum depth of water, measured
from the upstream toe of the dam to the top of the dam at maximum
storage elevation, of greater than 15 feet; and/or for ponds having
contributory drainage area of greater than 100 acres; and/or for
impoundments of greater than 50 acre-feet.
(9) The embankment's interior slope may not be steeper than 3:1. The
exterior slope of the embankment may not exceed 2:1.
(10) The minimum embankment width shall be four feet for
embankments less than six feet in height, six feet if the
embankment is between 6.1 feet and 9.9 feet in height and eight
feet if the embankment is between 10 feet and 15 feet in height.
(11) Fencing of the facility is not required if the interior slope of the
pond is 4:1 or flatter.
(12) Freeboard. Freeboard is the difference between the elevation of
the design flow in the emergency spillway (usually the 100-year
peak elevation) and the top elevation of the settled basin
embankment (that is, top of berm). The minimum freeboard shall
be one foot.
(13) Energy dissipators and/or level spreaders shall be installed to
prevent erosion and/or initiate sheet flow at points where pipes or
drainageways discharge to or from basins. Level spreaders shall be
used only where the maximum slope between the discharge point
and the waterway does not exceed 5%. Energy dissipators shall
comply with criteria in Hydraulic Design of Energy Dissipators for
§ 518-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-18
1:273
Culverts and Channels, HEC 14, FHWA, July 2006. Such facilities
shall be both functional and attractive; for example, native rock
shall be used in constructing dissipators where practical.
(14) Stabilization. Proper stabilization structures, including stilling
basins, energy dissipators and channel lining, shall be constructed
at the outlets of all basins and emergency spillways. The
stabilization structures shall control water to avoid erosion, reduce
velocities of released water and direct water so that it does not
interfere with downstream activities.
(15) Discharge points. The minimum distance between a proposed basin
discharge point (including the energy dissipator, etc.) and a
downstream property boundary shall in no case be less than 15
feet. Where there is discharge onto or through adjacent properties
prior to release to a stream, designers shall demonstrate how
downstream properties are to be protected. The Municipal
Engineer may require that the setback distance be increased based
upon factors such as topography, soil conditions, the size of
structures, the location of structures, and discharge rates. A
drainage easement may also be required.
(16) A sediment forebay with a hardened bottom shall be provided at
each inlet into the detention basin. The forebay storage capacity
shall at minimum be 10% of the permanent pool storage. The
forebay shall be designed to allow for access by maintenance
equipment for periodic cleaning.
F. Conveyance systems (open channels, drainageways and storm sewers).
(1) Applicants are encouraged to design conveyance systems that
encourage infiltration and improve water quality wherever
practicable.
(2) Wherever conveyance channels are necessary, drainage shall be
maintained by an open channel with landscaped banks designed to
carry the ten-year, twenty-four-hour stormwater runoff from
upstream contributory areas. The Municipal Engineer may
increase the design storm, as conditions require. All open channels
shall be designed with one foot of freeboard above the design water
surface elevation of the design runoff condition.
(3) Flood relief channels shall be provided and designed to convey the
runoff from the 100-year twenty-four-hour storm, such that a
positive discharge of this runoff to an adequate receiving stream or
conveyance system occurs without allowing this runoff to encroach
upon other properties.
(4) Manholes and/or inlets shall not be spaced more than 300 feet
apart for pipe sizes up to 24 inches in diameter and not more than
450 feet apart for larger pipe sizes.
§ 518-18 ETNA CODE § 518-18
1:274
(5) Where drainage swales are used in lieu of or in addition to storm
sewers, they shall be designed to carry the required runoff without
erosion and in a manner not detrimental to the properties they
cross. Drainage swales shall provide a minimum grade of 2% but
shall not exceed a grade of 9%. Drainage swales used strictly for
conveyance are not the same as open vegetated channels. Design
standards for open vegetated channels are provided under
§ 518-18C of this chapter.
(6) Street curbing for the purpose of stormwater conveyance is
discouraged. On streets that must contain curbing, storm sewers
shall be placed in front of the curbing. To the greatest extent
possible, storm sewers shall not be placed directly under curbing.
At curbed street intersections, storm inlets shall be placed in the
tangent section of the road.
(7) Use of grassed swales or open vegetated swales in lieu of curbing
to convey, infiltrate and/or treat stormwater runoff from roadways
is encouraged. Inlets shall be placed at the center of the shoulder
swale draining the street and shall be located no closer than four
feet from the edge of the cartway.
(8) When requested by the municipality, the developers shall obtain or
grant a minimum twenty-foot-wide drainage easement over all
storm sewers, drainage swales, channels, etc., that are a
component of the stormwater management system when located
within undedicated land. All permanent detention basins and/or
other stormwater management facilities providing stormwater
control for other than a single residential lot shall be located within
a defined drainage easement that allows proper legal access and
maintenance vehicle access.
(9) No property owner shall obstruct or alter the flow, location or
carrying capacity of a stream, channel or drainage swale to the
detriment of any other property owner, whether upstream or
downstream. All subdivision and/or land development plans
containing streams, channels, drainage swales, storm sewers or
other conveyance systems that cross property boundaries, existing
or proposed, or whose discharge crosses such boundaries shall
contain a note stating the above.
(10)Water quality inlets. Storm drainage systems that collect runoff
from parking areas and/or loading areas exceeding 10,000 square
feet of impervious coverage and discharge to stormwater
management systems, including surface or subsurface infiltration
systems, shall have a minimum of one water quality inlet per each
acre of drainage area. The purpose of water quality inlets is to
remove oil, grease and heavy particulates or total suspended solids,
hydrocarbons and other floating substances from stormwater
runoff. Methods other than water quality inlets may be permitted if
the applicant demonstrates to the municipality's satisfaction that
§ 518-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-18
1:275
§ 518-19. Landscaping of stormwater management facilities.
Stormwater management facilities shall be landscaped in accordance with
the following standards.
Note: Many municipalities require that stormwater management facilities
be landscaped in order to create more natural facilities that blend into
the landscape. Accordingly, such landscaping can contribute to the
effectiveness of the facility to hold and filter water as well. The standards
listed below are an example of the type of landscaping practices that might
be required. Also note that these standards relate specifically to structural
facilities; other types of management strategies, including riparian buffers,
constructed wetlands, etc., may need landscaping and enhancement
standards as well.
any such alternative will be as effective and as easily maintained.
Periodic cleaning of these systems shall be addressed in the
operations and maintenance plan submitted to the municipality.
Note: Municipalities may wish to expand on the types of stormwater practices listed above
(only the general categories of stormwater management practices are covered in this chapter).
For example, it is recommended that sections be added on porous paving, water quality inlets,
bioretention, rain barrels and sand filters, to name a few. On the other hand, the design
and construction of many stormwater management practices evolves over time and some
municipalities may wish to list only the general categories for that purpose (but provide for
other techniques in accordance with new design manuals, etc.). Also, riparian corridors and
other native plant landscaping can provide a valuable stormwater management benefit and
should be addressed but may best be implemented through a separate ordinance.
A. Landscaping shall be required in and around all constructed
stormwater management facilities with a minimum surface area of
1,000 square feet for the purposes of:
(1) Assisting in the management of stormwater;
(2) Stabilizing the soil within such facilities to minimize and control
erosion;
(3) Enhancing the visual appearance of such facilities; and
(4) Mitigating maintenance problems commonly associated with the
creation of such facilities.
B. A planting plan and planting schedule shall be submitted in accordance
with the following:
(1) Wet meadows including floors of stormwater management
facilities.
(a) Wet meadows and floors of stormwater management facilities
shall be planted with noninvasive plants native to western
Pennsylvania, such as wildflowers and noninvasive grasses, the
§ 518-18 ETNA CODE § 518-19
1:276
intent being to create a mixed meadow of such plantings where
appropriate. Selection of plantings shall be based on whether
the area in question is usually well drained or permanently
wet and whether the area will be used for recreation purposes.
No woody plants shall be planted within the saturated zone
(phreatic line) of a stormwater management practice or on a
berm constructed for impounded water.
(b) Seeding by drills, corrugated rollers, cyclone or drop seeders
or hand seeding of such areas is preferred; however,
hydroseeding followed by hydromulching can be used on wet
ground and steep slopes.
(c) Fertilizers, as a nutrient supplement, shall not be used unless it
is documented that soil conditions warrant such use and
nutrient applied does not exceed plant uptake. Soil for planting
of wildflowers shall contain not less than 3% or more than 10%
organic matter, as determined by an agricultural chemist, with
certification of the test before planting.
(d) Seeding shall take place either between April 1 and May 15 or
between September 1 and October 15. Planting areas shall be
soaked to maintain a consistent level of moisture for at least
four to six weeks after planting. For seeding recommendations,
reference the DEP's E&S Pollution Control Program Manual.
(e) Once established, a single annual mowing when plants are
dormant should be sufficient to maintain a wet meadow and/or
floor of a stormwater management practice.
(2) Wet edges that remain wet all or most of the year shall be planted
with wildflowers, grasses and shrubs. Plants to be located on rims
or banks which remain dry most of the year shall be planted with
species tolerant of dry soil conditions.
(3) Wooded areas.
(a) Where stormwater management facilities adjoin wooded areas,
trees and shrubs shall be selected and planted outside the
practice so as to blend with existing surroundings.
(b) Plantings in such areas shall be of sufficient density to
eliminate the need for mowing.
(c) It is recommended that clusters of trees and shrubs be planted
around stormwater management facilities but well away from
outfalls and any constructed berms, where applicable, to
provide for wildlife habitat, wind control and buffering and
screening.
(d) Vegetation shall be planted during appropriate times of the
year, predominantly between late March and mid May or from
§ 518-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-19
1:277
§ 518-20. Stream buffer requirements.
early October until evidence of ground freezing, depending
upon the species selected. Most deciduous trees and shrubs
can be planted in either spring or fall. Evergreens are best
planted in late summer or early fall.
(4) Slopes.
(a) Where slopes are gentle, a mixture of meadow grasses and
wildflowers (for wet meadows) shall be planted.
(b) On steep slopes as defined by the municipality's code of
ordinances, dense spreading shrubs (shrubs tolerant of dry
soils) shall be planted. Heavy mat mulch shall be used during
the period of establishment.
(c) No woody plant materials or trees shall be located on a
constructed or natural berm acting as the impoundment
structure of a stormwater management practice. Trees shall be
located downstream of an impoundment berm a sufficient
distance from the toe of the constructed slope to assure that
the toe of the slope is outside the dripline of the species
planted at maturity but in no case less than 15 feet.
(5) In cases where stormwater management facilities are to be located
in proximity to wetlands or waterways, the applicant's planting
plan and schedule shall consider the sensitive conditions existing
therein and be modified accordingly to reflect existing flora.
(6) Stormwater management facilities shall be screened in a manner
which complements the existing landscape and provides sufficient
access for maintenance.
A. Stream buffers shall be provided for new development sites as per the
following requirements:
(1) A minimum stream buffer width of 50 feet landward in each
direction from the top of stream banks is required for all waterways
having both a defined bank and a contributing watershed area of
greater than 100 acres.
B. The stream buffer area should be maintained in a natural state.
C. When wetland(s) extend beyond the edge of the required buffer width,
the buffer shall be adjusted so that the buffer consists of the extent of
the wetland plus a twenty-five-foot zone extending beyond the wetland
edge.
D. Stream buffer averaging may be applied to account for encroachments
such as road crossings. The following criteria must be met in order to
utilize buffer averaging on a development site:
§ 518-19 ETNA CODE § 518-20
1:278
§ 518-21. Volume controls.
The green infrastructure and low impact development practices provided
in the BMP Manual, found in § 518-36, shall be utilized for all regulated
activities wherever possible. Water volume controls shall be implemented
using the Design Storm Method in Subsection A or the Simplified Method in
Subsection B below, or alternative design criteria as allowed by Title 25 Pa.
Code Chapter 102.
(1) Buffer averaging is required for water quality buffers that have
stream crossings.
(2) An overall average buffer width of at least 50 feet must be achieved
within the boundaries of the property to be developed. Stream
buffer corridors on adjoining properties cannot be included with
buffer averaging on a separate property, even if owned by the same
property owner.
(3) The average width must be calculated based upon the entire length
of stream bank that is located within the boundaries of the property
to be developed. When calculating the buffer length, the natural
stream channel should be followed.
(4) Stream buffer averaging shall be applied to each side of a stream
independently. If the property being developed encompasses both
sides of a stream, buffer averaging can be applied to both sides of
the stream but must be applied to both sides of the stream
independently.
(5) On each stream bank, the total width of the buffer shall not be less
than 25 feet at any location, except at approved stream crossings.
Those areas of the buffer having a minimum width of 25 feet (or
less at approved stream crossings) can comprise no more than 50%
of the buffer length.
E. Stream buffer locations and widths should be illustrated on all
subdivision plans with notations requiring that they be maintained in a
natural state.
F. Stream buffers should be illustrated on all grading and erosion and
sedimentation control plans. The defined stream buffer location should
be properly recorded. The recording should provide a plan illustrating
the stream buffer location, width and the requirement that it be
maintained in a natural state.
A. The Design Storm Method (CG-1 in the BMP Manual found in § 518-36)
is applicable as a method to any size of regulated activity. This method
requires detailed modeling based on site conditions. The following shall
be incorporated into the CG-1 method:
§ 518-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-21
1:279
§ 518-22. Rate controls.
(1) Do not increase the post-development total runoff volume for all
storms equal to or less than the two-year twenty-four-hour duration
precipitation.
(2) For modeling purposes:
(a) Existing (predevelopment) nonforested pervious areas must be
considered meadow in good condition; 20% of existing
impervious area, when present, shall be considered meadow in
good condition in the model for existing conditions.
B. The Simplified Method (CG-2 in the BMP Manual found in § 518-36)
provided below is independent of site conditions and should be used if
the Design Storm Method is not followed. This method is not applicable
to regulated activities greater than one acre or for projects that require
design of stormwater storage facilities. For new impervious surfaces:
(1) Stormwater facilities shall capture at least the first two inches of
runoff from the net increase in impervious surfaces.
(2) At least the first one inch of runoff from the net increase in
impervious surfaces shall be permanently removed from the runoff
flow, i.e., it shall not be released into the surface waters of this
commonwealth. Removal options include reuse, evaporation,
transpiration, and infiltration.
(3) Wherever possible, infiltration facilities should be designed to
accommodate infiltration of the entire permanently removed
runoff; however, in all cases at least the first 0.5 inch of the
permanently removed runoff should be infiltrated.
(4) This method is exempt from the requirements of § 518-22, Rate
controls.
A. For areas not covered by a release rate map from an approved Act 167
stormwater management plan:
(1) Post-development discharge rates shall not exceed the
predevelopment discharge rates for the one-, two-, five-, ten-,
twenty-five-, fifty- and one-hundred-year twenty-four-hour storm
events. This is the equivalent to a 100% release rate area when
compared to those rates shown in the maps contained in Appendix
A (New and Existing Release Rate Management Districts).50 This
predevelopment to post-development control is not to be
misconstrued as the same as the conditional direct discharge areas
on the release rate maps. If it is shown that the peak rates of
discharge indicated by the post-development analysis are less than
or equal to the peak rates of discharge indicated by the
50.Editor's Note: Appendix A is an attachment to this chapter.
§ 518-21 ETNA CODE § 518-22
1:280
§ 518-23. Riparian buffers.
predevelopment analysis for one-, two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-,
fifty- and one-hundred-year twenty-four-hour storms, then the
requirements of this section have been met. Otherwise, the
applicant shall provide additional controls as necessary to satisfy
the peak rate of discharge requirement.
B. For areas covered by a release rate map from an approved Act 167
stormwater management plan:
(1) For the one-, two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty- and one-hundredyear
twenty-four-hour storm events, the post-development peak
discharge rates will follow the applicable approved release rate
maps. These maps are contained in Appendix A (New and Existing
Release Rate Management Districts) of this ordinance. For any
areas not shown on the release rate maps, the post-development
discharge rates shall not exceed the predevelopment discharge
rates for the specified design events. Peak flows should be
computed using the methods included in Chapter 8 of the PADEP
Stormwater Management BMP Manual.
A. In order to protect and improve water quality, a riparian buffer
easement shall be created and recorded as part of any subdivision or
land development that encompasses a riparian buffer.
B. Except as required by Title 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102, the Riparian
Buffer Easement shall be required for all streams (as defined in Article
V, Definitions) with a contributing watershed area of greater than 10
acres. The riparian buffer easement shall be measured to be a minimum
of 35 feet from the top of the stream bank (on each side.)
C. Minimum management requirements for riparian buffers.
(1) Existing native vegetation shall be protected and maintained within
the riparian buffer easement.
(2) Whenever practicable, invasive vegetation shall be actively
removed, and the riparian buffer easement shall be planted with
native trees, shrubs and other vegetation to create a diverse native
plant community appropriate to the intended ecological context of
the site.
D. The riparian buffer easement shall be enforceable by the municipality
and shall be recorded in the appropriate County Recorder of Deeds
Office, so that it shall run with the land and shall limit the use of the
property located therein. The easement shall allow for the continued
private ownership and shall count toward the minimum lot area
required by zoning, unless otherwise specified in Chapter 615, Zoning,
of this Code.
§ 518-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-23
1:281
§ 518-24. Authorization to construct; term of validity.
The municipality's approval of an SWM site plan authorizes the regulated
activities contained in the SWM site plan for a maximum term of validity
of five years following the date of approval. The municipality may specify a
term of validity shorter than five years in the approval for any specific SWM
site plan. Terms of validity shall commence on the date the municipality
signs the approval for an SWM site plan. If an approved SWM site plan is
not completed according to § 518-34 within the term of validity, then the
municipality may consider the SWM site plan disapproved and may revoke
any and all permits. SWM site plans that are considered disapproved by
the municipality shall be resubmitted in accordance with § 518-32 of this
chapter.
E. Any permitted use within the riparian buffer easement shall be
conducted in a manner that will maintain the extent of the existing
100-year floodplain, improve or maintain the stream stability, and
preserve and protect the ecological function of the floodplain.
F. The following conditions shall apply when public and/or private
recreation trails are permitted by the municipality within riparian
buffers:
(1) It is preferred that trails be designed to be permeable and for
nonmotorized use only; however, impermeable trails are permitted,
provided they have adequate drainage.
(2) Trails shall be designed to have the least impact on native plant
species and other sensitive environmental features.
G. Septic drain fields and sewage disposal systems shall not be permitted
within the riparian buffer easement and shall comply with setback
requirements established under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 73.
H. Underground utilities shall be permitted within the riparian buffer
easement; however, work shall be performed to minimize disturbance
area and removal of trees. Restoration within the riparian buffer
easement shall be with native species of trees, grasses and other
plantings. One tree shall be planted for each tree removed, and the
restoration shall be designed by a registered professional with the
requisite experience. Aboveground utilities shall only be permitted to
cross the easement perpendicular to the easement or in the shortest
practical distance. Existing utilities may remain and be maintained as
required.
§ 518-23 ETNA CODE § 518-24
1:282
ARTICLE III
Operation and Maintenance
§ 518-25. General responsibilities.
A. The owner of stormwater management facilities shall be responsible for
the proper operation and maintenance of those facilities during and
after construction. An operations and maintenance plan consistent with
the requirements of § 518-27 shall be prepared for review and approval
by the Municipal Engineer and shall be executed and signed by the
Municipal Engineer and applicant.
B. The owner of the stormwater management facilities for a tract shall be
responsible for the proper installation and function of those facilities in
accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All
temporary soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be
removed or converted to their permanent configuration in accordance
with an approved erosion control plan. This requirement in no way
precludes the authority of the Allegheny County Conservation District
to determine when sufficient stabilization has occurred on a site in
order to convert to the permanent stormwater management facilities.
C. Dedication and acceptance of stormwater management facilities.
(1) Upon completion of construction of stormwater management
facilities shown on an approved subdivision or land development
plan and within 90 days after approval of such construction, the
applicant shall submit a written offer of such stormwater
management facilities for dedication to the municipality. Said offer
shall include a deed of dedication covering said facilities, together
with satisfactory proof establishing an applicant's clear title to said
property. Such documents are to be filed with the Municipal
Secretary for review by the Municipal Solicitor. Deeds of dedication
for stormwater management facilities may be accepted by
resolution of the municipality at a regular meeting thereof.
(2) Municipality may require that stormwater management facilities
remain undedicated, with operation and maintenance the
responsibility of individual lot owners or a homeowners' association
or similar entity, or an organization capable of carrying out
maintenance responsibilities.
(3) Regardless of ownership, the applicant shall submit a written offer
deeding an access and/or drainage easement to the municipality
pursuant to § 518-26. Such easement shall cover the stormwater
management facilities, any drainage to and from such facilities, and
shall clearly permit municipal entry for inspection and/or
maintenance purposes.
(4) Regardless of ownership, the applicant shall submit an actual "as
built" plan to the municipality for the stormwater management
§ 518-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-25
1:283
§ 518-26. Ownership and maintenance.
All stormwater management facilities identified within an approved
stormwater management plan shall be owned and maintained by one or a
combination of the following entities:
facilities required per the approved stormwater management plan.
The "as built" plan shall show all final design specifications for all
permanent stormwater management facilities, including, but not
limited to, pipe material and diameter, inlet, outlet and overflow
elevations, two-foot contours for all detention/retention basins and
drainage swales and a comparison of "as-built" capacities to the
capacities of the approved design facilities, and shall be prepared
and certified by a licensed professional engineer. The as-built plan
shall be based on an actual field survey performed by a licensed
professional land surveyor. The surveyor shall certify as to the
accuracy of the plan. The "as built" plan shall be submitted to
the municipality for review by the Municipal Engineer. Any
performance and/or financial securities established for the project
shall include requirements for submittal of as-built plans.
(5) The as-built plan(s) shall be submitted to the municipality in a
digital format or formats approved by the municipality.
A. Private ownership.
(1) Where individual on-lot stormwater management facilities are
proposed, the subdivision and/or land development plan shall
contain a note in a form satisfactory to the Municipal Solicitor
designating the entity responsible for operation and maintenance
of the on-lot facilities consistent with an approved operations and
maintenance plan and, in the event that the responsible person or
entity fails to do so, granting to the municipality the right but not
the duty to enter upon the premises to repair or restore said
facilities, to charge and assess the costs thereof to the owner,
including a reasonable allowance for overhead, and to enforce said
charges and assessments by lien upon the property. In addition, the
deed for each lot shall contain a perpetual covenant binding the
grantee and all successors in interest designating the responsibility
for operation and maintenance of the on-lot facilities essentially in
the following form:
"Under and subject, nevertheless, to the following conditions and
restrictions: Prior to any earth disturbance for which stormwater
management facilities are required by the municipality, grantee
shall construct the permanent stormwater management facilities
as shown on the stormwater management plan (the "Plan")
prepared by ___________ , P.E., dated ______________, and last revised
___________________, and approved by municipality; thereafter, the
grantee, his heirs, executors, administrators, successors and
assigns ("owner"), at his sole cost and expense, shall operate,
§ 518-25 ETNA CODE § 518-26
1:284
maintain and repair said stormwater management facilities on the
lot in accordance with said plan, so that the facilities shall at
all times continue to operate and function in the same manner
and capacity as they were designed. In the event of the failure
of the owner to comply with these conditions and restrictions,
municipality shall have said stormwater management facilities
repaired or restored as required, and the costs thereof plus a
reasonable allowance for overhead shall be assessed to the owner;
said assessment shall be a charge and a continuing lien upon the
property herein. The municipality, before it may exercise this right,
shall notify the owner by certified mail of its intention to take the
aforesaid action. The notice shall set forth in what manner the
Owner has neglected the operation and maintenance of or repair
to the stormwater management facilities, and if the owner fails,
within a period of 90 calendar days, to correct or repair the items
listed in the notice from the municipality, then and only then may
the municipality exercise this right."
(2) In addition to the above, developers of parcels with more than one
dwelling unit shall record in the office of the Recorder of Deeds for
Allegheny County a declaration of covenants and restrictions in a
form satisfactory to the Municipal Solicitor, describing the
responsibility for operation and maintenance of the on-lot facilities,
consistent with an approved operations and maintenance plan,
prior to the sale of any individual lots. The terms of this covenant
and restriction shall run with the land and be binding upon the
initial grantees of each lot within the subdivision, his, her or their
heirs, administrators, successors or assigns.
B. Homeowners' or condominium association ownership. Where a
homeowners' association is created to own and manage common
facilities, the subdivision and/or land development plan shall contain a
note in a form satisfactory to the Municipal Solicitor designating the
entity responsible for construction and/or maintenance of the
stormwater management facilities consistent with an approved
operations and maintenance plan and, in the event that the responsible
entity fails to do so, granting to the municipality the right but not the
duty to enter upon the premises to repair or restore said facilities, to
charge and assess the costs thereof plus a reasonable allowance for
overhead to each owner of property within the development and to
enforce said charges and assessments by lien upon each property
within the development. In addition, the developer shall record in the
office of Recorder of Deeds for Allegheny County a declaration of
covenants in a form satisfactory to the Municipal Solicitor, setting forth
the rights and responsibilities of the homeowners' association for
operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facilities,
prior to the sale of individual lots. The terms of this covenant and
restriction shall run with the land and be binding upon the initial
grantees of each lot within the subdivision, his, her or their heirs,
administrators, successors and assigns.
§ 518-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-26
1:285
§ 518-27. Operation and maintenance plan.
An operations and maintenance plan shall be prepared by an engineer
licensed to practice in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania that identifies
the ownership, operation and maintenance responsibilities and as-built
conditions for all stormwater management facilities. At a minimum, the
operations and maintenance plan shall include the following:
C. Municipal ownership. Where the municipality has accepted an offer of
dedication of the permanent stormwater management facilities, the
municipality shall be responsible for operation and maintenance.
Municipal ownership notwithstanding, the applicant is required to
prepare a stormwater management plan and an operations and
maintenance plan, as defined herein. Upon approval of the stormwater
management facilities by the municipality, the applicant shall provide a
lump-sum long-term maintenance payment to the municipality, to be
always reserved and used by the municipality only for costs of operation
and maintenance of the dedicated facilities, as follows:
(1) Long-term maintenance payment. The long-term maintenance
payment shall be in an amount equal to the present value of
operation and maintenance costs for the facilities for a ten-year
period. The long-term maintenance payment shall be based on a
ten-year cost estimate prepared by the applicant's engineer and
reviewed and approved by the Municipal Engineer. The amount of
the payment shall include all costs of operation and maintenance,
which shall include but not be limited to, typical operation and
maintenance costs as well as costs such as landscaping and
planting, tax payments required, and construction of any kind
associated with the use, benefit and enjoyment of the facilities by
the owners. In particular, a description of routine facility operation
and day-to-day management requirements and a description of
projected maintenance actions and schedules necessary to ensure
proper operation of stormwater management facilities shall be
submitted for review and approval to the Municipal Engineer.
(2) Documentation. The terms of the long-term maintenance payment
shall be documented as part of the stormwater management plan
and the operations and maintenance plan.
A. Any obligations concerning perpetuation and/or maintenance of natural
drainage or infiltration facilities, and other facilities identified within
the stormwater management plan. Ownership of and responsibility for
operation and maintenance of stormwater management facilities,
including names and contact information, shall be required.
B. A description of the permanent stormwater management facilities on
the site, explaining how each facility is intended to function and operate
over time. All drainage and access easements shall be depicted, and any
site restrictions to be recorded against the property shall be identified
on the recorded plan. All such easements and restrictions shall be
§ 518-26 ETNA CODE § 518-27
1:286
§ 518-28. Operations and maintenance agreement.
perfected to run with the land and be binding upon the landowner and
any successors in interest.
C. A description of the actions, budget and schedule for operating and
maintaining the stormwater management facilities. This description
should be written in a clear manner, consistent with the knowledge and
understanding of the intended user.
D. A general description of operation and maintenance activities and
responsibilities for facilities held in common or on lot, including but not
limited to lawn care, vegetation maintenance, clean out of accumulated
debris and sediment (including from grates, trash racks, inlets, etc.),
liability insurance, maintenance and repair of stormwater management
facilities, landscaping and planting, payment of taxes and construction
of any kind associated with the use, benefit and enjoyment of the
facilities by the owners. In particular, a description of routine facility
operation and day-to-day management requirements (as needed) and a
description of routine maintenance actions and schedules necessary to
ensure proper operation of stormwater management facilities shall be
submitted.
E. Assurances that no action will be taken by any lot owner to disrupt or in
any way impair the effectiveness of any stormwater management
system, setting forth in deed restrictions the ability of the municipality
to take corrective measures if it is determined at any time that
stipulated permanent stormwater management facilities have been
eliminated, altered or improperly maintained, including the ability of
the municipality to cause the work to be done and lien all costs plus a
reasonable overhead allowance against the property should the
required corrective measures not be taken by the lot owner following
written notification within a period of time set by the Municipal
Engineer.
F. Parties responsible for the long-term operation and maintenance of
stormwater management facilities shall make records of the installation
and of all maintenance and repairs and shall retain the records for at
least 10 years. These records shall be submitted to the municipality as
established by the operations and maintenance plan or if otherwise
required by the municipality.
A. The owner of any land upon which permanent stormwater management
facilities and/or BMPs will be placed, constructed or implemented, as
described in an approved stormwater management plan and the
operations and maintenance plan, shall record the following documents
in the office of the Recorder of Deeds for Allegheny County, within 15
days of approval of the operations and maintenance plan by the
municipality:
(1) The operations and maintenance plan or a summary thereof;
§ 518-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-28
1:287
(2) Operations and maintenance agreement; and
(3) Access and/or drainage easements.
B. The operation and maintenance agreement shall be substantially the
same as the sample agreement in Appendix C of this chapter.51
C. Other items or conditions may be included in the operation and
maintenance agreement where determined necessary to guarantee the
satisfactory operation and maintenance of all permanent stormwater
facilities and BMPs. The agreement shall be subject to the review and
approval of the municipality.
D. The municipality may suspend or revoke any approvals granted for the
project site upon discovery of the failure of the owner to comply with
Article III of this chapter.
51.Editor's Note: Appendix C is an attachment to this chapter.
§ 518-28 ETNA CODE § 518-28
1:288
ARTICLE IV
Plan Submission, Review and Review Fees
§ 518-29. Plan submission.
A. The municipality shall require receipt of a complete plan, as specified in
this chapter.
B. Six copies of the stormwater management plan shall be submitted and
distributed as follows:
(1) Two copies to the municipality accompanied by the requisite
municipal review fee as established by the municipality.
(2) Two copies to the County Conservation District.
(3) One copy to the Municipal Engineer.
(4) One copy to the County Planning Commission/Department.
C. The following signature block for the municipality:
(1) "(Municipal official or designated plan reviewer) _____________, on
this date __________, has reviewed and hereby certifies that the
SWM site plan meets all design standards and criteria of the
Municipal Ordinance No. 1378, except where waivers have been
granted as noted on the plan. The review is based on a survey and
plan prepared by others and assumes that all information is correct
and valid as submitted."
D. Plan review.
(1) The municipality has designated the Gateway Engineers as the
designated plan reviewer of SWM site plans for the municipality
and shall be understood to be "the reviewer" where indicated as
"the municipality" within this chapter.
(2) SWM site plans shall be reviewed by the municipality for
consistency with the provisions of this chapter.
(3) The municipality shall notify the applicant in writing within 45 days
whether the SWM site plan is approved or disapproved or requires
additional documentation. If the SWM site plan involves a
subdivision and land development plan, the notification shall occur
within the time period allowed by the Municipalities Planning Code
(90 days). If a longer notification period is provided by other
statute, regulation or ordinance, the applicant will be so notified by
the municipality.
(4) For any SWM site plan that proposes to use any BMPs other than
green infrastructure and LID practices to achieve the volume and
rate controls required under this chapter, the municipality will not
§ 518-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-29
1:289
§ 518-30. Review.
approve the SWM site plan unless it determines that green
infrastructure and LID practices are not practicable.
(5) If the municipality disapproves the SWM site plan, the municipality
will state the reasons for the disapproval in writing. The
municipality also may approve the SWM site plan with conditions
and, if so, shall provide the acceptable conditions for approval in
writing.
(6) The applicable review fee, in accord with Article IV, must
accompany a resubmission of a disapproved SWM site plan.
A. The Municipal Engineer shall review the stormwater management plan
for consistency with this chapter. Any stormwater management plan
found incomplete shall not be accepted for review and shall be returned
to the applicant.
B. The Municipal Engineer shall review the stormwater management plan
for any subdivision or land development against municipal subdivision
and land development ordinance provisions not superseded by this
chapter.
C. When required by regulation, the County Conservation District shall
review and approve the erosion and sedimentation control plan for
consistency with PADEP's Chapter 102 regulations.
D. For activities regulated by this chapter, the Municipal Engineer shall
notify the applicant and the municipality, whether the stormwater
management plan is consistent with the chapter.
(1) Should the stormwater management plan be determined to be
consistent with the stormwater management plan, the Municipal
Engineer shall forward an approval letter to the Municipal
Secretary, who will then forward a copy to the applicant.
(2) Should the stormwater management plan be determined to be
inconsistent with this chapter, the Municipal Engineer shall
forward a disapproval letter to the Municipal Secretary, who will
then forward a copy to the applicant. The disapproval letter shall
cite the reason(s) and specific ordinance sections for the
disapproval. Disapproval may be due to inadequate information to
make a reasonable judgment as to compliance with the chapter.
Any disapproved stormwater management plans may be revised by
the applicant and resubmitted consistent with this chapter.
E. For regulated activities specified in § 518-4 of this chapter, which
require a building permit, the Municipal Engineer shall notify the
Municipal Building Permit Officer in writing, within a time frame
consistent with the Municipal Building Code and/or any Municipal
Subdivision Ordinance, whether the stormwater management plan is
§ 518-29 ETNA CODE § 518-30
1:290
consistent with the Stormwater Management Ordinance and forward
a copy of the approval/disapproval letter to the applicant. Any
disapproved stormwater management plan may be revised by the
applicant and resubmitted consistent with this chapter.
F. For regulated activities under this chapter that require an NPDES
permit application, the applicant shall forward a copy of the Municipal
Engineer's letter stating that the stormwater management plan is
consistent with the Stormwater Management Ordinance to the County
Conservation District. PADEP and the County Conservation District may
consider the Municipal Engineer's review comments in determining
whether to issue a permit.
G. The municipality shall not grant preliminary or final approval to any
subdivision or land development for regulated activities specified in
§ 518-4 of this chapter if the stormwater management plan has been
found to be inconsistent with this chapter, as determined by the
Municipal Engineer. All required permits from PADEP must be obtained
prior to approval of any subdivision or land development.
H. No building permits shall be issued for any regulated activity specified
in § 518-4 of this chapter if the stormwater management plan has been
found to be inconsistent with this chapter, as determined by the
Municipal Engineer, or without considering the comments of the
Municipal Engineer. All required permits from PADEP must be obtained
prior to issuance of a building permit.
I. The applicant shall be responsible for completing record drawings of all
stormwater management facilities included in the approved stormwater
management plan. The record drawings and an explanation of any
discrepancies with the design plans shall be submitted to the Municipal
Engineer for final approval. In no case shall the municipality approve
the record drawings until the municipality receives a copy of an
approved highway occupancy permit from the PennDOT District Office,
NPDES permit, and any other applicable permits or approvals from
PADEP or the County Conservation District. The above permits and
approvals must be based on the record drawings. The record drawings
must include copies of all applicable permits and approvals.
J. The municipality's approval of a stormwater management plan shall be
valid for a period not to exceed five years commencing on the date that
the municipality approves the stormwater management plan. If
stormwater management facilities included in the approved stormwater
management plan have not been constructed, or if constructed and
record drawings of these facilities have not been approved within this
time period, then the municipality may consider the stormwater
management plan disapproved and may revoke any and all permits.
stormwater management plans that are considered disapproved by the
municipality shall be resubmitted in accordance with § 518-32 of this
chapter.
§ 518-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-31
1:291
§ 518-31. Modification of plans.
A modification to a stormwater management plan under review by the
municipality for a development site that involves a change in stormwater
management facilities or techniques, or that involves the relocation or
redesign of stormwater management facilities, or that is necessary because
soil or other conditions are not as stated on the stormwater management
plan, as determined by the Municipal Engineer, shall require a resubmission
of a modified stormwater management plan consistent with this chapter and
shall be subject to review as specified in Article IV of this chapter.
§ 518-32. Resubmission of disapproved stormwater plans.
A disapproved stormwater management plan may be resubmitted; with
the revisions addressing the Municipal Engineer's concerns documented
in writing and addressed to the Municipal Secretary in accordance with
Article IV of this chapter and distributed accordingly and shall be subject
to review as specified in Article IV of this chapter. Any applicable municipal
review and inspection fee must accompany a resubmission of a disapproved
stormwater management plan.
§ 518-33. Municipal stormwater plan review and inspection fees.
§ 518-34. Record drawings, completion certificate, and final
inspection.
A. Fees may be established from time to time by the municipality in
accordance with applicable laws to defray plan review and construction
inspection costs incurred by the municipality. All fees shall be paid by
the applicant at the time of stormwater management plan submission.
B. Any fees established pursuant to this chapter may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, any of the following:
(1) Administrative costs.
(2) The review of the stormwater management plan by the
municipality, County (if applicable), Allegheny County Conservation
District (if applicable) and the Municipal Engineer.
(3) The site inspections.
(4) The inspection of stormwater management facilities and
stormwater management improvements during construction.
(5) The final inspection upon completion of the stormwater
management facilities.
(6) Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions
regulated by this chapter, correct violations, and assure proper
completion of stipulated remedial actions.
§ 518-31 ETNA CODE § 518-34
1:292
A. The developer shall be responsible for providing record drawings of all
SWM BMPs included in the approved SWM site plan. The record
drawings and an explanation of any discrepancies with the construction
plans shall be submitted to the municipality.
B. The record drawing submission shall include a certification of
completion signed by a qualified professional verifying that all
permanent SWM BMPs have been constructed according to the
approved plans and specifications. The latitude and longitude
coordinates for all permanent SWM BMPs must also be submitted at the
central location of the BMPs. If any licensed qualified professionals
contributed to the construction plans, then a licensed qualified
professional must sign the completion certificate.
C. The municipality may conduct inspections during construction as it
deems appropriate. If inspections performed by the municipality reveal
deficiencies from the submitted and approved SWM site plan, the
municipality may request corrective actions. Any corrective action shall
be at the cost of the stormwater facility owner.
D. After receipt of the completion certification by the municipality, the
municipality may conduct a final inspection.
§ 518-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-34
1:293

ARTICLE V
Definitions
§ 518-35. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AASHTO — American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials. The website home page for AASHTO is
https://www.transportation.org/
ACCD — Allegheny County Conservation District.
ACHD — Allegheny County Health Department.
ACT 167 — The Storm Water Management Act (Act of October 4, 1978, P.L.
864 No. 167; 32 P.S. §§ 680.1 to 680.17, as amended).
ACT 167 PLAN (or WATERSHED PLAN) — The plan for managing
stormwater runoff throughout a designated watershed adopted by
Allegheny County as required by the Pennsylvania Storm Water
Management Act.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — The work of producing crops, including
tillage, land clearing, plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting
crops, or pasturing and raising of livestock, and installation of conservation
measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious area is not
considered an agricultural activity.
APPLICANT — A landowner, developer or other person who has filed an
application for approval to engage in any regulated activity at a project site
in the municipality.
AQUIFER — A geologic formation, group of formations, or part of a
formation that contains sufficient saturated, permeable material to yield
useful quantities of groundwater to wells and springs.
ATTENUATE — To reduce the magnitude of the flow rate by increasing the
time it takes to release a specified volume of runoff (for example, the one
year, twenty-four-hour storm event). Attenuation is a method of reducing
the peak flow rates for post-development compared to the peak flow rates
in predevelopment.
BASE FLOW — Portion of stream discharge derived from groundwater; the
sustained discharge that does not result from direct runoff or from water
diversions, reservoir releases, piped discharges, or other human activities.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — Activities, facilities, designs,
measures or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from
regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to promote
groundwater recharge, and to otherwise meet the purposes of this chapter.
Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one of two broad categories
or measures: structural or nonstructural. In this chapter, nonstructural
BMPs or measures refer to operational and/or behavior-related practices
that attempt to minimize the contact of pollutants with stormwater runoff
§ 518-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-35
1:295
whereas structural BMPs or measures are those that consist of a physical
device or practice that is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff.
Structural BMPs include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices
and devices, from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands
to small-scale underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter
strips, low-impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving,
grassed swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins,
and manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the project site.
CFS — Cubic feet per second.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse that conveys continuously
or periodically flowing water.
CONCENTRATED STORM RUNOFF — Surface runoff from rainfall events,
which converges and flows primarily through water conveyance features
such as swales, gullies, waterways, channels or storm sewers and which
exceeds the maximum specified flow rates of filters or perimeter controls
intended to control sheet flow.
CONSERVATION DESIGN — A series of holistic land development design
practices that maximize protection of key land and environmental
resources, preserve significant concentrations of open space and
greenways, evaluate and maintain site hydrology, and ensure flexibility
in development design to meet community needs for complementary and
aesthetically pleasing development. Conservation design encompasses the
following objectives: conservation/enhancement of natural resources,
wildlife habitat, biodiversity corridors and greenways (interconnected open
space); minimization of environmental impact resulting from a change in
land use (minimum disturbance, minimum maintenance); maintenance of a
balanced water budget by making use of site characteristics and infiltration;
incorporation of unique natural, scenic and historic site features into the
configuration of the development; preservation of the integral
characteristics of the site as viewed from adjoining roads; and reduction
in maintenance required for stormwater management practices. Such
objectives can be met on a site through an integrated development process
that respects natural site conditions and attempts, to the maximum extent
possible, to replicate or improve the natural hydrology of a site.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — A conservation district, as defined in section
3(c) of the Conservation District Law [3 P.S. § 851(c)], which has the
authority under a delegation agreement executed with the Department to
administer and enforce all or a portion of the erosion and sediment control
program in this commonwealth.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours), used in the design and
evaluation of stormwater management systems. Also, see "return period."
§ 518-35 ETNA CODE § 518-35
1:296
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment designed to collect and retard
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at
a predetermined rate. Detention basins are designed to drain completely
shortly after any given rainfall event and are dry until the next rainfall
event.
DETENTION or TO DETAIN — The prevention of, or to prevent, the
discharge, directly or indirectly, of a given volume of stormwater runoff into
surface waters by temporary storage.
DEVELOPMENT SITE (SITE) — See "project site."
DISCHARGE — (Verb) To release of water from a project, site, aquifer,
drainage basin or other point of interest. (Noun) The rate and volume of
flow of water such as in a stream, generally expressed in cubic feet per
second (volume per unit of time).
DISTURBED AREA — An unstabilized land area where an earth disturbance
is occurring or has occurred.
DITCH — An artificial waterway for irrigation or stormwater conveyance.
DRAINAGE AREA — That land area contributing runoff to a single point and
that is enclosed by a ridgeline.
DRAINAGE SYSTEM — All facilities and natural features used for the
movement of stormwater through and from a drainage area, including, but
not limited to, any and all of the following: conduits, pipes and appurtenant
features; channels, ditches, flumes, culverts, streets, swales, gutters as well
as all watercourses, water bodies and wetlands.
EARTH DISTURBANCE — A construction or other human activity which
disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited to, clearing and
grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments; road maintenance; building
construction; the moving, depositing, stockpiling or storing of soil, rock or
earth materials.
EASEMENT — A right of use of a specified portion of land of another for a
specified purpose.
ENGINEER — A professional engineer duly appointed as the engineer for
municipality.
EPA — Environmental Protection Agency.
EROSION — The wearing away of land surface by water or wind which
occurs naturally from weather or runoff but is often intensified by human
activity.
EXISTING CONDITION — The dominant land cover during the five-year
period immediately preceding a proposed regulated activity.
FEMA — Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FIRST ORDER STREAM — Uppermost perennial tributary in a watershed
that has not yet confluence with another perennial stream. The confluence
of two first order streams forms a "second" order stream.
§ 518-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-35
1:297
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from any
natural source or delineated by applicable Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) maps and studies as being a special flood hazard area.
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the
adjoining floodplains that is reasonably required to carry and discharge the
100-year flood. Unless otherwise specified, the boundary of the floodway
is as indicated on maps and flood insurance studies provided by FEMA. In
an area where no FEMA maps or studies have defined the boundary of the
100-year floodway, it is assumed absent evidence to the contrary that the
floodway extends from the stream to 50 feet from the top of the bank of the
stream.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and activities
necessary for the management of forestland. These include timber
inventory and preparation of forest management plans, silvicultural
treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and construction, timber
harvesting, site preparation and reforestation.
FREEBOARD — Freeboard is the difference between the elevation of the
design flow in the emergency spillway (usually the 100-year peak elevation)
and the top elevation of the settled basin embankment (that is, top of berm).
The minimum freeboard shall be one foot.
GROUNDWATER — Water that occurs in the subsurface and fills or
saturates the porous openings, fractures and fissures of underground soils
and rock units.
HOT SPOTS — An area where land use or activities generate highly
contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those
typically found in stormwater.
HYDROGRAPH — A graph of discharge versus time for a selected point in
the drainage system.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) — Infiltration rates of soils vary widely
and are affected by subsurface permeability as well as surface intake rates.
Soils are classified into four HSGs (A, B, C and D) according to their
minimum infiltration rate, which is obtained for bare soil after prolonged
wetting. The Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the U.S.
Department of Agriculture defines the four groups and provides a list of
most of the soils in the United States and their group classification. The
soils in the area of the development site may be identified from a soil survey
report that can be obtained from local NRCS offices or conservation district
offices. Soils become less pervious as the HSG varies from A to D.
HYDROLOGY — The study of the properties, distribution, circulation and
effects of water on the earth's surface, soil and atmosphere.
IMPERVIOUS COVER — See "impervious surface."
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface (area), which has been compacted
or covered with a layer of material so that it is resistant to infiltration by
water. It includes semipervious surfaces such as compacted clayey soils,
as well as most conventionally surfaced streets, roofs, sidewalks, parking
§ 518-35 ETNA CODE § 518-35
1:298
lots, and other similar surfaces. "Net increase of impervious surface" refers
to the difference between the existing impervious coverage and the total
impervious surface proposed.
INFILTRATION — Movement of surface water into the soil, where it is
absorbed by plant roots, evaporated into the atmosphere, or percolates
downward to recharge groundwater.
INTENSITY — The depth of accumulated rainfall per unit of time.
INTERMITTENT STREAM — A defined channel in which surface water is
absent during a portion of the year as groundwater levels drop below the
channel bottom.
KARST — A type of topography or landscape characterized by surface
depressions, sinkholes, rock pinnacles/uneven bedrock surface,
underground drainage, and caves. Karst is formed on carbonate rocks, such
as limestone or dolomite.
LAND DEVELOPMENT (DEVELOPMENT) — Inclusive of any or all of the
following meanings:
LEVEL SPREADER — A low earthen berm constructed perpendicular to
the direction of slope and extending across the width of the slope for the
purpose of intercepting surface runoff and spreading it behind the berm
to enhance infiltration and reduce erosion and runoff from the slope. The
purpose of a level spreader is to prevent concentrated, erosive flows from
occurring and to spread out stormwater runoff uniformly over the ground
as sheet flow.
LOADING — The total amount (generally measured in pounds or kilograms
per acre per year) of material (sediment, nutrients, oxygen-demanding
material, or other chemicals or compounds) brought into a lake, stream or
water body by inflowing streams, runoff, direct discharge through pipes,
groundwater, the air (aerial or atmospheric deposition) and other sources
over a specific period of time (often annually).
LOW-IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID) — Site design approaches and smallscale
stormwater management practices that promote the use of natural
systems for infiltration, evapotranspiration, and reuse of rainwater. LID can
be applied to new development, urban retrofits, and revitalization projects.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving: 1) a group of two or more
building; or 2) the division or allocation of land or space between or
among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of or
for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums,
building groups, or other features;
A.
B. Any subdivision of land;
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.52
C.
52.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
§ 518-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-35
1:299
LID utilizes design techniques that infiltrate, filter, evaporate, and store
runoff close to its source. Rather than rely on costly large-scale conveyance
and treatment systems, LID addresses stormwater through a variety of
small, cost-effective landscape features located on site.
MAINTENANCE — The action taken to restore or preserve the as-built
functional design of any facility or system.
MEADOW CONDITION — A natural ground cover with less than one viable
tree of a DBH of six inches or greater per 1,500 square feet within 10 years
of application; a cover condition for which SCS curve numbers have been
assigned or to which equivalent Rational Method runoff coefficients have
been assigned.
MS4 — Municipal separate storm sewer system.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Etna.
NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) —
Created in 1972 under the Clean Water Act to authorize discharges to local
receiving waters only pursuant to governmental permits, in an effort to
reduce point source and non-point source pollutants.
NEW DEVELOPMENT — Any activity regulated by this chapter that is not
considered a redevelopment as defined in this chapter.
NOAA — National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
NONSTRUCTURAL STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICES — Passive
site design approaches or regulatory approaches that positively impact
water quality and reduce or minimize the generation of stormwater runoff
without requiring the construction of specific or discrete stormwater
management control structures.
NRCS — Natural Resources Conservation Service.
OPEN CHANNEL — Any natural or man-made watercourse or conduit in
which water flows with a free surface.
OPEN VEGETATED CHANNEL — Also known as swales, grass channels,
and biofilters. These systems are used for the conveyance, retention,
infiltration and filtration of stormwater runoff.
PACD — Pennsylvania Association of Conservation Districts.
PADEP — Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
PASTURE CONDITION — A ground cover of grassland or range with
continuous forage for grazing and greater than 75% ground cover and
lightly or only occasionally grazed; a cover condition for which the Natural
Resources Conservation Service curve numbers have been assigned or to
which equivalent Rational Method runoff coefficients have been assigned.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PENNDOT — Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
§ 518-35 ETNA CODE § 518-35
1:300
PERCOLATION RATE — The rate of movement of water under hydrostatic
pressure through interstices of rock or soil. For stormwater analysis, it is
typically measured as a distance per unit of time (e.g., inches per hour).
PERVIOUS AREA — Any area not defined as impervious.
PREDEVELOPMENT ASSUMPTION — The ground cover assumption used
when analyzing the stormwater runoff characteristics of a drainage area
prior to the proposed development.
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated activities in
the municipality are planned, conducted or maintained.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — Any person licensed by the Pennsylvania
Department of State or otherwise qualified by law to perform the work
required by the chapter.
RAINFALL INTENSITY — The depth of accumulated rainfall per unit of
time.
RATE — Volume per unit of time.
RECEIVING WATERS — Any water bodies, watercourses or wetlands into
which surface waters flow.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of groundwater through the infiltration
of rainfall, other surface waters, or land application of water or treated
wastewater.
REDEVELOPMENT — An existing, developed property containing
structures and/or impervious surfaces from prior development as of or after
the date of adoption of this chapter that is proposed for reconstruction
activities involving the demolition or partial demolition of the property. In
the case that these structures and impervious surfaces have been removed,
it must have been legally done within five years prior to the application
being made.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Any earth disturbances or any activities that
involve the alteration or development of land in a manner that may affect
post-construction stormwater runoff.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Activity involving earth
disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code Chapters 92a, Chapter
102, or the Clean Streams Law.
RELEASE RATE PERCENTAGE — The percentage of predevelopment peak
rate of runoff from a watershed subarea (as delineated in the Act 167
watershed plan), which defines the allowable post-development peak
discharge from any development site in that subarea.
RETENTION BASIN — An impoundment designed to collect and retard
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a
predetermined rate. Retention basins may also be designed to permanently
retain additional stormwater runoff. Retention basins are designed to retain
a permanent pool of water during dry weather.
§ 518-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-35
1:301
RETENTION or TO RETAIN — The prevention of direct discharge of
stormwater runoff into receiving waters or water bodies by temporary or
permanent containment in a pond or depression; examples include systems
which discharge by percolation to groundwater, exfiltration and/or
evaporation processes and which generally have residence times of less
than three days.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a storm
event of a given magnitude can be expected to occur one time. For example,
the twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be expected to occur on
average once every 25 years.
RIPARIAN — Pertaining to anything connected with or immediately adjacent
to the banks of a stream or other body of water.
RIPARIAN BUFFER — An area of land adjacent to a body of water and
managed to maintain the integrity of stream channels and shorelines to: 1)
reduce the impact of upland sources of pollution by trapping, filtering and
converting sediments, nutrients and other chemicals; and 2) supply food,
cover and thermal protection to fish and other wildlife.
RUNOFF — "See stormwater."
SCS — Soil Conservation Service. Now the Natural Resources Conservation
Service.
SEDIMENT — Fragmented material that originated from weathering rocks
and decomposing organic material that is transported by, suspended in, and
eventually deposited in the streambed.
SEDIMENTATION — Occurs when sediment particles that have been
suspended within flowing water are deposited on the stream bottom or
floodplain.
SHEET FLOW — A flow process associated with broad, shallow water
movement on sloping ground surfaces that is not channelized or
concentrated.
SLAMM (SOURCE LOADING AND MANAGEMENT MODEL) — This model
is based on small storm hydrology and pollutant runoff from urban land
uses. Pollutant sources are identified and both structural and nonstructural
stormwater practices can be accounted for in the model.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — Those areas identified by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Federal Insurance
Administration (FIA) as floodway area (FW), flood fringe area (FF), and
general floodplain area (FA); where determined by the municipality,
identified alluvial soils may be included as well.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory requirements
to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality under Pennsylvania
Code Title 25 and the Clean Streams Law.
STORM EVENT — The storm of a specific duration, intensity and frequency.
§ 518-35 ETNA CODE § 518-35
1:302
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BMPS — Abbreviated as SWM BMPs or
BMPs throughout this chapter.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The Pine Creek, Deer Creek,
Squaw Run, and Girty's Run Stormwater Management Plan for managing
stormwater runoff, adopted by the County of Allegheny as required by the
Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), as amended, and known as the
"Storm Water Management Act" if municipalities have drainage in these
watersheds.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICES — The designed and/or
constructed features which infiltrate, treat, collect, convey, channel, store,
inhibit or divert the movement of stormwater; such practices include
structural and nonstructural practices.
STORMWATER or RUNOFF — Drainage runoff from the surface of the land
resulting from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
STRUCTURAL STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICES — Any
measures that require the design and construction of a facility to help
reduce or eliminate a non-point source of pollution and control stormwater.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or installed with a fixed location on
the ground or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground.
SUBAREA (SUBBASIN) — A portion of the watershed (basin) that has
similar hydrological characteristics and drains to a common point.
SUBDIVISION — As defined in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247.53
SUBGRADE — The top elevation of graded and compacted earth underlying
roadway pavement.
SWALE — An artificial or natural waterway which may contain contiguous
areas of standing or flowing water only following a rainfall event, or is
planted with or has stabilized vegetation suitable for soil stabilization,
stormwater treatment and nutrient uptake, or is designed to take into
account the soil erodibility, soil percolation, slope, slope length, and
contributing drainage area so as to prevent erosion and reduce the
pollutant concentration of any discharge.
SWMM (STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MODEL) — EPA developed this
model for analyzing stormwater quantity and quality associated with runoff
from urban areas. Both single event and continuous simulation can be
performed on catchments having storm sewers, or combined sewers and
natural drainage, for prediction of flows, stages and pollutant
concentrations. Information on SWMM is available at https://www.epa.gov/
waterdata/epas-stormwater-management-model-swmm.
TOTAL SITE AREA (SITE AREA) — Total area of the parcel(s) being
developed.
USDA — United States Department of Agriculture.
53.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10107.
§ 518-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-35
1:303
USDOT FHWA — United States Department of Transportation Federal
Highway Administration.
WATER BODY — Any natural or artificial pond, lake, reservoir or other
area which ordinarily or intermittently contains water, and which has a
discernible shoreline and receives surface water flow.
WATER TABLE — The uppermost level of saturation of pore space or
fractures by subsurface water in an aquifer. "Seasonal high-water table"
refers to a water table that rises and falls with the seasons due either to
natural or man-made causes.
WATERCOURSE — A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of
water, whether natural or man-made, which gathers or carries surface
water.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams, creeks,
rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels
of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether
natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this commonwealth.
WATERSHED — Region or area drained by a river, watercourse or other
surface water of this commonwealth.
WETLAND — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water
or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs, fens and similar areas.
WETLANDS — Land areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water
or groundwater with a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions (wetlands generally
include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas); or areas that are defined
and delineated in accordance with the Federal Manual for Identifying and
Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands, dated January 10, 1989, and as may be
amended from time to time; or as further defined and delineated by the
United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Environmental
Protection Agency, or the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
WOODLAND CONDITION — A natural ground cover with more than one
viable tree of a DBH (diameter at breast height) of six inches or greater
per 1,500 square feet, which existed within 10 years of application; a cover
condition for which SCS curve numbers have been assigned or to which
equivalent Rational Method runoff coefficients have been assigned.
§ 518-35 ETNA CODE § 518-35
1:304
ARTICLE VI
References
§ 518-36. Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
No. 363-0300-002 (December 2006), as amended and updated.
Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Harrisburg,
PA.
§ 518-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 518-36
1:305
Chapter 524
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 518-36 ETNA CODE § 518-36
1:306
ARTICLE I
Obstructions and Excavations
[Adopted 1-10-1944 by Ord. No. 72654 (Ch. XXII, Part 3, §§ 101
through 103, of the 1974 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 524-1. Obstructions, excavations and nuisances on streets and
sidewalks.
From and after the passage of this article, it shall be unlawful for any
person, firm or corporation to permit any excavation, obstruction or
nuisance to be or remain in any street, alley or sidewalk within this
Borough, and if any excavation or obstruction is temporarily permitted, the
same must be protected by a temporary fence or covering, and the same
must be protected by a danger signal.
§ 524-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-20-1973 by Ord. No.
1058; 12-11-1989 by Ord. No. 1208]
Any person, whether principal or agent, violating any provision of this
article, shall for every such violation, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of not more than $600 and costs of prosecution and, in default of
payment of fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than
30 days, provided that each day on which any person, firm or corporation
violates any provision of this article shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 524-3. Additional actions or proceedings authorized to secure
compliance.
In addition to the penalties herein provided, the Borough of Etna may
institute appropriate actions or proceedings at law or in equity to secure
compliance with the provisions of this article. By reason of the dangerous
character of any structure or its unsanitary or noxious condition, the
enforcing officer may order the building vacated and kept vacant until such
dangerous, unsanitary or noxious condition is corrected.
54.Editor's Note: Section 2 of this ordinance repealed Ord. No. 15.
§ 524-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 524-3
1:307

ARTICLE II
Sidewalk Construction, Maintenance, and Snow Removal
[Adopted 9-8-1947 by Ord. No. 747 (Ch. XXII, Part 2A, of the 1974
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 524-4. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to provide a general system for the regulation
of all sidewalk matters and to provide uniformity in construction thereof.
§ 524-5. Width of sidewalks.
The width of sidewalks on either side of public streets is hereby fixed as
follows: All streets where sidewalks are to be replaced, sidewalks shall
conform with the present width of sidewalks on improved streets,55 and
where the streets are not improved, the width of sidewalks shall be as
follows:
§ 524-6. Material and construction. [Amended 3-8-1954 by Ord. No.
820]
A. Streets 30 feet wide or less: four feet.
B. Streets 31 to 40 feet wide: five feet.
C. Streets 41 to 50 feet wide: six feet.
D. Streets 51 to 60 feet wide: eight feet.
E. Streets of a width more than 60 feet: 10 feet.
A. All sidewalks hereafter constructed, and all walks reconstructed shall
be of concrete, composed of one part portland cement, two parts clean
sharp river sand and three parts river gravel, to be thoroughly mixed
and put in place over a cinder foundation (cinders dampened and well
rammed) to be at least eight inches in thickness, and to be spread over
entire area for the sidewalk construction. All concrete sidewalks to be
at least four inches in thickness, to be a float finish and broomed or
rough surfaces. (If the property owner desires to place three inches of
concrete and one inch finish on top, the finishing coat is to be composed
of one part cement, two parts sand and three parts Ligonier chips, the
same to have a rough surface.)
B. The sidewalks to have a grade falling 1/4 of one foot to the width of all
sidewalks, which shall be at an elevation where, if extended, it will not
be below the top of the curb and not more than 1/2 inch above same.
55.Editor's Note: "The present width of sidewalks on improved streets" was derived, first,
from Ord. No. 11, November 23, 1868, which read as follows: "The width of the sidewalks
on all streets 50 feet in width in the Borough of Etna is hereby fixed at 10 feet, and on all
streets that are 40 feet wide at six feet, and five feet on all streets that are 30 feet wide,
and 3 1/2 feet on streets and alleys that are 20 feet wide." Sidewalk widths on specific
streets were also set forth in ordinances providing for the construction of such sidewalks.
§ 524-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 524-6
1:309
§ 524-7. Old walks; reconstruction.
All sidewalks now existing in which the material out of which the same are
constructed, whether brick, stone or concrete, shall have become defective
and in such condition as to render the sidewalk dangerous to public travel,
shall upon notice from the Borough be reconstructed of concrete as herein
above specified.
§ 524-8. Inspection; maintenance. [Amended 3-8-1954 by Ord. No.
820]
C. In construction of sidewalks, property owners shall allow for expansion
and contraction joints by placing expansion material at least 1/2 inch in
thickness every 10 feet across the sidewalks, said expansion material
not to extend more than 1/8 inch above the sidewalk.
D. In the construction of concrete sidewalks between the curb and a
permanent structure along property line, such as the foundation for the
building or wall, the owner shall allow for the longitudinal expansion
joint for the entire length of sidewalk, either along the property line or
along the curbline. Said expansion joint to be at least 1/2 inch in
thickness and to extend from the top of the finished concrete to bottom
of same.
E. Notice to grade, pave and/or construct any sidewalk within 30 days
shall be served by any police officer of the Borough in the manner
provided by law. Such notice shall require the owner of the property to
grade, pave and/or construct the sidewalk in the manner specified
within the time limit stated therein and, in default of compliance
therewith, the Borough shall cause such work to be done, and the cost
thereof, plus 10%, shall be collected from the owner of such property in
the manner provided by law.
A. All sidewalks shall be maintained at all times by the owners of property
fronting or abutting thereon in a safe, passable condition.
B. Police officers of the Borough shall make inspection of sidewalks
continuously and report to the Secretary of the Borough any defect or
bad conditions found to exist.
C. Notice of defects and direction to remedy the same within 30 days shall
be served by such police officers in the manner provided by law. Such
notice shall require the owner of such property to remedy the defects
and repair the sidewalk within the time limit stated, and in default of
compliance therewith, the Borough shall make the necessary repairs
and the cost thereof, plus 15%, shall be collected from the owner of
such property in the manner provided by law. If on inspection it be
determined by the Borough that any sidewalk should be reconstructed
as provided in § 524-7 of this article, notice to begin such
reconstruction within 10 days and to complete the same within 30 days
shall be given as above provided, and upon default, the Borough shall
§ 524-6 ETNA CODE § 524-8
1:310
§ 524-9. Removal of snow and ice. [Amended 3-8-1954 by Ord. No.
820; 12-20-1973 by Ord. No. 1059; 12-11-1989 by Ord. No. 1208;
4-20-1999 by Ord. No. 1266]
§ 524-10. Use of sidewalks. [Amended 3-8-1954 by Ord. No. 820]
The sidewalks shall at all times be kept open and free of obstruction to
public travel except where building operations are in progress, such portion
of the sidewalk as may be reasonably necessary for such purposes may
be occupied; provided, however, that at all times sufficient space shall be
kept open adjoining property lines as to permit of passageway. No person
shall obstruct any sidewalk with any goods, wares or merchandise, nor shall
any person throw or cast or place upon any sidewalk any paper or any
discarded goods or material of any kind; provided, however, nothing herein
contained shall prohibit the placing upon any sidewalk of refuse in proper
containers, awaiting collection, where such placement shall conform strictly
to any other ordinance or regulation of the Borough relative thereto.
reconstruct such sidewalk and collect the cost, plus 10%, from the
owner of the premises as provided by law.
A. Owners in possession of real estate within the Borough, and owners of
vacant and unoccupied property and of property with more than one
tenanted or tenantable unit, and tenants of other types of property shall
remove enough snow and ice from the sidewalks in front of and/or along
such property within 24 hours after the snow has ceased to fall or the
ice to form thereon so as to create a reasonable pathway for pedestrian
traffic, and shall at all times keep such pathway clear from
accumulations of snow and ice.
B. Owners in possession of real estate within the Borough, and owners of
vacant and unoccupied property and property with more than one
tenanted or tenantable unit, and tenants of other types of property are
hereby prohibited from depositing the removed snow and ice from the
sidewalks into the streets or highways of the Borough of Etna.
C. Any person, firm or corporation, who or which violates any provision of
this section, shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $100 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of
fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
D. In addition to the penalties provided for the violation of this section of
this article, the Borough may, at its option, remove such snow and/or ice
not removed by the owner or tenant of a property as hereby required
and charge the cost of such removal, plus 10% in addition thereto, such
charges to be collectible either by action at law or by the filing of a
municipal claim or otherwise as provided by law.
§ 524-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 524-11
1:311
§ 524-11. Permit required to construct driveway or cut curb.
[Amended 2-24-1949 by Ord. No. 761; 3-8-1954 by Ord. No. 820;
12-20-1973 by Ord. No. 1059]
No person, firm or corporation shall construct or install a driveway in, over
or upon any sidewalk within the Borough of Etna, or cut away the curb of
the street for the purpose of constructing or installing such a driveway until
the permission of the Borough Council therefor shall have been acquired.
§ 524-12. Curb boxes, iron doors, etc.
All curb boxes, coal holes, iron doors and tank inlets in sidewalks shall be
so constructed as to be flush with the adjoining portions of such walks and
be of solid and substantial construction so as to prevent sinking.
§ 524-13. Overhanging trees, awnings, etc.
Trees overhanging sidewalks shall be kept trimmed to a height of not
less than seven feet above sidewalk level, and awnings or other overhead
construction shall not be connected with sidewalks or curbs by poles, pipes
or other supports, and shall be constructed and maintained at least seven
feet above sidewalk level.
§ 524-14. Nuisances.
Obstructing sidewalks by using them as display places for goods, wares,
merchandise, or permitting overhead construction contrary to the
provisions of this article, are hereby declared to be public nuisances and
shall, on 10 days' notice to owners or tenants, be abated by the Borough at
the cost of such owners or tenants.
§ 524-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-8-1954 by Ord. No.
820; 12-20-1973 by Ord. No. 1059; 12-11-1989 by Ord. No. 1208]
Any person, firm or corporation, who or which violates any provision of this
article, shall, for every such violation, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of not more than $600 and costs of prosecution and, in default of
payment of fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than 30
days.
§ 524-11 ETNA CODE § 524-15
1:312
ARTICLE III
Curbs
[Adopted 7-11-1949 by Ord. No. 765 (Ch. XXII, Part 2B, of the 1974
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 524-16. Curbs to be maintained by property owners; remedy of
defects. [Amended 3-8-1954 by Ord. No. 823]
§ 524-17. Manner of construction of curbs.
The material to be used in the constructing and repairing of all curbs at the
edge of sidewalks or of highways shall be either of good hard and durable
sandstone or concrete:
A. All curbs heretofore or hereafter constructed on any of the public
streets or highways of the Borough of Etna shall be kept in a safe and
usable condition by the owners of the abutting property.
B. Police officers of the Borough shall make inspection of curbs
continuously and report to the Secretary of the Borough any defects or
bad conditions found to exist.
C. Notice of defects and directions to remedy the same within 30 days
shall be served by such police officers as provided by law. Such notice
shall require the owner of such property to remedy the defect and
repair the curb within 30 days from the date of such service and, in
default of compliance therewith at the end of 30 days, the Borough shall
make the necessary repairs at the cost of such property owner, plus
10%, which sum may be recovered in an action of assumpsit or by filing
a lien against such property, as provided by law.
A. If of stone, they shall not be less than four feet in length, nor less than
24 inches in depth, and of a uniform thickness of six inches. The top
face shall be accurately set to the level of the sidewalk, and the exposed
front shall be dressed to a uniform surface of a depth of 10 inches; the
ends shall be cut square and abut closely when set to the depth of 20
inches; the curb shall be accurately set to the line and grade
established by ordinance and shall be firmly tamped in place; each end
of the curbstone shall rest on stone blocks 10 inches by 12 inches, and
at least four inches thick; return curbs for streets 50 feet in width shall
be cut in lengths not less than three feet and to a radius of four feet, and
for streets 50 feet and over in width, shall be cut in lengths and to a
radius of six feet; when sewer inlets interfere, the cut must be fitted
neatly up to the castings.
B. If of concrete, the curbs shall be not less than 24 inches in depth and of
uniform thickness of six inches, and the composition thereof shall be
one part portland cement, two parts clean, sharp sand, and two parts
river gravel, to be thoroughly mixed and put in place over a cinder
foundation (cinders dampened and well rammed); the curbs shall be
accurately set to the line and grade established by ordinance. Forms
§ 524-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 524-17
1:313
§ 524-18. Improperly constructed and repaired curbs constitute
nuisance; penalty for failure to reconstruct; authority for Borough
to do work and collect cost. [Amended 3-8-1954 by Ord. No. 823;
12-11-1989 by Ord. No. 1208]
Curbs not laid, reconstructed or repaired in conformity with the provisions
of this article and the established grade of the street on which they are
constructed are declared to be a nuisance and must be taken up and
reconstructed according to the provisions of this article within 30 days after
notice from the Borough to the owner or owners of the abutting property to
do so. Upon failure of the owner or owners to reconstruct the curb within
the time stipulated, such owner or owners shall be guilty of an offense and,
upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and
costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of fine and costs, to undergo
imprisonment for not more than 30 days. Furthermore, the Borough shall
cause the curb to be reconstructed in the manner required by this article
and shall collect the cost of the work, plus 10%, together with all charges
and expenses, from the owner or owners of the abutting property according
to law and this article.
shall be removed before the concrete has hardened, and the front and
top floated to a uniform surface with all voids filled. Outside top edge
shall be rounded to a 1/2 inch radius. Finishing curbs by plastering over
porous concrete shall not be permitted. Return curbs for streets under
50 feet in width shall be constructed to a radius of four feet, and for
streets 50 feet and over in width, to a radius of six feet. All construction
shall be done in a workmanlike manner and under the supervision of
either the Street Commissioner or the Borough Engineer.
§ 524-17 ETNA CODE § 524-18
1:314
ARTICLE IV
Openings and Excavations
[Adopted 8-10-1970 by Ord. No. 1025 (Ch. XXII, Part 1C, of the
1974 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 524-19. Permit required to make opening or excavation in street
or alley.
A permit for the opening and excavating of streets, avenues, alleys and
public highways in front of premises in said Borough for the purpose of
making connections for sewer, gas, water or other lines shall be granted
only upon application of the contractor, plumber, owner or any other person
making such connection approved by the owner of the property for whom
such connection is to be made.
§ 524-20. Application for permit; issuance following cash deposit or
bond.
Said application shall be made to the Borough Secretary, who shall grant
same, provided he is satisfied that it is for the best interest of the property
owner to be served, and provided also that a cash deposit or bond is made
with him by either the contractor, plumber, owner or other person in the
sum of $5,000 where the opening or excavating is to be made on any street,
avenue, alley or public highway.
§ 524-21. Permit holder to furnish evidence of insurance coverage.
The person, persons, firm or corporation making such connection in
opening or excavating the streets, avenues, alleys or public highways as
aforesaid shall be required to deliver to the Borough Secretary satisfactory
evidence of insurance coverage for property damage, public liability and
worker's compensation and must as soon as possible make temporary repair
to the streets, avenues, alleys or public highways, so that there shall be as
little interference with traffic thereon as may be necessary.
§ 524-22. Time limit for restoration of street or alley.
The owner of the property or the contractor, plumber or other person
performing the work shall, within 30 days after completion of the work,
restore the streets, avenues, alleys, or public highways to their former
condition, unless an extension of time shall be given by him by the said
Borough by reason of weather conditions or other conditions beyond his
control.
§ 524-23. Authority for Borough to restore at expense of permit
holder.
In case of failure to restore said streets, avenues, alleys or public highways
to their former condition within the time hereinbefore provided, the
Borough shall have the right and privilege to perform said work and deduct
§ 524-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 524-23
1:315
the cost of said work from the amount previously deposited by the owner,
contractor, plumber or other person, and if the sum so deposited is not
sufficient to cover the cost to perform said work, said Borough is hereby
authorized to take such steps as are necessary to collect the balance due
from either the owner, contractor, plumber or other person, or all of them,
by appropriate action.
§ 524-24. Refund of deposit or portion unused.
In the event the restorative costs do not consume the deposit, the balance
remaining shall be refunded to the depositor, and likewise the depositor is
entitled to a refund of his deposit when the Borough has not incurred any
costs by reason of said opening. Said refund shall be returned only after
the expiration of six months from date of application upon resolution of the
Council.
§ 524-25. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-11-1989 by Ord.
No. 1208]
Any person, firm or corporation, who or which violates any provision of this
article, shall for every such violation, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of not more than $600 and costs of prosecution and, in default of
payment of fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than 30
days.
§ 524-23 ETNA CODE § 524-25
1:316
ARTICLE V
Sledding
[Adopted 3-8-1954 by Ord. No. 824 (Ch. XXII, Part 3, § 105, of the
1974 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 524-26. Sledding on streets and sidewalks.
No person or persons shall coast or ride upon any sled or similar
conveyance upon any sidewalk in the Borough or upon any of the streets
or alleys in the Borough not set apart for the purpose by the Mayor and
barricaded and/or guarded so as to protect the sledders. Any person who
shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $1.
§ 524-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 524-26
1:317

ARTICLE VI
Telecommunications Systems Right-of-Way Permits
[Adopted 3-20-2001 by Ord. No. 1281]
§ 524-27. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the
terms used in this article shall be as follows:
APPLICANT — The person who has applied for a right-of-way permit.
APPLICATION — The form prescribed from time to time by the Borough of
Etna which the applicant must complete in order to obtain a right-of-way
permit.
CONSTRUCTION PERMIT — The document that must be obtained before a
person may perform construction in a right-of-way.
EMERGENCY — A condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to life
or health, or significant loss of property,
IN — When used in conjunction with "rights-of-way" means over, above, in,
within, or under a right-of-way.
PERMIT HOLDER — The person obtaining a right-of-way permit.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or other business entity.
RESTORE or RESTORATION — The process by which a right-of-way is
returned to a state that is as good or better as its condition before
construction.
RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT or PERMIT — A written agreement granted by the
Borough of Etna to an applicant for use of the rights-of-way in the Borough
of Etna for wires, poles, pipes, conduits and other facilities, but not to
transact local business with another person.
RIGHTS-OF-WAY — The surface and space above and below any real
property in which the Borough of Etna has an interest in law or in equity,
including but not limited to any public street, boulevard, road, highway,
easement, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, river, tunnel,
viaduct, bridge, park, green space, or any other place, area or real property,
other than real property owned in fee by the Borough of Etna.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES — The regulated and unregulated
services offering to customers the transmission of video, data and/or voice
communications, both active and interactive, and associated usage.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM — A system used or to be used to
provide telecommunication services, including public or private line video,
data or voice service to another person, using or crossing a street, highway,
rights-of-way or easements in the Borough of Etna, but it shall not include
cable television service offered pursuant to a franchise granted under the
Borough of Etna Code.
§ 524-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 524-27
1:319
UNDERGROUND EQUIPMENT — All equipment that is located wholly or
partially underneath rights-of-way.
§ 524-28. Right-of-way permit required.
§ 524-29. Application for right-of-way permit.
A. No person shall enter upon or occupy any right-of-way for the purpose
of installing, constructing, maintaining or operating a
telecommunications system without first having obtained a right-of-way
permit.
B. Before offering or providing any telecommunications service, the holder
of or applicant for a right-of-way permit shall have applied for any and
all regulatory approvals, permits or authorizations from the appropriate
federal, state and local authorities, if required. Upon the request of the
Borough of Etna, the applicant shall submit written evidence of all
materials relevant to its applications for or receipt of all such approvals,
permits or authorizations.
C. Nothing in this article shall be construed as a waiver of any ordinances
or regulations of the Borough of Etna or the Borough of Etna's right to
require the prospective right-of-way permit holders to secure
appropriate permits or authorizations for such use. No fee or charge
may be imposed upon a right-of-way permit holder for any such permit
or authorization, other than the standard fees or charges generally
applicable to all persons for such permits or authorizations. Such
standard fee or charge shall not be offset against any right-of-way
permit fees.
A. A right-of-way permit shall only be granted after an applicant has
completed an application in the form that has been prescribed by the
Borough of Etna, which form may be revised from time to time. Upon
request, an applicant shall be provided with a copy of the then current
application for a right-of-way permit. The application shall contain
information concerning the applicant, its proposed used of the rights-ofway
and the likely burden that will be placed on the rights-of-way and
the Borough of Etna. Following receipt of the application, the Borough
of Etna may request such additional information as is necessary to
enable it to make a determination as to the cost and potential harm
posed by the applicant's proposed use of the rights-of-way.
B. Before commencing any construction, installation or other work in the
rights-of-way, an applicant shall submit to the Borough of Etna detailed
plans of its proposed construction, installation or other work. Such
plans shall include the specific locations and the beginning and ending
dates of all known planned construction.
C. The applicant shall submit a fully completed application to the Borough
of Etna for consideration at least 60 days prior to the date that it
intends to begin occupying the rights-of-way for the purpose of
§ 524-27 ETNA CODE § 524-29
1:320
§ 524-30. Duration and suspension of right-of-way permit.
constructing or installing a telecommunications system. Upon receipt of
a properly and fully completed application and accompanying fees, the
Borough of Etna shall conduct a review of the application to determine
whether or not the granting of a right-of-way permit to the applicant
will promote the provision of telecommunications services while
fulfilling the purposes of this article. Specifically, the Borough of Etna
will determine whether the granting of a right-of-way permit will ensure
the public safety and protect the Borough of Etna's rights-of-way from
excessive damage.
D. The Borough of Etna shall have the power to prohibit or limit the
placement of new or additional equipment within the rights-of-way if
there is insufficient space to reasonably accommodate all existing and
potential users of the rights-of-way, but shall be guided primarily by
considerations of the public interest, the conditions of the rights-of-way
and the protection of existing and potential equipment in the rights-ofway.
E. In considering an application, the Borough of Etna may use such
outside experts that it deems appropriate. In the event the Borough of
Etna deems it necessary to employ outside technical experts, the costs
of such expert shall be borne by the applicant.
A. The right-of-way permit shall be issued for a period of one year. Each
year, within 60 days prior to the anniversary of the issuance of the
permit, the permit holder shall apply for a renewal for a period of one
year. The Borough of Etna shall renew the permit for a period of one
year unless the Borough of Etna orders otherwise as a result of any one
or more of the following having occurred:
(1) The permit holder shall have failed to pay any of the fees required
under this article or any other amount due to the Borough of Etna;
(2) The permit holder shall have failed to obtain, or having previously
obtained, shall have had revoked, any approvals, permits or
authorizations required under any federal, state or local statute or
regulation;
(3) The permit holder shall have caused damage to the Borough of
Etna property or the right-of-way without the prior consent of the
Borough of Etna and without completing proper restoration;
(4) The permit holder has or is likely to endanger the public safety.
B. The Borough of Etna shall be permitted to immediately suspend any
right-of-way permit if any of the events listed in Subsection A above
occur. A suspension shall be brought to the attention of the Council of
the Borough of Etna at its next meeting; at which time Council shall be
permitted to uphold or withdraw the suspension.
§ 524-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 524-31
1:321
§ 524-31. Violations and penalties.
Violation of any of the terms of this article shall be punishable by a fine of
up to $100 per day from the day the Borough of Etna provides notice of the
violation until the violation is cured.
§ 524-32. Initial, annual and miscellaneous fees.
A. Each applicant shall include with its application an application fee in
the amount of $500. The purpose of this fee is to compensate the
Borough of Etna for reviewing the application (excluding expert costs)
and planning and implementing any changes that may be necessary in
order to safely allow for the provision of additional telecommunications
services. This fee will not be refunded in the event the application is
denied.
B. Once an application is granted, a permit holder shall pay an annual fee
that is received by the Borough of Etna no later than 30 days prior to
the renewal date of the right-of-way permit. The annual fee is
established based upon historical costs of maintaining, preserving,
repairing and inspecting public property and estimated prospective
costs of such activities. The annual fee shall be the greater of the
following:
(1) A per-linear-foot fee based on the per linear foot (not number of
lines or capacity) of the telecommunication system located in the
rights-of-way in the Borough of Etna equal to $0.40 per linear foot
of underground and $0.20 per linear foot of overhead lines, wires,
cables, poles, conduits and like structures, erections and fixtures in
the rights-of-way; or
(2) $500.
C. Miscellaneous fees. In addition to the fees set forth above, a permit
holder shall pay, within 30 days of the presentation of a statement, any
extraordinary or unusual expenses incurred by the Borough of Etna as a
result of the use of the rights-of-way. Examples of extraordinary or
unusual costs include the cost of obtaining and operating a backhoe,
dump truck or other heavy equipment used to repair the right-of-way,
overtime or special pay for police officers, hazardous waste cleanup or
emergency services.
D. Fee considerations:
(1) Permit holders sharing the same conduit shall each pay a full fee.
(2) Permit holders sending signals over another permit holder's
existing line or a line that is leased to another and upon which fees
are already paid are not subject to additional fees.
(3) Permit holders using the same line to provide cable television
service and to provide telecommunications services shall be subject
§ 524-31 ETNA CODE § 524-32
1:322
§ 524-33. No recourse.
A permit holder shall have no recourse whatsoever against the Borough of
Etna for any loss, costs, expense or damage arising out of the failure to
grant a permit. By applying for a permit, the applicant acknowledges what
it has not been induced to enter into a permit by any understanding or
promise or other statement, whether verbal or written, by or on behalf of
the Borough of Etna or by any other third party concerning any term or
condition of a permit not expressed in this article.
§ 524-34. Liability and indemnification.
to both a cable television franchise fee and all fees set by this
article.
E. A permit holder shall pay to the Borough of Etna an amount equal to the
annual fee within 30 days following the anniversary of the issuance of
the original permit.
F. In the event that payment of any annual fee is made after the date due,
the permit holder shall pay a late payment penalty of simple interest at
10% annual percentage rate of the total amount past due. Acceptance
of payment under this section shall not in any way limit or inhibit the
Borough of Etna from suspending or terminating the permit according
to the terms of this article.
A. A permit holder shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify and hold
harmless the Borough of Etna, its elected and appointed officials,
employees and agents, at all times against any an all claims for personal
injury, including death, as well as claims for property damage arising
out of the permit holder's use or occupancy of the rights-of-way. A
permit holder shall defend any actions or proceedings against the
Borough of Etna in which it is claimed that personal injury, including
death, or property damage was caused by the permit holder's use or
occupancy of the rights-of-way. Such indemnification by the permit
holder shall include any and all claims for property damage to permit
holder's facilities caused by anything else in the rights-of-way.
B. A permit holder shall at all times during the life of a permit carry and
require its contractors and subcontractors to carry liability, property
damage, workers' disability, and vehicle insurance in such form and
amount as shall be determined by the Borough of Etna as set forth in
the permit. A permit holder shall name the Borough of Etna as an
additional insured on its liability insurance policies. All required
insurance coverage shall provide for 30 days' notice to the Borough of
Etna in the event of material alteration or cancellation of such coverage
prior to the effective date of such material alteration or cancellation.
Failure of the permit holder to provide appropriate insurance
certificates to the Borough of Etna within 60 days after the execution of
a permit shall render the permit null and void.
§ 524-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 524-35
1:323
§ 524-35. Construction standards.
§ 524-36. Reporting requirement.
A. Except in the case of an emergency, a permit holder shall not
commence construction in the rights-of-way without first obtaining any
necessary construction permits as required under the Borough of Etna
Code. Whenever a permit holder shall disturb any pavement, sidewalk
or other public property in order to perform any underground activities,
the permit holder will fully comply by registering with Pennsylvania's
"One Call System" pursuant to 73 P.S. § 176 et seq. Each permit holder
shall construct, install and maintain its equipment in a manner
consistent and in compliance with the detailed plans it submitted to the
Borough of Etna and all applicable federal, state and local laws and
regulations.
B. The telecommunications systems shall not endanger or interfere with
the safety of persons or property within the Borough of Etna. All
operating, maintenance, construction and repair personnel shall be
thoroughly trained in the use of all safety equipment and in the safe
operation of vehicles. Such personnel shall follow all safety procedures
required by applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations. All
areas of the telecommunications system shall be routinely inspected
and maintained so that conditions that could develop into safety
hazards can be corrected before they become a hazard.
C. Construction, installation and maintenance of a telecommunications
system shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner and
in close coordination with public utilities serving the Borough of Etna,
following accepted industry construction procedures and practices and
working through existing committees and organizations.
D. All cable and wires shall be installed, where possible, parallel with
electric and telephone lines, and multiple cable configurations shall be
arranged in parallel and bundles with due respect for engineering
consideration.
A. A permit holder shall annually provide the Borough of Etna, on the
anniversary date of the issuance of the permit, the current maps of the
horizontal and vertical locations of its existing installations and a
summary of all additions and deletions of equipment, wires and conduit,
in the rights-of-way unless no changes have occurred in the previous
year.
B. Upon request by the Borough of Etna, the permit holder shall annually
file with the Borough of Etna a copy of its annual financial reports,
including its annual income statement, a balance sheet, and a
statement of sources and applications of funds.
C. A permit holder shall submit to the Borough of Etna such reasonable
information or reports in such form and at such times as the Borough of
§ 524-35 ETNA CODE § 524-36
1:324
§ 524-37. Sale or transfer of rights of permit holder.
A rights-of-way permit may not be sold, transferred, assigned, changed
control, or otherwise encumbered, in whole or in part, without the prior
written consent of the Borough of Etna. This provision shall not apply to a
sale, transfer or assignment to a permit holder's wholly owned parent or if
less than 20% of the assets of the permit holder are transferred to another
entity.
§ 524-38. Performance bond.
A permit holder may be required, prior to construction, to obtain a
performance bond in a reasonable amount set by the Borough of Etna,
based upon the construction cost of the equipment to be installed in the
rights-of-way and the extent of the disturbance of such rights-of-way. The
performance bond shall ensure the permit holder's faithful performance of
its construction obligations. The Borough of Etna may reduce or cancel the
bond requirement when construction is completed.
§ 524-39. Termination and probationary status.
Etna may request. All information provided to the Borough of Etna shall
be maintained by the Borough of Etna as proprietary and confidential if
such information is designated in good faith as such prior to the time it
is provided to the Borough of Etna.
D. Subject to the privacy rights of the permit holder, the Borough of Etna
shall have the right to inspect, during normal business hours, upon 10
days' notice, all books, records, maps, plans, service complaint logs,
performance test results and other like materials of the permit holder
which relate to the operation of the telecommunications system within
the Borough of Etna. Access to the aforementioned records shall not be
denied by the permit holder on the basis that the records contain
proprietary information, provided that the Borough of Etna maintains
such information as proprietary and confidential.
E. A permit holder shall allow the Borough of Etna to make inspections of
any of the permit holder's telecommunications system within the
Borough of Etna's boundaries at any time upon three days' notice or, in
case or emergency, upon demand without notice.
A. In addition to all other rights and powers reserved by the Borough of
Etna, the Borough of Etna reserves as an additional remedy the right to
terminate a permit and all rights and privileges of a permit holder for
any of the following reasons:
(1) A permit holder fails, after 30 days' prior written notice, to comply
with any of the provisions of the permit or this article;
(2) A permit holder becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its
debts or is adjudged bankrupt;
§ 524-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 524-39
1:325
§ 524-40. Removal.
Upon expiration or termination of the permit, if the permit is not renewed,
the permit holder shall remove its wires, cable, lines, supporting structures,
and any and all other equipment from the rights-of-way and shall restore
said areas. If such removal is not completed within six months of such
termination, the Borough of Etna may deem any property not removed as
abandoned, and the Borough of Etna may remove it at the former permit
holder's expense. Except as otherwise provided, the permit holder shall
not remove any underground cable or conduit which requires trenching
or other opening of the streets unless it is ordered to be removed by the
Borough of Etna based upon a determination, in the sole discretion of
the Borough of Etna, that removal is required to eliminate or prevent a
hazardous condition or promote future utilization of the streets and rightsof-
way for public purposes.
§ 524-41. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or word of the permit
or this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court
(3) All or part of a permit holder's facilities are sold under an
instrument to secure a debt and are not redeemed by the permit
holder within 90 days from such sale;
(4) A permit holder attempts to or does practice any fraud or deceit in
its conduct or relations with the Borough of Etna under the permit.
(5) The Borough of Etna condemns all of the property of a permit
holder within the Borough of Etna by the lawful exercise of eminent
domain;
(6) The permit holder abandons the telecommunications system or
fails to seek renewal of its permit for 60 days following the
expiration of the permit.
B. In lieu of termination, the Borough of Etna may place the permit holder
on probationary status for a period up to three years by the adoption of
a resolution by a majority of the Council of the Borough of Etna. As a
condition of being placed on probationary status, the Council of the
Borough of Etna may direct that the permit holder pay up to double the
amount of the annual fee as a monetary penalty and require that it post
an additional performance bond or other security.
C. No termination or probation shall be effective unless or until the
Council of the Borough of Etna shall have adopted a resolution setting
forth the cause and reason for the termination or probation and the
effective date, which resolution shall not be adopted without 30 days'
prior notice to the permit holder and an opportunity for the permit
holder to be heard before the Council of the Borough of Etna on the
proposed resolution.
§ 524-39 ETNA CODE § 524-41
1:326
of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision, and such holding shall not render invalid the
permit or this article.
§ 524-42. Equal application.
The provision of this article shall be imposed upon and enforce against all
persons requiring a permit from the Borough of Etna.
§ 524-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 524-42
1:327
Chapter 535
TAXATION
§ 524-42 ETNA CODE § 524-42
1:328
ARTICLE I
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 11-30-1954 by Ord. No. 833; amended in its entirety
12-20-1973 by Ord. No. 1060 (Ch. XXV, Part 2, §§ 31 through 33, of
the 1974 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 535-1. Tax imposed on earned income and net profits. [Amended ]
A tax for general revenue purposes of 1% is hereby imposed on:
§ 535-2. Section 13 of Local Tax Enabling Act, with certain options,
incorporated by reference.
Section 13 of the said Local Tax Enabling Act of 1965 (P.L. 1257), as
amended and supplemented, is hereby adopted and incorporated by
reference and made a part of this article,56 to the same extent as if the full
text of the said section were set out verbatim in this article, except that: (a)
in the case of net profits, the Borough elects to operate under the option
set forth in Subsection III-A-1(ii) of the said Section 13, requiring an annual
declaration of estimated net profits and quarterly payments thereof, rather
than annual payments of the tax due on net profits of the preceding year
as set forth in Subsection III-A-1(i); and (b) in the case of earned income
not subject to withholding, the Borough elects to operate under the option
set forth under Subsection III-B-2 requiring quarterly declarations and
payments, rather than the option set forth in Subsection III-B-1 requiring an
annual declaration and return and a single payment.
§ 535-3. Income Tax Officer. [Amended 3-18-2003 by Ord. No. 1296]
The Borough Council may from time to time appoint and designate a person
to serve as Income Tax Officer, and the bond of the Income Tax Officer shall
be filed with the Borough Solicitor.
A. Earned income earned on and after January 1, 1973, by residents of the
Borough of Etna;
B. Earned income earned on and after January 1, 1973, by nonresidents of
the Borough of Etna for work done or services performed or rendered in
the Borough of Etna;
C. Net profits earned on and after January 1, 1973, of businesses,
professions and other activities conducted by residents of the Borough
of Etna;
D. Net profits earned on and after January 1, 1973, by businesses,
professions and other activities conducted in the Borough of Etna by
nonresidents of the Borough.
56.Editor's Note: Section 13 of the Local Tax Enabling Act is repealed as of June 30, 2012.
§ 535-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-3
1:329

ARTICLE II
Mercantile License and Business Transaction Tax
[Adopted 4-30-1956 by Ord. No. 850; amended in its entirety
12-8-1969 by Ord. No. 1019(Ch. XXV, Part 3, of the 1974 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 535-4. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Mercantile License and
Business Transaction Tax Ordinance."
§ 535-5. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases, when
used in this article, shall have the meanings as ascribed to them in this
section:
GROSS VOLUME OF BUSINESS — Includes both cash and credit
transactions and, in cases where any person or persons is or are engaged as
a wholesale dealer or wholesale vendor, or retail dealer or retail vendor, and
who, in addition thereto or in connection with such business, also conducts
or operates any business, shop, place, office or establishment wherein,
whereat or whereby any article or thing is repaired, restored or altered or
at which any trade is pursued, any professional service is rendered, any
personal work or labor is performed, or any services are offered to, or
contracted for with the public or a limited number thereof, the gross volume
of business of such person or persons shall include the gross receipts
received for such services or transactions in addition to the gross receipts
from the sale or vending of goods, wares and merchandise.
LICENSE YEAR — The twelve-month period corresponding to the fiscal year
of the Borough of Etna, and the "current license year" shall mean the fiscal
year beginning the first Monday of July and ending December 31.
PERSON or PERSONS — Any individual, partnership, limited partnership,
association or corporation.
PLACE OF AMUSEMENT — Any place indoors or outdoors where the
general public or a limited or selected number thereof may, upon payment
of an established price, attend or engage in any amusement, entertainment,
exhibition, contest, recreation, including among other places, theaters,
opera houses, motion-picture houses, amusement parks, stadia, arenas,
baseball or football parks or fields, skating rinks, circus or carnival tents
or grounds, fairgrounds, bowling alleys, billiard or pool rooms, shuffleboard
rooms, nine- or ten-pin alleys, riding academies, golf courses, bathing and
swimming places, dance halls, tennis courts, archery, rifle or shotgun
ranges and other like places. The term does not include any exhibition,
amusement, performance or contest conducted by a nonprofit corporation
or association organized for religious, charitable or educational purposes.
§ 535-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-5
1:331
RETAIL DEALER or RETAIL DEALERS — Any person who is a dealer in or
vendor of goods, wares and merchandise, who is not a wholesale dealer or
vendor.
SERVICE or SERVICES — Includes all types and classifications of personal
or professional work, labor or trade offered by any person to the general
public or a limited number thereof, and pursued, performed, rendered
or contracted for by any person in or from places, offices, shops,
establishments or businesses, conducted by such persons in the limits of the
Borough of Etna.
The terms "person," "wholesale dealer," "wholesale vendor" and "retail
vendor" shall not include nonprofit corporations or associations organized
for religious, charitable or educational purposes, agencies of the
Government of the United States or of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
or any person vending or disposing of articles of his own growth,
production or manufacture for shipment or delivery from the place of
growth, production or manufacture thereof.
TAX COLLECTOR — The Tax Collector of the Borough of Etna.
TEMPORARY, SEASONAL OR ITINERANT BUSINESS — Any business that
is conducted at one location for less than 60 consecutive calendar days.
WHOLESALE DEALER or WHOLESALE VENDOR — Any person who sells
to dealers in or vendors of goods, wares or merchandise.
§ 535-6. Levy and collection of tax.
For the period beginning July 2 and ending December 31, the Council of
the Borough of Etna hereby imposes annual license fees and taxes in the
manner and at the rates hereinafter set forth.
§ 535-7. Licenses.
A. For the fiscal year beginning the first Monday of July in the year 1956,57
every person desiring to continue to engage in, or hereafter to begin to
engage in the business of wholesale or retail vendor or dealer in goods,
wares and merchandise, and any person conducting a restaurant or
other place where food, drink or refreshments are sold, or places of
amusement, and all persons offering services to the general public or a
limited number thereof in the Borough of Etna shall, on or before the
first Monday of July, or prior to commencing business in such license
year, procure a license for his place of business or, if more than one, for
each of his places of business in the Borough of Etna, from the Tax
Collector of the Borough, who shall issue the same upon the payment of
a fee of $2. Such license shall be conspicuously posted at the place of
business or each of the places of business of every such person at all
times.
57.Editor's Note: Originally Ord. No. 850 was reenacted annually, but after 1967, annual
reenactment was no longer necessary unless the rate of the tax changed.
§ 535-5 ETNA CODE § 535-7
1:332
§ 535-8. Imposition of tax.
Every person engaging in any of the following occupations or businesses in
the Borough of Etna shall pay a license tax for the period from July 2, 1956
to December 31, 195658 and at the rate set forth:
§ 535-9. Computation of volume of business.
B. Provided, however, that possession of such a license from the School
District of the Borough of Etna under a resolution of that body, imposing
a levy similar to the one herein imposed, shall be considered sufficient
compliance with this section, and no additional license or license fee
shall be necessary.
A. Wholesale vendors or dealers in goods, wares and merchandise, at the
rate of one mill on each dollar of the volume of the annual gross
business transacted by him.
B. Retail vendors or dealers in goods, wares and merchandise, all persons
engaged in conducting restaurants or other places where food, drink or
refreshments are sold, and all persons conducting places of
amusement, at the rate of 1 1/2 mills on each dollar of the volume of the
annual gross business transacted by him.
C. Wholesale and retail vendors or dealers in goods, wares and
merchandise, at the rate of one mill on each dollar of the volume of the
annual gross wholesale business transacted by him, and 1 1/2 mills on
each dollar of the volume of the annual gross retail business transacted
by him.
D. Any person who conducts or operates any business, shop, place, office
or establishment within the limits of the Borough of Etna, wherein,
whereat or whereby any article or thing is repaired, restored, or
altered; any personal trade is pursued; any professional service is
rendered; any personal work or labor is performed; or any services are
offered to, or contracted for with, the public or a limited number
thereof, shall pay a tax for such privilege at the rate of one mill on each
dollar of the annual gross business transacted by such persons.
A. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who has
commenced his business at least one year prior to the beginning of the
current license year shall compute his annual gross volume of business
upon the actual gross amount of business transacted by him during
such preceding license year.
B. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed, who
has commenced or who commences his business less than one full year
prior to the beginning of the current license year, shall compute his
annual gross volume of business for such license year upon the average
58.Editor's Note: See Note 23 of this chapter.
§ 535-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-9
1:333
§ 535-10. Returns.
monthly volume of business transacted by him during such period he
was in business prior to the beginning of the current license year,
multiplied by 12.
C. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed, who
commences his business subsequent to the beginning of any license
year, shall compute his annual gross volume of business for such license
year upon the gross volume of business transacted by him during the
first month of his engaging in business, multiplied by the number of
months he engages in business in such license year.
D. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who
engages in a business temporary, seasonal or itinerant by its nature
shall compute his annual gross volume of business upon the actual
gross amount of business transacted by him during such license year.
E. Provided that, when an article or thing is traded in or accepted by the
vendor or dealer in part payment of the article or thing sold, the
allowance for such property traded in shall not be deducted from the
selling price of the property sold; and
F. Provided, further, that when an article or thing is traded in or accepted
by the vendor or dealer in partial payment of any article or thing sold,
and said article or thing so traded in or accepted by the vendor or
dealer is subsequently sold, said vendor or dealer shall compute and
pay tax on that part of the selling price of such article or thing which is
in excess of the amount which was allowed for such article or thing
traded in or accepted in part payment.
A. Every return shall be made upon a form furnished by the Tax Collector.
Every person making a return shall certify the correctness thereof by
affidavit.
B. Every person subject to the tax hereby imposed who has commenced
his business at least one full year prior to the beginning of any license
year shall, on or before the 15th day of February, 1957,59 file with the
Tax Collector a return setting forth his name, his business and business
address, and such other information as may be necessary in arriving at
the actual gross amount of business transacted by him during the
preceding license year and the amount of the tax due.
C. Every person subject to the tax hereby imposed who has commenced
his business less than one full year prior to the beginning of any license
year shall on or before the fifteenth day of February following, file with
the Tax Collector a return setting forth his name, his business, business
address, and such other information as may be necessary in arriving at
59.Editor's Note: Originally Ord. No. 850 was reenacted annually, but after 1967, annual
reenactment was no longer necessary unless the rate of the tax changed.
§ 535-9 ETNA CODE § 535-10
1:334
§ 535-11. Payment.
At the time of filing the return, the person making the same shall pay the
amount of tax shown as due thereon to the Tax Collector.
§ 535-12. Powers and duties of Tax Collector.
the actual gross amount of business transacted by him during the first
month of business and the amount of the tax due.
D. Every person subject to the tax hereby imposed who commences
business subsequent to the beginning of any license year shall, within
40 days from the date of commencing such business, file a return with
the Tax Collector setting forth his name, his business, and business
address, and such information as may be necessary in arriving at the
actual gross amount of business transacted by him during his first
month of business and the amount of the tax due.
E. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who
engages in a business temporary, seasonal or itinerant by its nature
shall, within seven days from the day he completes such business, file a
return with the Tax Collector setting forth his name, his business, and
business address, and such information as may be necessary in arriving
at the actual gross amount of business transacted by him during such
period and the amount of the tax due.
A. It shall be the duty of the Tax Collector to collect and receive the taxes,
fines and penalties imposed by this article and transmit the same to the
Borough of Etna. It shall also be the duty of the Tax Collector to keep a
record showing the amount received by him from each person paying
the tax and the date of such receipt.
B. The Tax Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this article and is hereby empowered
to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations
relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement
of this article, including provisions for the reexamination and correction
and adjustment of returns and payment alleged or found to be
incorrect, or as to which an overpayment is claimed or found to have
occurred, in accordance with provisions set forth in § 535-14B. Any
person aggrieved by any decision of the Tax Collector shall have the
right to appeal to the Court of Common Pleas as in other cases
provided.
C. The Tax Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books, papers
and records of any taxpayer or supposed taxpayer in order to verify the
accuracy of any return made or, if no return was made, to ascertain the
tax due. Every such taxpayer or supposed taxpayer is hereby directed
and required to give to the Tax Collector the means, facilities and
opportunity for such examination and investigations as are hereby
authorized.
§ 535-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-13
1:335
§ 535-13. Suit on collection; penalties.
§ 535-14. Violations and penalties; refunds. [Amended 12-11-1989
by Ord. No. 1208]
§ 535-15. Saving clause.
A. The Borough Solicitor may sue for the recovery of taxes due and unpaid
under this article in the same manner as other Borough debts are
collected.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due in each year, interest at
the rate of 6% per annum on the amount of said tax, and an additional
penalty of 1% of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction
thereof during which the tax remains unpaid, shall be added and
collected. Where suit is brought for the recovery of any such tax, the
person liable therefor shall, in addition, be liable for the costs of
collection and the interest and penalties herein imposed.
A. Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on his return, or refuses
to permit inspection of the books, records or accounts of any business
in his custody or control when the right to make such inspection by the
Tax Collector is requested, and whoever fails or refuses to file a return
required by this article, and whoever fails or refuses to procure a
license required under this article or fails to keep his license
conspicuously posted at his place of business as required herein, shall
be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $600 and costs of prosecution and, in default of
payment of fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than
30 days.
B. Whoever shall have paid any tax in accordance with regulations and
requirements of this article, and the amount thereof paid shall be in
excess of the actual amount due as calculated from the next annual
return subsequently filed, may apply to the Tax Collector for the refund
of the amount of excess payment or may be permitted to credit such
excess payment against any tax due under this article for the following
license year.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
Council of the Borough of Etna to levy and collect the taxes hereby
imposed on any person, or any business, or any portion of any business
not within the taxing power of the Council of Etna under the
Constitution of the United States and the laws and Constitution of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax, or any portion thereof, imposed upon any person under the
provisions of this article shall be held by any court of competent
jurisdiction to be in violation of the Constitution of the United States or
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the decision of the court shall
§ 535-13 ETNA CODE § 535-15
1:336
not affect or impair the right to impose taxes, or the validity of the taxes
so imposed, upon other persons as herein provided.
C. If any sentence, clause or section or part of this article is for any reason
found unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality,
illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining
provisions, sentences, clauses or sections or parts of this article. It is
hereby declared as the intent of the Council of the Borough of Etna that
this article would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal
or invalid sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included
herein.
§ 535-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-15
1:337

ARTICLE III
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 4-11-1966 by Ord. No. 985; as amended through
11-20-2007 by Ord. No. 1313 (Ch. XXV, Part 4, of the 1974 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 535-16. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Local Services Tax."
§ 535-17. Definitions.
As used in this article, unless the context indicates clearly a different
meaning, the following words shall have the meanings set forth below:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Etna.
COMPENSATION — Salaries, wages, commissions, tips, bonuses, fees,
gross receipts, or any other income.
EMPLOYER — Any person, partnership, limited partnership,
unincorporated association, institution, trust, corporation, governmental
agency, or any other body engaged in business or situated in the Borough,
employing one or more employees engaged in any occupation, other than
domestic servants.
OCCUPATION — Includes any livelihood, job, trade, profession, business or
enterprise of any kind, including services, domestic or other, for which any
compensation is received.
SECRETARY — The Secretary of the Borough of Etna.
TAX — The tax imposed by this article.
TAXPAYER — Any natural person liable for tax levied by this article.
§ 535-18. Levy.
§ 535-19. Collection through employers.
A. For general revenue purposes, a tax is hereby levied upon the privilege
of engaging in an occupation within the Borough from the effective date
of this article. Each natural person who exercises such privilege for any
length of time during a year shall pay tax in the amount of $52 in
accordance with the provisions of this article.
B. In case of concurrent employment, the employer within the Borough of
Etna shall refrain from withholding the local services tax if the
employee provides a recent pay stub from a principal employer that
shows that the local services tax is being withheld.
C. The employer shall withhold the local services tax from the employer in
equal amounts from each pay period throughout the course of the year.
§ 535-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-19
1:339
§ 535-20. Direct payment by taxpayers.
Every taxpayer who is self-employed, or whose tax for any other reason is
not collected under § 535-19 of this article, shall file a return on a form
prescribed by the Secretary and shall pay the tax directly to the Treasurer.
Each such taxpayer who first becomes subject to the tax on or before March
31, shall file the return and pay the tax on or before April 30, and each
such taxpayer who first becomes subject to the tax after March 31, shall
file the return and pay the tax on or before July 31, October 31 and January
31, whichever of such payment dates first occurs at least 30 days after the
taxpayer first becomes subject to the tax.
A. Every employer not registered under the provisions of the Earned
Income Tax Ordinance of the Borough60 shall, within 15 days after the
effective date of this article or within 15 days after first becoming an
employer, register with the Secretary the employer's name, address and
such other information as the Secretary may require.
B. As to each taxpayer employed for any length of time on or before March
31, 1966, each employer shall deduct the tax from compensation
payable to the taxpayer, file a return on a form prescribed by the
Secretary and pay the Secretary the full amount of all such taxes on or
before April 30, 1966. Thereafter, as to each taxpayer for whom no prior
deduction has been made, who is employed for any length of time in any
of the three-month periods ending June 30, September 30 and
December 31, each employer shall deduct the tax from compensation
payable to the taxpayer, file a return on a form prescribed by the
Secretary and pay to the Secretary the full amount of all taxes deducted
for each such three-month period on or before July 31, October 31 and
January 31, respectively.
C. Any employer who discontinues business or ceases operation before
December 31, shall, within 15 days after discontinuing business or
ceasing operation, file the return hereinabove required and pay the tax
to the Secretary.
D. The failure of any employer to deduct the tax shall not relieve the
employee from the duty to file a return and pay the tax. Any employer
who fails to deduct the tax as required by this section, or who fails to
pay such tax to the Secretary, shall be liable for such tax in full, as
though the tax had originally been levied against such employer.
E. As to employees who present official receipts evidencing prior payment
of the tax either directly or by collection through other employers, the
employer shall not deduct the tax but shall maintain adequate records
concerning such employees.
60.Editor's Note: See Art. I of this chapter.
§ 535-19 ETNA CODE § 535-21
1:340
§ 535-21. Nonresident taxpayers.
Both resident and nonresident taxpayers shall, by virtue of engaging in an
occupation within the Borough, be subject to the tax and the provisions of
this article.
§ 535-22. Administration and enforcement.
The Secretary, on behalf of the Borough, shall collect and receive the taxes,
interest, fines and penalties imposed by this article and shall maintain
records showing the amounts received and the dates such amounts were
received. The Secretary shall prescribe and issue all forms necessary for the
administration of the tax and may adopt and enforce regulations relating
to any matter pertaining to the administration of this article, including, but
not limited to, requirements for collection through employers, requirements
for deductions, requirements for evidence and records, and provisions for
the examination and correction of returns. The Secretary and agents
designated by him may examine the records of any employer or supposed
employer or of any taxpayer or supposed taxpayer in order to ascertain the
tax due or verify the accuracy of any return. Every employer or supposed
employer and every taxpayer or supposed taxpayer shall give the Secretary
and any agent designated by him all means, facilities and opportunity for
the examinations hereby authorized.
§ 535-23. Collection.
The Secretary shall collect, by suit or otherwise, all taxes, interest, costs,
fines and penalties due under this article and unpaid. If for any reason,
any tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6% per year on the
amount of unpaid tax and an additional penalty of 1/2% of the amount
of unpaid tax for each month or fraction of month during which the tax
remains unpaid shall be added and collected. Whenever suit is brought for
the recovery of unpaid tax, the taxpayer shall, in addition, be liable for the
costs of collection as well as for interest and penalties. The Secretary may
accept payment under protest of the tax claimed by the Borough in any case
where any person disputes the Borough's claim for the tax. If a court of
competent jurisdiction thereafter decides that there has been overpayment
to the Secretary, the Secretary shall refund the amount of the overpayment
to the person who paid under protest.
§ 535-24. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article or of any regulation
adopted pursuant to this article shall for every such violation, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and costs
of prosecution and, in default of payment of fine and costs, to undergo
imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
§ 535-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-25
1:341
§ 535-25. Applicability and severability.
The tax shall not apply to any subject of tax or person not within the
taxing power of the Borough under the Constitution of the United States
and the laws and Constitution of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. If a
final decision of a court of competent jurisdiction holds any provision of this
article, or the application of any provision to any circumstances, to be illegal
or unconstitutional, the other provisions of this article or the application
of such provision to other circumstances shall remain in full force and
effect. The intention of Council is that the provisions of this article shall be
severable and that this article would have been adopted if any such illegal
or unconstitutional provisions had not been included.
§ 535-26. Exemption.
Any person whose total income from all sources is less than $12,000 per
annum shall be exempt from the provisions of this article and shall pay no
local services tax.
§ 535-25 ETNA CODE § 535-26
1:342
ARTICLE IV
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 4-19-1988 by Ord. No. 119961 (Ch. XXV, Part 5, of the 1974
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 535-27. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of the
Borough of Etna."
§ 535-28. Imposition of tax; legal authority.
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or interest in real estate situated within the
Borough of Etna, regardless of where the documents making the transfer
are made, executed or delivered, or where the actual settlements on such
transfer took place as authorized by Article XI-D, Local Real Estate Transfer
Tax, 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq.
§ 535-29. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership, or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust,
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of this
commonwealth, the United States, or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title to
real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor; land contracts whereby the legal title does not
pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has
been paid or any cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding 30 years; or instruments which solely grant,
vest or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also include
a declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording under
§ 535-34 of this article.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of its
assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each
class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The "business of agriculture" shall not be deemed to include:
61.Editor's Note: This ordinance repealed Ord. No. 1019.
§ 535-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-29
1:343
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendants of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing, and the estate of any of the
foregoing. Individuals related by the half-blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they were related by the whole-blood.
PERSON — Every natural person, association or corporation. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or
both, the term "person," as applied to associations, shall include the
responsible members or general partners thereof and, as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or
more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and
which:
Recreational activities, such as, but not limited to, hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing;
A.
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities;
B.
C. Fur farming;
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations; or
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
All lands, tenements or hereditaments within this Borough, including
without limitation buildings, structures, fixtures, mines, minerals, oil,
gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower boundaries, trees,
and other improvements, immovables or interests which by custom,
usage or law pass with a conveyance of land, but excluding permanently
attached machinery and equipment in an industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or
disposition of real estate; or
A.
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets
which are freely transferable and actively traded on an established
market.
B.
§ 535-29 ETNA CODE § 535-29
1:344
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting, or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specified number
of years, including without limitation an estate in fee simple, life estate
or perpetual leasehold; or
A.
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including without limitation a leasehold interest or
possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term of
30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity.
B.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents, or a
commensurate part thereof, where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against other real
estate, provided that, where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the "value" thereof shall be determined from the price
set forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale;
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, any exchange of properties, or the real estate
of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local
real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio factor developed
by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue for Pennsylvania realty
transfer tax base calculations;
B.
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate, the value of
which is not determinable under Subsection A or B, the actual monetary
worth of such interest; or
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor of a related
D.
§ 535-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-29
1:345
§ 535-30. Imposition of tax; interest added to unpaid tax.
§ 535-31. Exempt parties.
The United States, the commonwealth, or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax
imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
§ 535-32. Excluded transactions.
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.
A. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording shall be
subject to pay for, in respect to the transaction or any part thereof, a tax
at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate represented by such
document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the
document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of
such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
B. The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the recorder, whereon the date
of the payment of the tax, amount of the tax and the signature of the
collecting agent shall be set forth.
C. It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of the tax imposed
herein on a person or transfer shall not exceed the limitations
prescribed in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965,
P.L. 1257, 53 P. S. § 6901 et seq.,62 so that if any other political
subdivision shall impose or hereafter shall impose such tax on the same
person or transfer then the tax levied by the Borough under the
authority of that Act shall, during the time such duplication of the tax
exists, except as hereinafter otherwise provided, be 1/2 of the rate, and
such 1/2 rate shall become effective without any action on the part of
the Borough; provided, however, that the Borough and any other
political subdivision which imposes such tax on the same person or
transfer may agree that, instead of limiting their respective rates to 1/2
of the rate herein provided, they will impose respectively different
rates, the total of which shall not exceed the maximum rate permitted
under "The Local Tax Enabling Act."
D. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate in
effect at the time the tax is due shall be added and collected.
A. The tax imposed by § 535-31 shall not be imposed upon:
62.Editor's Note: See now 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 535-29 ETNA CODE § 535-32
1:346
(1) A transfer to the commonwealth, or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions by gift, dedication or deed in lieu
of condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings or a reconveyance by the condemning
body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the time
of condemnation, which reconveyance may include property line
adjustments, provided said reconveyance is made within one year
from the date of condemnation.
(2) A document which the Borough is prohibited from taxing under the
Constitution or statutes of the United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, township, school
district or county of a tax delinquent property at sheriff sale or tax
claim bureau sale.
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend
or limit existing record legal title or interest.
(5) A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in
value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
(6) A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided the property in interest therein subject to such transfer
was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife prior to
the granting of the final decree in divorce, between parent and
child or the spouse of such child, between brother or sister or
spouse of a brother or sister and brother or sister or the spouse of a
brother or sister, and between a grandparent and grandchild or the
spouse of such grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by the
grantee within one year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor
were making such transfer.
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust, where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are
contingent or specifically named. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a copy of
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries.
§ 535-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-32
1:347
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
(11) A transfer: (i) for no or nominal actual consideration between
principal and agent or straw party; or (ii) from or to an agent or
straw party where, if the agent or straw party were his principal, no
tax would be imposed under this article. Where the document by
which title is acquired by a grantee or statement of value fails to set
forth that the property was acquired by the grantee from, or for the
benefit of, his principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the
property is the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if
the grantee claims an exemption from taxation under this clause.
(12) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the department reasonably determines that the
primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is
avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.
(13) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of
the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more than two years.
(14) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt of the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
(15) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if: (i) the
grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary purpose
of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding, processing,
publishing, research and development, transportation, energy
conversion, energy production, pollution control, warehousing or
agriculture; and (ii) the agency or authority has the full ownership
interest in the real estate transferred.
(16) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale, in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
(17) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
§ 535-32 ETNA CODE § 535-32
1:348
§ 535-33. Documents relating to associations or corporations and
members, partners, stockholders and shareholders thereof.
Except as otherwise provided in § 535-32 of this article, documents which
make, confirm or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate
between associations or corporations and the members, partners,
shareholders, stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purpose of
this article, corporations and associations are entities separate from their
members, partners, stockholders or shareholders.
§ 535-34. Acquired companies.
is not being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial
purposes.
(18) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax-exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954
[68A Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)] and which has as its primary
purpose preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic,
agricultural or open space opportunities.
(19) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
(20) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
(21) A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
(22) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of
Value may be submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural
gas or minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an explanation
of the reason such document is not subject to tax under this article.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change
does not affect the continuity of the company and, of itself or together
with prior changes, has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly,
90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a
period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of the issuance or transfer of stock or because of the
acquisition or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of
§ 535-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-34
1:349
§ 535-35. Credits against tax.
§ 535-36. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
§ 535-37. Priority of tax out of proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid and have priority out of the
proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
agriculture, it fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm
corporation under this article.
C. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the recorder of each county in
which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and
recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Declaration of Acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker, which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property, which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given
the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate, which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount of tax due, no refund or carryover credit shall be
allowed.
§ 535-34 ETNA CODE § 535-37
1:350
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made except the state realty transfer tax, and the sheriff or other
officer conducting said sale shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the first
monies paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale are
insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be
liable for the remaining tax.
§ 535-38. Duties of Recorder of Deeds.
§ 535-39. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for
recording shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof, or shall be accompanied by a statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction,
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value
thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under
this article. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of
Value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt
from taxation based on family relationship. Other documents presented
for the affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy of
the document and statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction, showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this article.
A. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by Act of July 7, 1983 (P.L.
40, No. 21), the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for the
local realty transfer tax, including any amount payable to the Borough
based on a redetermination of the amount of tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax,
without compensation from the Borough.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the Recorder shall not
accept for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
C. On or before the 10th of each month, the Recorder shall pay over to the
Borough all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2% for use of the
county, together with a report containing the information as is required
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting collections of the
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The 2% commission shall be paid to
the county.
D. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Recorder shall re-record the deed
or record the additional realty transfer tax form only when both the
state and local amounts and a re-recording or recording fee have been
tendered.
§ 535-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-40
1:351
§ 535-40. Effect of underpayment of tax due to fraud; effect of
failure to record declaration.
§ 535-41. Lien of tax.
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements or hereditaments, or any interest therein, lying, being situated,
wholly or in part, within the boundaries of the Borough, which lands,
tenements, hereditaments or interest therein are described in or conveyed
by or transferred by the deed which is the subject of the tax imposed,
assessed and levied by this article, said lien to begin at the time when the
tax under this article is due and payable, and continue until discharge by
payment or in accordance with the law, and the Solicitor is authorized to file
a municipal or tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County,
in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Claims and Liens Act of
1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., its supplements and amendments.
§ 535-42. Recovery of tax, interest and penalties.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character are
recovered.
§ 535-43. Powers and duties of Tax Collector; state regulations
incorporated by reference.
The Tax Collector of the Borough is charged with enforcement and
collection of this tax and is empowered to promulgate and enforce
reasonable regulations for enforcement and collection of the tax. The
regulations which have been promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department
of Revenue under 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq., are incorporated into and made
a part of this article.
§ 535-44. Severability.
Should any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this article be
declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the article in its entirety or of any part thereof other
than that declared to be invalid.
A. If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this article is due to
fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
B. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this article
on the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is
due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the
amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an
additional 5% for each additional month or fraction thereof during
which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
§ 535-40 ETNA CODE § 535-44
1:352
ARTICLE V
Senior Citizens Tax Relief
[Adopted 4-17-2001 by Ord. No. 1282]
§ 535-45. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACT 77 — The Act of December 22, 1993, Public Law 529, No. 77, codified
as the Allegheny County Regional Asset District Law, 16 P.S. § 6101-B et seq.
ALLEGHENY REGIONAL ASSET DISTRICT LAW — See the definition of
"Act 77" above.
ASSESSMENT — The fair market value of property as determined by the
Board of Property Assessment, Appeals and Review of Allegheny County.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Etna.
COUNCIL — Council of the Borough of Etna.
DEPARTMENT OF PROPERTY ASSESSMENT — The Department of
Property Assessment, Appeals, Review and Registry of Allegheny County.
ELIGIBLE TAXPAYER — A longtime owner/occupant of a principal residence
in the Borough of Etna, who is: (1) a single person aged 60 or older during
a calendar year in which county real property taxes are due and assessed;
or (2) married persons if either spouse is 60 or older during a calendar year
in which the Borough of Etna real property taxes are due and assessed.
HOUSEHOLD INCOME — All income received by an eligible taxpayer while
residing in his or her principal residence during a calendar year.
INCOME — All income from whatever source derived, including, but not
limited to, salaries, wages, bonuses, commissions, income from selfemployment,
alimony, support money, cash public assistance and relief, the
gross amount of any pensions or annuities, including railroad retirement
benefits, all benefits received under the Federal Social Security Act (except
medicare benefits), all benefits received under state unemployment
insurance laws and veterans' disability payments, all interest received from
the federal or any state government or any instrumentality or political
subdivision hereof, realized capital gains, rentals, workers' compensation
and the gross amount of loss-of-time insurance benefits, life insurance
benefits and proceeds (except the first $5,000 of the total of death benefit
payments), and gifts of cash or property (other than transfers by gift
between members of a household) in excess of a total value of $300,
but shall not include surplus food or other relief in kind supplied by a
governmental agency or property tax or rent rebate or inflation dividend.
LONGTIME OWNER/OCCUPANT — Any person who, for at least 10
continuous years, has owned or has occupied the same dwelling place as
a principal residence and domicile, or any person who, for at least 10
years, has owned and occupied the same dwelling as a principal residence
§ 535-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-45
1:353
and domicile, if that person received assistance in the acquisition of the
property as part of a government or nonprofit housing program.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Etna.
PERSON — A natural person.
PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE — The dwelling place of a person, including the
principal house and lot and such lots as are used in connection therewith
which contribute to its enjoyment, comfort and convenience; or a building
with a maximum of one commercial establishment and a maximum of three
residential units, of which one residential unit must be a principal residence
of the longtime owner/occupant.
SENIOR CITIZENS REBATE AND ASSISTANCE ACT — The Act of March
11, 1971, Public Law 104 No. 3, as amended, codified at Pa. Stat. Ann. tit.
72, § 4751-1 et seq.63
§ 535-46. Limitation of assessment for eligible taxpayers.
All eligible taxpayers in the Borough of Etna who are longtime owner/
occupants shall be entitled to have a 10% reduction in the assessment
on their principal residence if the eligible taxpayer meets the household
income limits for qualification for any amount of property tax rebate under
the Senior Citizens Rebate and Assistance Act.
§ 535-47. Participation in limitation of tax assessment program.
Any person paying property taxes in the Borough of Etna may apply to
participate in the assessment limitation program authorized under this
article. In order to be eligible to participate in the program, the person must
meet the following conditions:
§ 535-48. Rules and regulations.
The Department of Property Assessment and the Borough of Etna's
Manager/Secretary shall have the authority to issue rules and regulations
with respect to the administration of the limitations of the tax assessment
A. The person must be a single person aged 60 or older or be married
persons with either spouse being 60 years of age or older;
B. The person must be a longtime owner/occupant;
C. The property owned by the person must be the principal residence and
domicile of the resident; and
D. The person's household income must qualify him or her to receive any
amount of property tax rebate under the Senior Citizens Rebate and
Assistance Act.
63.The former Senior Citizens Property Tax Assistance Act, 72 P.S. §§ 4751-1 through
4751-12, was repealed 6-27-2006 by P.L. 1873, No. 1. See now the Senior Citizens Property
Tax and Rent Rebate Assistance Act, 53 P.S. § 6926.1301 et seq.
§ 535-45 ETNA CODE § 535-48
1:354
program established under this article. Such rules and regulations shall
include, but not be limited to, reasonable proof of household income, proof
of residence, proof of qualification for or receipt of a property tax rebate
under the Senior Citizens Rebate and Assistance Act ,and any other
reasonable requirements and conditions as may be necessary to operate the
tax assessment limitation program.
§ 535-49. Effective date.
This article shall enter into effect on April 17, 2001.
§ 535-50. Repealer.
Any and all previous ordinances which are inconsistent with the terms and
provisions of this article are hereby repealed.
§ 535-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-50
1:355

ARTICLE VI
Taxpayers' Bill of Rights
[Adopted 12-15-1998 by Ord. No. 1260; amended 2-15-2000 by Ord.
No. 1273; 12-19-2000 by Ord. No. 1279]
§ 535-51. Adoption of provisions.
The Borough of Etna hereby generally adopts the provisions of the Local
Taxpayers Bill of Rights and hereby mandates that Pennsylvania Municipal
Service Co. shall take all appropriate action to be in compliance with the
provisions of the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights.
§ 535-52. Form of disclosure statement.
The Council for the Borough of Etna does hereby adopt the form of
disclosure statement of the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights attached hereto
and made part hereof, as amended from time to time, in order to be in
compliance with applicable law, providing an explanation of taxpayer rights
and the obligations of the Borough of Etna. 64
§ 535-53. Administrative appeals procedure.
The Council of the Borough of Etna hereby adopts and establishes the
Act 50 Administrative Appeal Procedures, attached hereto and made a
part hereof, as amended from time to time in order to be in compliance
with applicable law and by resolution of Council, providing for the right
of taxpayers to receive determinations on petitions pertaining to the
assessment, determination or refund of eligible taxes.65
§ 535-54. Taxpayer rights coordinator.
The Council of the Borough of Etna hereby appoints and designates the
Pennsylvania Municipal Service Company as the taxpayer rights
coordinator to act as a liaison between the taxpayer and the local taxing
authority in any disputes or with regards to any complaints.
64.Editor's Note: The Disclosure Statement is an attachment to this chapter.
65.Editor's Note: The Administrative Appeals Procedure is on file in the Borough office.
§ 535-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-54
1:357

ARTICLE VII
Attorneys' Costs for Collection
[Adopted 12-19-2000 by Ord. No. 1277]
§ 535-55. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Municipal Claim Collection Ordinance."
§ 535-56. Delinquent tax or claim charges.
Hereinafter, for every delinquent claim, charge, tax, assessment, levy or
obligation owed to the Borough of Etna there shall be added to such
claim, charge, tax, assessment, levy or obligation such attorneys' fees,
charges, and expenses incurred in the collection process subsequent to
proper notification to taxpayers of the intent to impose attorneys' fees
on delinquent obligations. Such additional charges shall be collected in
addition to such interest and penalties as are allowed by law. They shall
further be collected in the same manner and with the full authority as other
municipal claims of any nature and shall be deemed to be a municipal claim
and collectable and lienable as such.
§ 535-57. Fee schedule
Such fees shall be reasonable and the same are hereby established in a
fee rate as attached hereto and made a part hereof as Schedule "A."66 Said
schedule of fees is hereby deemed to be reasonable, fair and necessary in
order to allow the Borough to collect such sums due it. This schedule may
be adjusted by amendment by the Borough.
§ 535-58. Added fees.
Any person or entity empowered to collect sums on behalf of the Borough
is directed to add such fees as are incurred to the extent allowed and
set forth on Schedule "A." Such sums collected pursuant to this article
shall be in addition to any tax, penalty, interest, costs or fees already part
of the delinquent account or assessment. The sums collected pursuant to
this article shall be remitted to the municipal taxing authority in the same
manner as the underlying tax obligation.
§ 535-59. Attorneys' fees to be added; notice of delinquency.
Attorneys' fees incurred to the extent set forth on Schedule "A" shall be
added to all unpaid municipal claims of any nature arising or imposed
subsequent to December 19, 2000, or which become delinquent or are
redetermined to be delinquent subsequent to December 19, 2000. Prior
to the time when such fees are added to any underlying claim, the Tax
Collector shall first give the taxpayer such notice as required by law. The
Tax Collector or other collector shall so notify the taxpayer by sending such
66.Editor's Note: Said schedule of fees is on file in the Borough's office.
§ 535-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-59
1:359
notice to the taxpayer's last known address by mailing notices in the manner
prescribed by the Act of the Pennsylvania General Assembly, known as Act
1 of 1996.67
§ 535-60. When effective.
This article shall become effective this 19th day of December, 2000.
§ 535-61. Severability.
Any ordinance in conflict with this article shall be deemed to have been
repealed to the extent of the conflict. If any portion of this article is deemed
to be illegal or unconstitutional, then it is the intent of Council that it would
have enacted the balance of this article irrespective of said invalid portion.
67.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act.
§ 535-59 ETNA CODE § 535-61
1:360
ARTICLE VIII
Delinquent Accounts
[Adopted 12-19-2000 by Ord. No. 1278]
§ 535-62. Additional charges when suit is brought.
From and after enactment of this article, when suit is brought against any
delinquent party, to each delinquent earned income tax assessment, levy or
obligation owed to the Borough, there shall be added such attorneys' fees,
charges, and expenses incurred in the delinquent collection process. Such
additional charges shall be collected in addition to all interest and penalties
as are allowed by law.
§ 535-63. Fees schedule.
Such fees shall be reasonable, and the same are hereby established in a fee
rate schedule as attached herein and made a part hereof as Schedule "A."
Said schedule of fees is hereby deemed to be reasonable, fair and necessary
in order to allow the Borough to collect such sum due. This schedule may
be adjusted by amendment by the Borough of Etna.68
§ 535-64. Added fees.
Any person or entity empowered to collect sums on behalf of the Borough
is directed to add such fees as are incurred to the extent allowed as set
forth in Schedule "A." Such sums collected pursuant to this article shall
be in addition to any tax penalty, interest or other costs already part of
the delinquent account or assessment. The sums collected pursuant to this
article shall be remitted to the taxing authority in the same manner as the
underlying tax obligation.
§ 535-65. When effective.
This article shall become effective this 19th day of December, 2000.
§ 535-66. Repealer; severability.
Any ordinance in conflict with this article shall be deemed to have been
repealed to the extent of that conflict. If any portion of this article is deemed
to be illegal or unconstitutional, then it is the intent of the Borough of Etna
that it would have enacted the balance of this article irrespective of said
invalid portion.
68.Editor's Note: Said schedule of fees is on file in the Borough's office.
§ 535-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-66
1:361

ARTICLE IX
Collection of Delinquent Taxes from Tenants
[Adopted 1-17-2012 by Ord. No. 133769]
§ 535-67. Citations and civil litigation authorized.
The Borough Tax Collector or the Delinquent Tax Collector, as the case may
be, is hereby authorized to utilize and enforce the provisions of the Act of
May 25, 1945, P.L. 1050, § 19, 72 P.S. § 5511.19. If any tenant fails to pay
rent to the Tax Collector following service of a notice of distraint, the Tax
Collector or other Borough officials are authorized to issue a citation and/
or institute civil litigation against such tenant for the tenant's failure to
comply with the distraint. Such civil litigation and/or citation is authorized
by the Tax Collector and may be prosecuted in the name of the Borough and
initiated by any Borough official.
§ 535-68. Civil
Any tenant who fails to comply with the distraint notice shall be subject to
a civil penalty for such refusal in the amount of $500 for each month such
tenant fails to pay commencing on the first day of each month following
service of the distraint notice. Such tenant shall also be liable for court costs
and reasonable costs and fees incurred by the Borough or Tax Collector
in pursuing a remedy against a noncomplying tenant. Any net proceeds
received by the Tax Collector or Borough shall be applied to the outstanding
tax bill of the landowner.
§ 535-69. Severability.
If any portion of this article is found by a court of competent jurisdiction
to be illegal or unconstitutional, then it is deemed to be the intent of
Borough Council that the balance of this article would have been enacted
irrespective of said invalid portion.
§ 535-70. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately.
69.Editor's Note: Original Section 1 of this ordinance provided that the "Whereas" clauses
are incorporated in the ordinance. The complete ordinance, including whereas clauses, is
on file in the Borough's office.
§ 535-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-70
1:363

ARTICLE X
Volunteer Service Credit
[Adopted 11-21-2017 by Ord. No. 1372]
§ 535-71. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings given to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise.
ACTIVE VOLUNTEER — An individual who volunteers at a volunteer fire
company or nonprofit emergency medical services agency and has satisfied
the following conditions:
APPLICATION — A form provided by the Borough of Etna to a volunteer
applying for certification under the Volunteer Service Credit Program.
AUTHORIZED EARNED INCOME TAX COLLECTOR — Keystone Collections
Group\\ or the current regional earned income tax collector.
COMMISSIONER — The State Fire Commissioner of the Commonwealth.
EARNED INCOME TAX — A tax on earned income and net profits levied
under Chapter 3 of the act of December 31, 1965 (P.L. 1257, No. 511),
known as the Local Tax Enabling Act.70
ELIGIBILITY PERIOD — The timeframe when volunteers may earn credit
under the Volunteer Service Credit Program.
EMERGENCY RESPONDER — A volunteer who responds to an emergency
call with the volunteer fire company listed under § 535-72C or a volunteer
in a nonprofit emergency medical services agency listed under § 535-72C.
EMERGENCY RESPONSE CALL — Any emergency call to which a volunteer
responds, including travel directly from and to a volunteer's home, place
of business or other place where he/she shall have been when the call was
received.
VOLUNTEER — A member of a volunteer fire company or a volunteer
member of a nonprofit emergency medical services agency.
§ 535-72. Volunteer Service Credit Program.
Completes the activities of the Volunteer Service Credit Program set
forth in § 535-72;
A.
Receives certification as an active volunteer by the chief or designee
of a volunteer fire company or the supervisor of a nonprofit emergency
medical services agency; and
B.
Receives approval as an active volunteer by Council for the Borough of
Etna.
C.
70.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 535-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-72
1:365
A. Establishment. The Borough of Etna hereby establishes a Volunteer
Service Credit Program. The goal of the program is to encourage
membership and service in the community's volunteer fire company.
B. Program criteria. The Council shall establish, by resolution, the criteria
that must be met during the eligibility period to qualify for credits
under the program based on the following:
(1) The number of emergency response calls to which a volunteer
responds.
(2) The level of training and participation in formal training and drills
for a volunteer.
(3) The total amount of time expended by a volunteer on administrative
and other support services, including but not limited to:
(a) Fund-raising.
(b) Providing facility or equipment maintenance.
(c) Financial bookkeeping.
(4) The involvement in other events or projects that aid the financial
viability, emergency response or operational readiness of a
volunteer fire company.
(5) The total number of years the volunteer has served.
C. Eligible entities. The Volunteer Service Credit Program is available to
volunteer fire department personnel and volunteers of nonprofit
emergency medical service agencies residing within any member
municipality of the NHCOG and having a written mutual aid agreement
with:
(1) Etna Volunteer Fire Department, 437 Butler Street, Pittsburgh, PA
15223;
(2) Shaler Emergency Medical Services, 339 Wetzel Road, Glenshaw,
PA 15116.
Who have been certified by his/her respective chief, supervisor, or
designee, and approved by the pertinent municipality, as meeting
the individual service qualifications of the applicable Act 172
ordinance.71
D. Eligibility period. A volunteer must meet the minimum criteria, set by
resolution under this section, during the eligibility period set forth in
this section to qualify for the tax credits authorized under § 535-73.
71.Editor's Note: Reference to Act of Nov. 21, 2016, P.L. 1509, No. 172 (effective January 1,
2017), Real Estate Tax Reduction for Volunteers.
§ 535-72 ETNA CODE § 535-72
1:366
(1) For the Tax Year 2017, the eligibility period under the Volunteer
Service Credit Program shall run from January 20, 2017 until
October 31, 2017.
(2) For the Tax Year 2018, and each tax year thereafter, the eligibility
period shall run from the prior November 1st until October 31st of
the year for which the tax credit will apply.
E. Recordkeeping. The chief of each volunteer fire company or the
supervisor of the nonprofit emergency medical service agency listed
under § 535-72C shall keep specific records of each volunteer's
activities in a service log to establish credits under the Volunteer
Service Credit Program. Service logs shall be subject to audit/review
by:
(1) The Borough of Etna Manager or the Manager's designee;
(2) The State Fire Commissioner; and
(3) The State Auditor General.
F. Volunteer application. On or before the first Monday in November of
each year, volunteers who have met the minimum criteria of the
Volunteer Service Credit Program shall sign and submit an application
for certification provided by the Borough of Etna to their chief or
supervisor. The chief or supervisor shall sign the application if the
volunteer has met the minimum criteria of the Volunteer Service Credit
Program during the eligibility period and shall forward said application
to the Borough Manager for the Borough of Etna, together with the
notarized list required by § 535-72G, within the timeframe specified
herein.
G. Notarized list. On or before November 15 of each year, the chief or
supervisor shall mail or hand deliver to the Borough Manager for
Borough of Etna a notarized eligibility list of all volunteers that have
met the minimum criteria for the Volunteer Service Credit Program and
applied for certification pursuant to § 535-72F. The chief or supervisor
shall post the notarized eligibility list in an accessible area of the
volunteer agency's facilities.
H. Municipal review. The Borough Manager for the Borough of Etna shall
review the applications for credit under the Volunteer Service Credit
Program and shall cross reference them with the notarized eligibility
list. At the first regular meeting in December of each year, the Council
for the Borough of Etna shall approve or disapprove the volunteers that
appear on the notarized list submitted by the chief or supervisor
pursuant to § 535-72F. All applicants approved by the Council for the
Borough of Etna shall be issued a tax credit certificate by the Borough
Manager for the Borough of Etna by no later than December 15 of each
year.
§ 535-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-72
1:367
§ 535-73. Earned income tax credit.
I. Appeal of denial of certification. A volunteer who is denied certification
as an active volunteer shall have the right to request a hearing before
Council within 30 days of the denial pursuant to the provisions of 2
Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 5, Subchapter B (relating to practice and procedure
of local agencies), and 2 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 7, Subchapter B (relating to
judicial review of local agency action), also known as the "Local Agency
Law."72
J. Official tax credit register. The Borough of Etna shall keep an official tax
credit register of all active volunteers that were issued tax credit
certificates. No later than December 31 of each year, the Borough
Manager for the Borough of Etna shall issue updates, as needed, of the
official tax credit register to the following:
(1) The Council for the Borough of Etna;
(2) Chief of the volunteer fire company;
(3) Supervisor of the nonprofit emergency medical services agency;
(4) Authorized earned income tax collector.
K. Injured volunteers.
(1) An emergency responder that is injured during an emergency
response call may be eligible for future tax credits. The injury must
have occurred while responding to, participating in, or returning
from an emergency response call with one of the entities listed
under § 535-72C.
(2) An injured emergency responder shall provide documentation from
a licensed physician with the application required under § 535-72F,
stating that their injury prevents them from performing duties to
qualify as an active volunteer. In such a case, the injured
emergency responder shall be deemed an active volunteer for that
tax year.
(3) An injured emergency responder shall annually submit the
application required under § 535-72F, along with updated
documentation from a licensed physician, stating that the injury
still exists and prevents them from qualifying as an active
volunteer. The injured emergency responder shall again be deemed
an active volunteer for that tax year. An injured emergency
responder shall only be deemed an active volunteer for a maximum
of five consecutive tax years.
A. Tax credit. Each active volunteer who has been certified under the
Borough of Etna Volunteer Service Credit Program shall be eligible to
72.Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 551 et seq. and 751 et seq.
§ 535-72 ETNA CODE § 535-73
1:368
§ 535-74. Appeals.
§ 535-75. Penalties for false reporting.
receive a tax credit of up to $300 of the earned income tax levied by the
Borough of Etna. When an active volunteer's earned income tax liability
is less than the amount of the tax credit, the tax credit shall equal the
individual's earned income tax liability.
B. Claim. An active volunteer with a tax credit certificate may claim a tax
credit on his (or her) Borough of Etna earned income tax liability when
filing a final return for the preceding calendar year with the authorized
earned income tax collector.
C. Rejection of tax credit claim.
(1) The tax officer shall reject a claim for a tax credit if the taxpayer is
not on the official tax credit register issued by the Borough
Manager for Borough of Etna.
(2) If the tax officer rejects the claim, the taxpayer shall be notified in
writing of the decision. The notice shall include the reasons for the
rejection and provide the method of appealing the decision
pursuant to § 535-74.
(3) Taxpayers shall have 30 days to appeal the decision of the tax
officer pursuant to § 535-74.
A. Earned income tax credit appeals.
(1) Any taxpayer aggrieved by a decision under § 535-73 shall have a
right to (appeal) said decision.
(2) A taxpayer shall have 30 days to appeal a decision or rejection of
claim.
(3) All appeals of decisions under § 535-73 shall follow the provisions
of the Act of May 5, 1998, P.L. 301, No. 50, known as the Local
Taxpayers Bill of Rights and the procedures covered by Ord. No.
1260 of 1998 of the Borough of Etna.73
A. Any individual who knowingly makes or conspires to make a false
report in an application for certification under this article commits a
misdemeanor of the first degree punishable by a fine of $2,500.
B. Any individual who knowingly provides or conspires to provide false
information that is used to compile a service log under this article
commits a misdemeanor of the first degree punishable by a fine of
$2,500.
73.Editor's Note: See Art. VI of this chapter.
§ 535-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-76
1:369
§ 535-76. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the terms of this article
are repealed and rescinded to the extent of such conflict.
§ 535-77. Severability.
In the event that any provision, section, sentence, clause or part of this
article is held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect or impair any
remaining provision, section, sentence, clause or part of the article, it being
the intent of the Council that such remainder shall remain in full force and
effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this article are hereby declared
to be severable.
§ 535-78. Effective date.
This article shall be effective November 21, 2017.
§ 535-79. Retroactive effect.
Once effective, this article shall apply retroactively to January 20, 2017.
§ 535-76 ETNA CODE § 535-79
1:370
Chapter 552
VACANT BUILDINGS
§ 552-1. Repealer.
Ordinance No. 1349 of 2013 is repealed in its entirety.
§ 552-2. Applicability and scope.
The requirements of this chapter shall be applicable to every property in
the C-1 Zoning District in the Borough of Etna and to each owner of any
property in the C-1 Zoning District that has a vacant "ground floor" space,
as defined by this chapter.
§ 552-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings indicated unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CELLAR — A room typically used for storage and mechanical equipment
that is located in the basement of a building and is not used for commercial
or residential purposes.
GROUND FLOOR — Any floor of a building with direct access to grade, that
is located less than one story above or less than one story below grade,
provided that no portion of a floor that constitutes a cellar (as defined in
this article) shall constitute a ground floor.
PROPERTY — Improved real estate, including buildings or structures.
VACANT — A building or structure space shall be deemed to be vacant if no
person or persons currently conduct a lawfully licensed use in said space.
§ 552-4. Vacant property monitoring fee.
A. During each calendar year, the Borough will identify ground-floor
spaces in the C-1 Zoning District that are deemed "vacant," as defined
by this chapter.
B. The vacancy "start date" shall be the date of mailing of a written
notification by the Borough that the subject property's ground-floor
space has been identified as vacant. On the 45th day after the start
date, should said ground-floor space remain vacant, as defined in this
chapter, the owner of the building in which said vacant space is present
shall be required to pay a vacant property monitoring fee, to be
established by resolution of the Borough of Etna. (Currently, $500.)
C. There shall be no proration of the monitoring fee.
D. The monitoring fee shall not be imposed on vacant properties, as
defined in this chapter, that are the subject of an active building permit
§ 535-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 552-4
1:371
§ 552-5. Vacant property monitoring fee waiver.
§ 552-6. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence or clause of this chapter is held, for any
reason, to be invalid, such decision or decisions shall not affect the validity
of the remaining portions of this chapter.
Chapter 560
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
for repair or rehabilitation, and the owner is progressing diligently to
complete said repair or rehabilitation.
A. The monitoring fee, as required herein, shall be waived in full by the
Borough of Etna, if, by the 45th day after written notification as
described in § 552-4 herein, all of the following conditions are present:
(1) Street-level exterior building components in which said groundfloor
vacancy is identified are clean (including glass inside and out).
A minimum of 70% window transparency must be maintained.
(2) The property is not in violation of any provision of the Etna
Borough's Property Maintenance Code (specifically, all applicable
International Property Maintenance Code provisions), or any other
Borough ordinance.
(3) A professionally produced legal sign is prominently displayed
promoting the vacant space for sale and/or for lease, providing (at
least) a contact phone number for information and showings. Said
sign must be in compliance with applicable sign ordinance(s), and
at minimum its font size must be reasonably readable from the
adjacent roadway. Handwritten signs are not permitted relative to
this requirement.
(4) All local real estate taxes are paid in full.
B. The monitoring fee waiver may be revoked by the Borough if any of the
above-required conditions are not in place continuously until the vacant
condition no longer exists.
§ 552-4 ETNA CODE § 552-6
1:372
ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 560-1. Definitions and interpretation.74
§ 560-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted as
ordinances or as parts of ordinances or as amendments to ordinances of the
Borough of Etna, except where the law specifically authorizes less formal
action.
§ 560-3. Temporary and emergency regulations.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in The Vehicle Code (the Act of June 17, 1976, P.L. 162,
No. 81), as amended, except that, in this chapter, the word "street" may
be used interchangeably with the word "highway," and shall have the
same meaning as the word "highway" as defined in The Vehicle Code.75
B. The term "legal holiday," as used in this chapter, shall mean and
include: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
C. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
A. The Mayor shall have the following powers to regulate traffic and
parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations; and
(2) In the case of emergency public works or public events of limited
scope or duration, to restrict or prohibit traffic and/or parking in
limited areas for periods of not more than 72 hours.
B. These temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Mayor and the Police Department in the same manner as permanent
regulations. Any person who drives or parks a vehicle in violation of any
such regulation shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction, shall
be liable to the penalty set out in the law or elsewhere in this chapter
for a violation of that nature and, in case of a violation for which no
specific penalty is set out in the law or elsewhere in this chapter, to a
fine of $25 and costs.
74.Editor's Note: This heading and the headings of original ordinance Sections 2 to 6, 21 to
30, 41 to 47, 61 to 71, 81 to 91, 121 to 127, 141 to 144, 151, 152, 161 to 164, 181 and 182
of this chapter are part of the basic ordinance or as added thereto by later ordinances.
75.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 560-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 560-4
1:373
§ 560-4. Experimental regulations.
Council may, from time to time, designate places upon and along the streets
in the Borough where, for a period of not more than 90 days, specific
traffic and/or parking regulations, prohibitions and restrictions shall be in
force and effect, and shall designate those locations by proper signs and
markings. Those regulations, prohibitions and restrictions shall be effective
just as if they had been specified in this chapter. No person shall drive or
park a vehicle in violation of any such regulation, prohibition or restriction,
and no person shall move, remove, destroy or deface any sign or marking
erected, posted or made by authority of this section. Any person who
violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be liable to the
penalty set out in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of that
nature and, in case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set out in
the law or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of $25 and costs, provided
that the purpose of this section is to allow for the test and experimental
determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent changes in the
ordinances of the Borough relative to traffic and parking.
§ 560-5. Traffic on streets closed or restricted for construction,
maintenance or special events.
§ 560-6. Authority of police officers.
The police officers of the Borough are given authority to direct traffic on the
streets in the Borough, at intersections, in public parks and in other places
where The Vehicle Code or this chapter applies.76
A. Council shall have authority to close any street or specific part of a
street to vehicular traffic and to place barriers or station police officers
at each end of the closed portion while construction or maintenance
work is under way or a special event is being conducted on the closed
portion. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any
such closed portion.
B. Council shall have authority to establish a restricted traffic area upon
any street where construction or maintenance work is under way and to
station flagmen at each end of the restricted portion. It shall be
unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any such restricted
traffic area at any time when the flagman is displaying a sign directing
that vehicle to stop or is signaling that vehicle, by a flag or other device,
not to proceed.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
76.Editor's Note: Section 3101 of The Vehicle Code makes it unlawful for any person wilfully
to fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or directions of any uniformed police
officer, sheriff or constable or any appropriately attired person authorized to direct,
control or regulate traffic.
§ 560-4 ETNA CODE § 560-6
1:374
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 560-7. Maximum speed limits established on certain streets.
[Amended 11-17-1998 by Ord. No. 1259]
§ 560-8. Traffic signals at certain intersections.
§ 560-9. Intersections where turns prohibited on red signal.
A. A maximum speed limit of 25 miles per hour is established on all Etna
Borough streets, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a
vehicle where a maximum speed limit applies at a higher speed than the
maximum speed prescribed.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per
hour over the maximum speed limit.
A. At the following intersections, official traffic signals shall be erected (or
are ratified if previously erected), and traffic at those intersections shall
be directed by those signals:
Location
Butler Street and Bridge Street
Butler Street Spur and Crescent Street
Butler Street and Freeport Street
Butler Street and Grant Avenue
Butler Street and High Street
Butler Street and Kittanning Street
Butler Street and Washington Street
Butler Street Spur and Crescent Avenue
B. Any driver of a vehicle who disobeys the directions of any official traffic
signal shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and
costs.
A. The following intersections are established as intersections where
drivers of vehicles headed in the direction or directions indicated are
prohibited from making a right turn on a steady red signal:
Vehicles Traveling
on
Direction of
Travel
Not to Make Right Turn
on Red onto
Bridge Street West Butler Street
Butler Street North Bridge Street
§ 560-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 560-9
1:375
§ 560-10. One-way streets established.
Vehicles Traveling
on
Direction of
Travel
Not to Make Right Turn
on Red onto
Butler Street Spur South Crescent Avenue
Butler Street North Freeport Street
Butler Street South High Street
Butler Street North Kittanning Street
Freeport Street West Butler Street
High Street East Butler Street
Kittanning Street West Butler Street
B. Any driver of a vehicle who makes a turn on a steady red signal in
violation of this section shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a
fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following are established as one-way streets, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any one-way street
other than in the direction established for traffic upon that street:
Street From To Direction of Travel
Back Street Strawberry Street Sycamore Street Southbound
Catherine Street Butler Street Kittanning Street Eastbound and
southbound
Center Street Butler Street Cherry Street Southbound
Cherry Street Sycamore Street Isabella Street Westbound
Church Street Wilson Street Dewey Street Southbound
Locust Street Elk Street High Street Northbound
Middle Street Sycamore Street Sumner Street Southbound
Peach Street77 Cherry Street Butler Street Northbound
Pine Street a) Dewey Street Dewey Street Westbound
b) Little Pine
Creek
Crescent Avenue Northbound
Prospect Street High Street Locust Street Southbound
Spring Street High Street Maplewood Street Northbound
Strawberry
Street
Bridge Street Back Street Westbound
Sycamore Street Isabella Street Bridge Street Eastbound
Vilsack Street Grant Avenue Kraus Street Westbound
77.Editor's Note: Peach Street was renamed VFW Way 3-16-1999 by Ord. No. 1264.
§ 560-9 ETNA CODE § 560-10
1:376
§ 560-11. Left and/or right turns prohibited at certain intersections.
§ 560-12. Through highways established.
Street From To Direction of Travel
Wendlin Street Dewey Street Wilson Street Northbound
Wilson Street Jones Street Grant Avenue Eastbound
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, traveling upon the firstnamed
street at any of the following intersections, in the direction or
directions indicated in each case, to make a left turn or a right turn at
that intersection, as indicated for that intersection:
Vehicle
Traveling on
Direction of
Travel Into Not to Make
Bridge Street North Butler Street Left turn
Sycamore Street Left turn
Butler Street North Grant Avenue Left turn
South Grant Avenue Right turn
Crescent
Avenue
South Kittanning Street Left turn
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs of prosecution.
A. The following streets are established as through highways, and stop or
yield signs shall be erected at every intersection of every through
highway (except for those intersections where traffic signals are
erected and maintained as provided in § 560-8 of this article), facing
traffic approaching the through highway on intersecting streets. Every
driver of a vehicle approaching the through highway on any
intersecting street where there is a stop or yield sign shall stop the
vehicle as required by Section 3323(b) or Section 3323(c) of The
Vehicle Code, as the case may be, and shall not proceed into or across
the through highway until he has followed all applicable requirements
of that section of the law.
Highway Portion
Butler Street Entire extent
Grant Avenue Entire extent
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs of prosecution.
§ 560-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 560-13
1:377
§ 560-13. Stop intersections established.
A. In addition to the streets intersecting with the through highways
established in § 560-12 of this article, the following are established as
stop intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected (or are
ratified if previously erected) in such a position as to face traffic
approaching the second-named street (the intersecting street) upon the
first-named street (the stop street) in the direction or directions
indicated for that intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching
the intersection on the first-named or stop street, in the direction
indicated in each case, shall stop the vehicle as required by Section
3323(b) of The Vehicle Code and shall not proceed into or across the
second-named or intersecting street until he has followed all applicable
requirements of that section of the law.
Stop Street Intersecting Street Direction of Travel
Bottomfield Street Seavey Road Northbound
Bridge Street Freeport Street Eastbound
Christler Street Seavey Road Northbound
Church Street Dewey Street Southbound
Church Street Vilsack Street Northbound and
southbound
Dewey Street Crescent Avenue Eastbound
Dewey Street Wendlin Street Eastbound and
westbound
Elizabeth Avenue Mount Hope Street Southbound
Elm Lane High Street Westbound
Fischer Avenue Mount Hope Street Southbound
Glenn Avenue Center Street Northbound and
southbound
Glenn Avenue Charles Street Southbound
Greeley Avenue Dewey Street Northbound and
southbound
Griesmere Street Kittanning Street Southbound
Hafner Street Bridge Street Eastbound
Higgins Street Kittanning Street Northbound
High Street Locust Street Eastbound
Jones Street Dewey Avenue Northbound
Jones Street Greeley Avenue Northbound and
southbound
Lincoln Street Kittanning Street Southbound
§ 560-13 ETNA CODE § 560-13
1:378
Stop Street Intersecting Street Direction of Travel
Locust Street High Street Northbound and
southbound
Locust Street Maplewood Street Northbound and
southbound
Locust Street Prospect Street Southbound
Locust Street Walnut Street Northbound and
southbound
North Main Street Bridge Street Westbound
Maplewood Street Locust Street Eastbound
Martha Street Dewey Street Northbound and
southbound
Oakland Street High Street Westbound
Park Avenue Dewey Street Northbound and
southbound
Park Avenue Spring Street Southbound
Parker Street Washington Street Eastbound
Pine Street Dewey Street Northbound
Pine Street Martha Street Westbound
Pine Street Wendlin Street Westbound
Poplar Street Bridge Street Eastbound
Prospect Street High Street Northbound
Prospect Street Walnut Street Southbound
Robertson Street Mount Hope Street Northbound
Snyder Street Kittanning Street Northbound
Spring Street Greeley Avenue Northbound and
southbound
Spring Street High Street Southbound
Sumner Street Sycamore Street Southbound
Sycamore Street Bridge Street Eastbound and
westbound
Vilsack Street Jones Street Westbound
Vine Street High Street Northbound
Washington Street Nauman Street Northbound,
southbound and
eastbound
Wendlin Street Dewey Street Northbound and
southbound
§ 560-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 560-13
1:379
§ 560-14. Yield intersections established.
§ 560-15. Vehicle weight limits established on street.
Stop Street Intersecting Street Direction of Travel
Wendlin Street Spring Street Northbound and
southbound
Wendlin Street Wilson Street Northbound
Wilson Street Jones Street Westbound
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs of prosecution.
A. The following intersections are established as yield-right-of-way
intersections, and official yield signs shall be erected (or are ratified if
previously erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street (the intersecting street) upon the first-named
street (the yield street) at each yield intersection, in the direction or
directions indicated for that intersection. Every driver of a vehicle
approaching the intersection upon the first-named street, in the
direction indicated in each case, shall slow down or stop the vehicle as
required by Section 3323(c) of The Vehicle Code and then yield the
right-of-way as required by that subsection of The Vehicle Code.
Yield Street Intersecting Street Direction of Travel
Butler Street Pennsylvania Route 28 Northbound
Crescent Avenue Grant Avenue Southbound
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. Vehicle weight limits, as indicated, are established on the following
streets by authority granted by Section 4902(a) of The Vehicle Code,
and it shall be unlawful for any person to operate on any of those streets
or portions of streets, as the case may be, any vehicle or combination
having a gross weight in excess of the maximum prescribed for that
street or portion of street.
Street Portion Maximum Gross Weight
Bittner Street Entire extent 10,000 pounds
Cherry Street Entire extent 10,000 pounds
Dewey Street Entire extent 10,000 pounds
Greeley Avenue Entire extent 10,000 pounds
High Street Entire extent 10,000 pounds
Isabella Street Entire extent 10,000 pounds
§ 560-13 ETNA CODE § 560-15
1:380
§ 560-16. Play highways established and authorized.
Street Portion Maximum Gross Weight
Locust Street Entire extent 10,000 pounds
Maplewood Street Entire extent 10,000 pounds
Mount Hope Street Entire extent 10,000 pounds
Parker Street Entire extent 15,000 pounds (except for
buses and local delivery
and pickup)
Prospect Street Entire extent 10,000 pounds
Railroad Street Entire extent 10,000 pounds
Spuder Street Entire extent 10,000 pounds
Sycamore Street Entire extent 10,000 pounds
Vilsack Street Entire extent 10,000 pounds
Washington Street Entire extent 15,000 pounds (except for
buses and local delivery
and pickup)
Wilson Street Entire extent 10,000 pounds
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under Section 4902(a) of The Vehicle Code and, upon
conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $150 and costs, and an
additional penalty of $75 for each 500 pounds or part thereof in excess
of 3,000 pounds over the maximum allowable weight as prescribed by
Section 4902(g)(1) of The Vehicle Code.
A. The following areas upon the streets in the Borough are established as
play highways:
Street Between Days Hours
Dewey Street Church Street
and Wendlin
Street
School days Recess hours and
lunch period
B. The Mayor is authorized to designate as play highways, whenever he
deems that action advisable, and for whatever period of time directed
by him, any part of any street in the Borough where sledding and
coasting shall be permitted. That play highway shall be set apart for the
purpose under the direction of the Mayor.
C. No person shall drive any motor vehicle upon any play highway at time
when that street shall be designated as a play highway, except in an
emergency, with special permission of the Mayor or of the police officer
in charge, who shall first clear that play highway of all persons using it
for the purpose for which it was set aside. Any person who violates any
§ 560-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 560-16
1:381
§ 560-17. Vehicle weight limits on bridges. [Amended 6-20-1988 by
Ord. No. 1201]
All bridges under the care and control of the Borough of Etna shall be
posted with weight limit signs in accordance with the material and
installation specifications and standards of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, Department of Transportation, in accordance with
Department Regulation 67 Pa. Code Chapter 21178 or The Vehicle Code,
Section 4902, Subsection (e).
provision of this subsection shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of $25 and costs.
78.Editor's Note: Title 67 Pa. Code Ch. 211, which related to posting signs for snowmobile or
ATV roads, was marked "reserved" February 3, 2006.
§ 560-16 ETNA CODE § 560-17
1:382
ARTICLE III
Parking, Standing and Stopping
§ 560-18. Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces.
Wherever a space is marked off on any street for the parking of an individual
vehicle, every vehicle parked there shall be parked wholly within the lines
bounding that space, and it shall be a violation of this article for any person
to park a vehicle or allow it to remain parked otherwise.
§ 560-19. Parking prohibited at all times in certain locations.
Parking shall be prohibited at all times in the following locations:
Street Side Between
Ann Street Both Butler Street and a point 300 feet west
of Butler Street
Butler Street East Kittanning Street and a point 50 feet
south of the crossing of the railroad
leading to National Supply Company
Bridge Street and a point 50 feet north
of Bridge Street
North Prospect Street and the first parking
meter installation
West Crescent Avenue and a point 50 feet
south of the crossing of the railroad
leading to the National Supply
Company
Cherry Street South Isabella Street and Cherry Alley
Church Street Both Wilson Street and Dewey Street
Crescent Avenue East Grant Avenue and Butler Street
West Pine Street and a point 75 feet
northwardly thereof
Dewey Street North Park Avenue and Crescent Avenue
Elk Way Both Locust Street and Butler Street
Freeport Street South Bridge Street and Butler Street
Glenn Avenue East North Borough line and Mount Hope
Street
West North Borough line and Herman Street
Hickory Street South West boundary line of the Etna High
School property and Locust Street
Kittanning Street Both North Borough line and Butler Street
Lincoln Street North Kittanning Street and Gardner Street
§ 560-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 560-19
1:383
Street Side Between
Locust Street South High Street and Butler Street
Maplewood Street East Butler Street and Locust Street
North Hawkins Avenue and High Street
Garrick Street and Locust Street
South Butler Street and Locust Street
Mount Hope Street North Grant Avenue and Glenn Avenue
South Grant Avenue and Spring Street
School Street East High Street and Walnut Street
Spring Street Both Maplewood Street and High Street
Sycamore Street South Isabella Street and Bridge Street
Vista Street North Forsaith Street and west Borough line
Walnut Street North Prospect Street and Locust Street
Washington Street Both Parker Street and Forsaith Street
Weible Street North Cunningham Street and Grant Avenue
Wilson Street South Jones Street and Grant Avenue
Wood Street North Forsaith Street and west Borough line
§ 560-20. Parking prohibited in certain locations certain days and
hours.
Parking shall be prohibited in the following locations at all times on the days
and between the hours indicated in this section, as follows:
Street Side Between Days Hours
Butler
Street
East A point 50 feet
south of the
crossing of the
railroad
leading to the
National
Supply
Company and a
point 60 feet
north of Bridge
Street
Monday
through Friday
4:00 p.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Isabella Street
and the west
Borough line
Monday
through Friday
4:00 p.m. to
6:00 p.m.
§ 560-19 ETNA CODE § 560-20
1:384
Street Side Between Days Hours
Kittanning
Street and
Catherine
Street
Monday
through
Saturday
3:00 p.m. to
7:00 p.m.
Kittanning
Street and
north Borough
line
Monday
through
Saturday
3:00 p.m. to
7:00 p.m.
North Prospect Street
and
Washington
Street
Every day 6:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
West A point 50 feet
south of the
railroad
leading to the
National
Supply
Company and a
point 65 feet
north of
Maplewood
Street
Monday
through Friday
7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Maplewood
Street and
Walnut Street
Monday
through Friday
7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Kittanning
Street and
north Borough
line
Every day 6:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Freeport
Street
North Butler Street
and Bridge
Street
Monday
through Friday
4:00 p.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Locust
Street
West High Street
and
Maplewood
Street
Monday
through Friday
6:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
§ 560-21. Parking time limited in certain locations certain days and
hours. [Amended 3-18-1986 by Ord. No. 1181]
No person shall park a vehicle, or allow it to remain parked, for longer than
the time indicated in any of the following locations at any time on the days
and between the hours indicated:
§ 560-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 560-21
1:385
Street
Address Side Location Days Hours
Parking
Time Limit
363 Butler
Street
North Front of bank
machine as
indicated by 36
feet of blue
painted curb
7 24 10 minutes
§ 560-22. Special purpose parking zones established; parking
otherwise prohibited.
The following are established as special purpose parking zones, and it shall
be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or to allow it to remain parked
in any such zone except as specifically permitted for that zone:
Street Side Location
Authorized
Purpose or Vehicle
Butler Street East North of the crossing or
railroad leading to the
National Supply
Company
Bus stop
Butler Street West North of the intersection
with Maplewood Street
Bus stop
Butler Street West South of the point
opposite the intersection
with Maplewood Street
Bus Stop
Butler Street West North of the intersection
with High Street
Bus stop
Butler Street East South of the intersection
with Bridge Street
Bus stop
Butler Street East North of the point
opposite the intersection
with Walnut Street
Bus stop
Butler Street North Southeast of the
intersection with Walnut
Street
Bus stop
Butler Street South East of the intersection
with Winchel Street
Bus stop
Butler Street North West of the intersection
with Elk Way
Bus stop
Butler Street South West of the intersection
with Center Street
Bus stop
Butler Street North West of the intersection
with Locust Street
Bus stop
§ 560-21 ETNA CODE § 560-22
1:386
Street Side Location
Authorized
Purpose or Vehicle
Butler Street South West of the intersection
with Isabella Street
Bus stop
Butler Street North West of the intersection
with Washington Street
Bus stop
Butler Street South West of a point opposite
the intersection with
Washington Street
Bus stop
Butler Street North Approximately 700 feet
west of Washington
Street
Bus stop
Butler Street South Approximately 700 feet
west of a point opposite
intersection with
Washington Street
Bus stop
Butler Street North North of the intersection
with Catherine Street
Bus stop
Butler Street South North of a point opposite
the intersection with
Catherine Street
Bus stop
Butler Street North North of the intersection
with Ann Street
Bus stop
Butler Street South North of a point opposite
the intersection with Ann
Street
Bus stop
Crescent
Avenue
West South of the intersection
with Dewey Street
Bus stop
Crescent
Avenue
North Northwest of the
intersection with Butler
Street
Bus stop
Crescent
Avenue
South Northwest of the
intersection with Butler
Street
Bus stop
Freeport
Street
South East of the intersection
with Butler Street
Bus stop
Grant Avenue East North of the intersection
with Charles Street
Bus stop
Grant Avenue East North of the intersection
with Angle Street
Bus stop
Grant Avenue West North of the intersection
with Vilsack Street
Bus stop
§ 560-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 560-22
1:387
Street Side Location
Authorized
Purpose or Vehicle
Grant Avenue East South of a point opposite
the intersection with
Wilson Street
Bus stop
Maplewood
Street
South West of the intersection
with Butler Street
Bus stop
§ 560-23. Stopping restricted on certain streets certain days and
hours.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to stop that vehicle upon
the traveled portion of any of the following streets at any time on the days
and between the hours stipulated for that street:
Street Between Days Hours
Butler Street West Borough line
and Crescent
Avenue
Monday through
Saturday
6:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.; 3:00
p.m. to 7:00 p.m.
Butler Street
East
Kittanning Street
and Catherine
Street
Monday through
Saturday
3:00 p.m. to 7:00
p.m.
Grant Avenue Dewey Street and
Wilson Street
Monday through
Saturday
6:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Provided that the word "stop," as used in this section, shall mean to halt the
vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
traffic-control sign or signal.
§ 560-24. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $15 and costs.
§ 560-25. Restrictions on parking trucks, trailers, boats and
commercial vehicles. [Added 6-16-1991 by Ord. No. 1216; amended
3-17-1992 by Ord. No. 1221]
No truck or commercial vehicle (with a load capacity greater than three
quarter tons), mobile homes, house trailers, camper units, tow dolly,
recreational trailer and/or vehicle, wrecker, or any vehicle with dual rear
wheels, busses, boats, and/or construction vehicles or equipment shall be
parked on or in any street, road, highway, alley or cartway of the Borough
of Etna between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., Monday through
Saturday, and from 8:00 p.m. Saturday to 6:00 a.m. Monday, at the
prevailing standard time; except that, during said hours, they may park
for a period of time not exceeding 30 minutes as may be required for
§ 560-22 ETNA CODE § 560-25
1:388
the prompt loading or unloading thereof, or for the retention of public
utility services or other services of any emergency nature. Construction
vehicles or equipment may be parked on a lot while construction activity
is proceeding, provided a municipal permit has been duly granted for such
activity. The definitions of all vehicles as set forth in this section of this
chapter are those described by the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code at 75
Pa.C.S.A. § 102.
§ 560-26. Parking of nonresident recreational vehicles. [Added
6-16-1991 by Ord. No. 1216; amended 3-17-1992 by Ord. No. 1221]
Recreational vehicles owned by nonresidents who are visiting residents of
the Borough of Etna may be parked for a period of two weeks on Borough
streets, provided a permit is attained, in advance, from the Borough Police
Department at a cost of $25 for a two-week period.
§ 560-27. Violations and penalties. [Added 6-16-1991 by Ord. No.
1216; amended 3-17-1992 by Ord. No. 1221]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, before the Magisterial District Judge, be compelled to
pay a fine, the minimum of which shall be $50 plus costs of prosecution for
the first offense, and each subsequent offense shall be assessed a fine and
costs as follows: second offense, $100; third offense, $200; fourth offense,
$300; and each subsequent conviction thereafter shall be assessed a fine
and cost of not less than $300 and not greater than $400. Upon default of
payment of such fine and cost, any person found in violation of this chapter
shall be committed to the Allegheny County Jail for a period not exceeding
10 days.
§ 560-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 560-27
1:389

ARTICLE IV
On-Street Metered Parking
§ 560-28. Parking meter zones established.
Parking meter zones are established upon and along certain streets in the
Borough of Etna, as follows:
Street Side Between
Parking Time
Limit
Bridge Street South Garden Alley and a point
opposite the intersection
with Freeport Street
2 hours
Butler Street East A point opposite the
intersection with Grant
Avenue and the
intersection with
Kittanning Street
2 hours
A point 50 feet south of
the crossing of the
railroad leading to the
National Supply
Company and a point 50
feet north of the
intersection with Bridge
Street
2 hours
North Walnut Street and Locust
Street
2 hours
South Freeport Street and
Center Street
2 hours
West A point 50 feet south of
the crossing of the
railroad leading to the
National Supply
Company and the
intersection with Walnut
Street
2 hours
Freeport Street North Bridge Street and Butler
Street
2 hours
Except for those spaces and locations within those parking meter zones
where parking, now or in the future, as the case may be, is prohibited.
§ 560-29. Parking time limited in parking meter zones.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or to allow it to be
parked on any part of a street established as a parking meter zone by
§ 560-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 560-29
1:391
§ 560-28 of the article, at any time between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
7:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, for longer than the parking time limit
established in that section for that zone, provided that the requirements of
this article as to the parking time limit and as to the deposit of coins in
parking meters shall not apply on legal holidays.
§ 560-30. Placement and characteristics of parking meters.
Parking meters installed in the parking meter zones established by § 560-28
of this article shall be placed upon the curb or sidewalk, and immediately
adjacent to the individual parking spaces described in § 560-31 of this
article. Each parking meter shall be placed or set so as to show that the
parking space adjacent to that meter is or is not legally occupied. Each
parking meter installed shall indicate by a proper legend the legal parking
time established by the Borough, and when the adjacent space is occupied
by a vehicle, the parking meter shall indicate on its dial and pointer the
duration of the period of legal parking and, in the expiration of that period,
shall indicate illegal parking or overparking.
§ 560-31. Parked vehicles to be wholly within marked spaces.
Lines and/or markings shall be painted or placed upon the curb, sidewalk or
roadway adjacent to each meter for the purpose of delineating the parking
space for which that meter shall be used. Every vehicle parked at any
parking meter shall be parked wholly within the lines or markings so placed
and applicable to that meter. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this
article for any person to park a vehicle across any such line or marking, or
to park a vehicle in such a position that that vehicle is not wholly within the
area delineated by those lines or markings.
§ 560-32. Coin deposit in meter; overtime parking unlawful.
A. Whenever a vehicle is to be parked in any space adjacent to a parking
meter, at any time in the period of limited parking as prescribed by
§ 560-28 of this article, the driver of the vehicle, upon entering the
parking space, shall immediately deposit or cause to be deposited in
that parking meter one or more proper coins of the United States, as
follows:
(1) A five-cent coin to allow parking for a period of 30 minutes; or
(2) One ten-cent or two five-cent coins to allow parking for a period of
60 minutes; or
(3) Any combination of five-cent or ten-cent coins to allow for parking
up to a total of two hours.
B. Upon the deposit of the coin or coins and placing the meter in
operation, the parking space may be lawfully occupied by the vehicle
for the time indicated on the meter. If any vehicle shall remain in any
such parking space for such length of time that the meter shall indicate
§ 560-29 ETNA CODE § 560-32
1:392
§ 560-33. Unlawful to deposit substitute for coin in meter.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to deposit
in any parking meter installed under the provisions of this article any slug
or other substitute for a coin of the United States of America.
§ 560-34. Unlawful to deposit coin in meter to extend parking time
beyond legal limit.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to deposit
or cause to be deposited in any parking meter installed under the provisions
of this article, any coin for the purpose of extending the parking time of any
vehicle beyond the total time limit fixed by this article for parking in the
parking space alongside of or next to which that parking meter is placed.
§ 560-35. Unlawful to remain parked at meter showing violation.
It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this article for any person to permit
a vehicle to remain in a parking space adjacent to a parking meter installed
under this article when that meter displays a signal indicating that the
vehicle has already been parked there beyond the period of time prescribed
for that parking space or the time for which a coin or coins was deposited
in that meter for the parking of that vehicle.
§ 560-36. Unlawful to tamper with meter.
It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this article for any person to deface,
tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any
parking meter installed under the provisions of this article, provided that
nothing in this section shall apply to the servicing or opening of parking
meters by officers, employees or police officers of the Borough under the
direction of the Mayor or Council.
§ 560-37. Enforcement. [Amended 6-20-1995 by Ord. No. 1236]
It shall be the duty of the police officers of the Borough, or any other
officer and/or employee of the Borough designated by the Mayor, to report
to the Mayor designating the parking meter where any violation of this
article occurs, the license number of the vehicle involved in that violation,
the time when that vehicle was parked in violation of any provision of this
article, and any other facts that may be necessary in order to secure a clear
understanding of the circumstances of the violation. The officer or employee
making the report shall also attach to every such vehicle a notice that that
certain vehicle was parked in violation of this article, which notice shall
contain instructions that the owner or driver of the vehicle may report to
the police station within five days of the time when the notice was given
by proper signal that the lawful parking time has expired, that vehicle
shall be considered as having been parked overtime, and the parking of
a vehicle overtime shall be a violation of this article.
§ 560-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 560-37
1:393
and pay a penalty of $5, which shall be in lieu of any other penalty imposed
under § 560-38A of this article.
§ 560-38. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-20-1995 by Ord. No.
1236]
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article except for § 560-36
shall for every such violation, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not less than $5 or more than $25 and costs of prosecution,
provided that, if any such person appears in person at the Borough
police station within five days of the time limit when notice of the
violation was given and shall at the time of his appearance pay a penalty
of $5 to the officer in charge at the police station, that payment shall be
in lieu of the other penalties prescribed by the subsection.
B. Any person who violates any provision of § 560-36 of this article shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $50 and
costs of prosecution.
§ 560-37 ETNA CODE § 560-38
1:394
ARTICLE V
Off-Street Metered Parking
[Added 3-18-1986 by Ord. No. 1180; amended in its entirety
6-20-1995 by Ord. No. 1236]
§ 560-39. Off-street metered parking.
Off-street metered parking zones, not previously designated under Article
IV of Etna Borough Ordinance No. 1158, are hereby established. Any and
all metered parking not specifically covered under Article IV of this chapter
shall hereinafter be designated as "off-street metered parking areas" only in
those areas where metered parking is available. It is hereby ordained that
those penalties and violations encompassed under Article IV of this chapter
shall be deemed to be incorporated into this article as if the same were set
forth at length as appears in Article IV of this chapter and shall carry the
same procedures for fines, penalties and enforcements as if the same were
set forth at length herein.
§ 560-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 560-39
1:395

ARTICLE VI
Removal and Impounding of Certain Vehicles
§ 560-40. Applicability and scope.
This article is enacted under authority of Section 6109(a)(22) of The Vehicle
Code and gives authority to the Borough to remove and impound:
§ 560-41. Authority to remove and impound.
The Chief of Police of the Borough shall have authority to remove and
impound or to order the removal and impounding of any vehicle parked
overtime or otherwise illegally, provided that the circumstances of its
parking were within the conditions stated in § 560-40 of this article,
provided that no such vehicle shall be removed or impounded except in
strict adherence to the provisions of this article.
§ 560-42. Designation of approved storage garages; bonding,
towing and storage.
Removal and impounding of vehicles under this article shall be done only
by approved storage garages that shall be designated from time to time
by Council. Every such garage shall submit evidence to Council that it is
bonded or has acquired liability insurance in an amount satisfactory to
Council as sufficient to indemnify owners of impounded vehicles against
loss or damage to those vehicles while in the custody of the garage keeper
for the purpose of towing or storage. The approved storage garage shall
submit to Council its schedule of charges for towing and storage of vehicles
under this article, and when the schedule is approved by Council, those
charges shall be adhered to by the approved storage garage; no different
schedule of charges shall be adopted without approval of Council and no
different charges shall be demanded of or collected from any person whose
vehicle is removed or impounded under this article by any approved storage
garage. Council shall delete from its list of approved storage garages any
garage that shall make any unapproved charge in connection with any
vehicle removed or impounded under this article.
A. Vehicles that are parked overtime on any street in the Borough in
violation of any provision of Article III or Article IV of this chapter;
B. Vehicles parked in any unmetered parking lot operated by the Borough
under Article VI, and in any metered parking lot, if and when the
Borough operates any metered parking lot, in violation of any ordinance
provision governing those metered or unmetered parking lots, as the
case may be; and
C. Vehicles parked in violation of any provision of Article VII.
§ 560-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 560-43
1:397
§ 560-43. Notification of removal and impounding.
Within 12 hours after the time of removal of any vehicle under authority
granted by this article, notice of the fact that the vehicle was removed shall
be sent by the Chief of Police to the owner of record of the vehicle. The
notice shall designate the place from which the vehicle was removed, the
reason for its removal and impounding, and the garage in which it was
impounded.
§ 560-44. Effect of payment of towing and storage charges.
The payment of any towing and storage charges authorized by this article
shall, unless payment is made under protest, be final and conclusive, and
shall constitute a waiver of any right to recover the money so paid. If
payment of any towing or storage charges is made under protest, the
offender shall be entitled to a hearing before a Magisterial District Judge.
Payment of towing and storage charges shall not relieve the owner or driver
of any vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation of the
provision of this chapter for which the vehicle was removed or impounded.
§ 560-45. Record of vehicles removed and impounded.
The Chief of Police shall keep a record of all vehicles impounded under this
article and shall be able at all reasonable times to furnish the owners or the
agents of the owners of those vehicles with information as to the place of
storage of the vehicles.
§ 560-46. Restrictions upon removal of vehicles.
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this article if, at the
time of the intended removal, the owner or the person for the time being in
charge of the vehicle is present and expresses a willingness and intention
to remove the vehicle immediately.
§ 560-47. Vehicle removal and impoundment: habitual violators.
[Added 10-21-1986 by Ord. No. 1188]
Any vehicle having five or more unpaid summonses or other process issued
against it, charging that such vehicle was parked, stopped or standing in
violation of the Commonwealth Vehicle Code or any other traffic ordinance
of the Borough of Etna is deemed to be a public nuisance, and the Police
Department or any other Borough official assigned to traffic duty is hereby
authorized to remove such vehicle or cause it to be removed at the sole cost
and expense of the habitual violator. The police or other Borough authority
shall have the power and is hereby authorized to remove the vehicle by
either private or governmental equipment to any place deemed advisable
for the storage of said vehicle as determined by the officials of the Borough
of Etna.
§ 560-43 ETNA CODE § 560-48
1:398
§ 560-48. Notice to owner; redemption or sale by Borough. [Added
10-21-1986 by Ord. No. 1188]
Whenever the Police Department has impounded a vehicle pursuant to
§§ 560-40 to 560-46 of this chapter, notice of the removal and storage place
of such vehicle shall be mailed to the last registered owner, if the name
and address of such owner can be ascertained with reasonable diligence.
Such notice shall state that, if the owner fails to reclaim the vehicle within
30 days from the date of the mailing, title to such vehicle shall vest in
the Borough and the vehicle shall be sold at public auction to be held not
sooner than 30 days after expiration of the thirty-day period contained in
the notice.
§ 560-49. Owner responsibility. [Added 10-21-1986 by Ord. No.
1188]
The registered owner of a vehicle having five or more outstanding
summonses against it shall be presumed to be the driver at the time the
summonses were in fact issued and shall be severally responsible for the
offenses and the impoundment, except where the use of the vehicle was
obtained by the operator without the owner's consent.
§ 560-50. Release of vehicle. [Added 10-21-1986 by Ord. No. 1188]
Vehicles impounded pursuant to this article shall be released to their lawful
owner or person entitled to possession upon a showing of adequate
evidence of a right to its possession and upon paying all accrued fines and
costs for each outstanding unpaid summons or depositing of the collateral
required for his appearance in the Borough Municipal Court to answer to
each violation for which there is an outstanding or otherwise unsettled
traffic violation notice or warrant and, in addition thereto, the charges for
towing and storage.
§ 560-51. Sale authority. [Added 10-21-1986 by Ord. No. 1188]
Whenever any vehicle impounded pursuant to this article remains
unclaimed by the owner or other person legally entitled to possession for
30 days, such vehicle may be sold in accordance with the Commonwealth's
Vehicle Code.
§ 560-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 560-51
1:399

ARTICLE VII
Snow and Ice Emergency
§ 560-52. Declaration of snow and ice emergency.
In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards
of snow and ice on the snow emergency routes named in § 560-53 of this
article and elsewhere in the Borough, the Mayor, in his discretion, may
declare a snow and ice emergency (designated in this article as a "snow
emergency"). Information on the existence of a snow emergency may be
given by the Borough through radio, newspaper or other available media,
and information on the termination of the emergency may be given by use
of the same media.
§ 560-53. Snow emergency routes designated.
The following are designated as snow emergency routes:
Street Between
(Reserved)
§ 560-54. Parking restrictions during snow emergencies.
§ 560-55. Restrictions on driving on snow emergency routes during
snow emergency.
A. After a snow emergency is declared, it shall be unlawful for any person
at any time during the continuance of the snow emergency:
(1) To park a motor vehicle or to allow the same to remain parked on
any snow emergency route designated in § 560-53 of this article;
(2) To park a motor vehicle on any street not being a snow emergency
route except as follows: on odd-numbered days, parking shall be
permitted on one side of the street only, as directed by the Mayor in
his announcement of the snow emergency, and on even-numbered
days, parking shall be permitted on the other side of the street only,
until the street has been cleared of snow.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $15 and costs.
A. After a snow emergency is declared, it shall be unlawful for any person
at any time during the continuance of the snow emergency to drive a
motor vehicle on any snow emergency route designated in § 560-53 of
this article unless that vehicle is equipped with snow tires or chains.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 560-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 560-55
1:401

ARTICLE VIII
Pedalcycles
§ 560-56. Riding and parking of pedalcycles on sidewalks along
certain streets unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or park a pedalcycle on the
sidewalk along the following portions of streets:
Street Side Portion
(Reserved)
§ 560-57. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of § 560-56 of this article shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $10 and costs.
§ 560-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 560-57
1:403

ARTICLE IX
Pedestrians
§ 560-58. Pedestrians to obey traffic signals.
At all intersections in the Borough where traffic signals are installed, as
provided in § 560-8 of this chapter, except where directed otherwise by
pedestrian-control signals installed under § 560-59 of this article,
pedestrians shall obey the directions of those traffic signals as follows:
§ 560-59. Pedestrian-control signal locations established.
§ 560-60. Locations where pedestrians may cross roadway only in
crosswalk.
It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to cross any roadway in a business
district within the Borough except in a crosswalk.
A. When facing a green signal, a pedestrian may proceed across the
roadway within a crosswalk;
B. When facing a steady yellow signal, a pedestrian shall not start to cross
the roadway; and
C. When facing a steady red signal, a pedestrian shall not enter the
roadway.
A. At the following locations pedestrian-control signals shall be erected (or
are ratified if previously erected):
At Intersection of:
Butler Street and Bridge Street
Butler Street and Freeport Street
Butler Street and Grant Avenue
Butler Street and High Street
Butler Street and Kittanning Street
B. Every pedestrian facing a steady signal exhibiting "Don't Walk" shall
not start to cross the roadway in the direction of the signal, but any
pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the "Walk"
signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone while the "Don't Walk"
signal is showing.
C. Whenever the "Don't Walk" indication is flashing, pedestrians shall not
start to cross the roadway in the direction of the indication, but any
pedestrian who has partly completed crossing during the "Walk"
indication shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone, and all drivers of
vehicles shall yield to the pedestrian.
§ 560-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 560-61
1:405
§ 560-61. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be sentenced to pay a fine of $5 and costs.
§ 560-61 ETNA CODE § 560-61
1:406
ARTICLE X
Interpretation
§ 560-62. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter shall be severable, and if any of its provisions
shall be held to be unconstitutional, illegal or otherwise invalid, that
decision shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining provisions of
this chapter. It is declared as a legislative intent that this chapter would
have been enacted had that unconstitutional, illegal or otherwise invalid
provision not been included in the ordinance.
§ 560-63. Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations.
The provisions of this chapter, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances and regulations in force immediately before the enactment of
this chapter, are intended as a continuation of those earlier ordinances and
regulations and not as new enactments. Nothing in this chapter shall affect
any act done or liability incurred, or any suit or prosecution pending or
to be instituted, under any of those repealed or superseded ordinances or
regulations.
§ 560-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 560-63
1:407

ARTICLE XI
Residential Permit Parking District
[Added 9-30-2016 by Ord. No. 1364]
§ 560-64. Repealer.
Ordinance No. 1360 of 2015 is hereby repealed.
§ 560-65. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and terms are defined
as herein indicated:
ADMINISTRATOR — The Borough Manager of the Borough of Etna.
AUTOMOBILE — Passenger vehicle, as defined in Section 102 of the
Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code Title 75.
CAREGIVER — Any person charged with the responsibility of rendering
care to the ill, infirm, disabled, etc. Examples would include, but not be
limited to, senior care, child care, nanny, hospice or home health care nurse,
etc.
COMPANY AUTOMOBILE — Passenger vehicle as defined in Section 102 of
the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code Title 75, used in conjunction with the
respective applicant's employer.
HOUSEHOLD — Single-family dwelling, townhouse, duplex, individual
apartment, individual condominium, and any other residence that requires
a separate mailing address.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY — Immediate family consists of the resident's spouse,
children, mother, father, brother, sister, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-inlaw,
daughter-in-law, grandfather or grandmother.
MOTORCYCLE — A motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the
rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with
the ground.
NONRESIDENT — A licensed driver who does not reside in the designated
parking zone of the Borough of Etna and who has an inspected, insured and
operable vehicle registered in his or her own name.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES — Any camper, trailer, boat or other wheeled
vehicle designed to be drawn by passenger automobile or other vehicle,
and not primarily designed for day-to-day passenger transport over the
roadways. This shall apply to any such recreational vehicle larger than
seven feet by 15 feet but not to exceed 10 feet by 20 feet.
REGISTERED VEHICLE — A vehicle with a current vehicle registration in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code, Title 75 Pa.C.S.A.
RELATIVE — Immediate family member, as defined herein, brother-in-law,
sister-in-law, uncle, aunt, first cousin, stepfather, stepbrother, stepsister,
stepson or stepdaughter.
§ 560-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 560-65
1:409
RESIDENT — A licensed driver who resides in the Borough of Etna and who
has an inspected, insured and operable automobile or motorcycle, currently
registered in their own name or in the name of a relative residing at the
same address.
RESIDENTIAL PARKING PERMIT — Duly authorized permit from the
Borough of Etna, issued by the administrator or his or her designee to a
permit holder, allowing on-street parking in the designated area.
§ 560-66. Permit parking district. [Amended 1-16-2018 by Ord. No.
1376]
This article of this chapter of the Borough of Etna Code establishes a
residential parking district encompassing the following streets in the
Borough of Etna: Lower Locust Street, between Walnut Street and High
Street; Locust Street on the even-numbered side (from High Street to
Maplewood Street); Locust Street on the odd-numbered side (from
Maplewood Street to Pine Street); and the odd-numbered side of Pine
Street; and all of Garrick Street; and Maplewood Street from Locust Street
to Garrick Street. Thus, Maplewood Street, from the intersection of Garrick
Street to Hickory Street, is excluded from the Residential Permit Parking
District. The address 111 Locust Street is hereby included and made part of
the Residential Permit Parking District.
§ 560-67. Permit requirements.
A. Resident permit:
(1) Proof of residency, which shall include any two of the following
bearing a Borough of Etna address: Tax receipts, utility bill,
property closing statement, driver's license, bank statement, lease,
vehicle registration, or deed:
(a) Verification of car ownership and/or specific written
permission to operate a company automobile.
(b) Payment of the permit fee in full.
(c) Proof of current registration.
(d) Proof of current insurance.
(e) Proof of valid driver's license with the address located in the
designated permit zone.
(f) Proof of payment of all wage and property taxes.
B. Visitor permit.
(1) Only one visitor permit may be purchased at a time and will be
issued to the resident for his/her visitors. Each permit is good for
seven uses in a thirty-day period.
§ 560-65 ETNA CODE § 560-67
1:410
§ 560-68. Permit exception.
§ 560-69. Application for permit.
(2) The visitor permit shall be displayed on the front dashboard of the
vehicle and is reusable for seven occurrences. No one visitor
permit may be used in excess of seven consecutive days or seven
total days in a thirty-day period. A visitor pass is only expired after
seven uses, regardless of date of issue; however, only one can be
purchased during a thirty-day period. In order to purchase a
subsequent visitor pass, the expired pass must be surrendered to
the Borough officials.
(3) Overnight visits will require a visitor pass.
C. Caregiver permit.
(1) Residents or nonresidents who have dependents living in the
Borough, requiring the services of a caregiver (i.e., hospice, home
health services, senior care, nanny/childcare), may apply for a
"caregiver" permit.
(2) One such permit may be purchased at the resident parking fee rate
and will be issued for one year to the resident as a caregiver.
(3) The Borough resident must show proof of residency and submit a
statement of need.
(4) These permits will be reviewed by the parking administrator and/or
his or her designee.
D. Contractor permit.
(1) Any contractor performing services in the Residential Permit
Parking District shall first obtain a permit for such work, free of
charge, at the Etna Borough office.
A. Company automobile.
(1) When a resident utilizes a company automobile and wishes to apply
for an on-street parking permit for said vehicle, an exception shall
be made to allow for the application for a parking permit.
(2) This exception shall be limited to only one company automobile per
household and will not be in addition to the total number of
vehicles.
A. All residents residing in the Residential Permit Parking District shall
apply for a permit within 30 days of the effective date of this chapter.
B. Any new resident in the Residential Permit Parking District shall apply
for a permit within 30 days of their occupancy of a residence in the
Residential Permit Parking District.
§ 560-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 560-70
1:411
§ 560-70. Permit administration.
§ 560-71. Permit fees.
§ 560-72. Permit provisions.
§ 560-73. Enforcement hours.
A. Permits shall be purchased on or before March 31 of the current year.
Permits are valid for 12 months (April 1 until March 31).
B. A permit issued after September 30 may be purchased at 1/2 of the
yearly cost.
C. Permits shall be displayed inside the vehicle on the rear-view mirror so
as to be readily visible from outside the vehicle. Visitor permits must be
displayed on the front dashboard with the current date clearly written
on it and plainly visible.
A. Fees for on-street parking permits established by this chapter are as
follows.
(1) Resident parking permit: $20, annually.
(2) Visitor parking permit: $10 (valid for seven uses).
(3) Caregiver parking permit: $20, annually.
B. All fees established by this article may be changed or amended by
resolution of the Council of the Borough of Etna.
A. To park on a street where it is legally permissible to do so requires a
permit.
B. Permits will be limited to one permit per household per corresponding
registered vehicle for an on-street permit.
C. Permits will be limited to two parking spaces per household. If the
household has a garage or off-street parking available, that will count
for one space; therefore, that residence would only be eligible to obtain
one permit.
D. On-street parking permits are nontransferable.
E. On-street parking permits are issued for one year from April 1 to March
31.
F. Caregiver on-street parking permits are nontransferable between
households. However, caregiver on-street parking permits may be
transferred between caregivers providing such service at a given
household.
A. In all designated Residential Permit Parking District areas, one-hour
free parking is permitted. [Amended 5-17-2017 by Ord. No. 1370]
§ 560-70 ETNA CODE § 560-73
1:412
§ 560-74. Violations and penalties.
§ 560-75. Inconsistency or illegality.
§ 560-76. Effective date.
This article shall take effect immediately.
B. Pine Street and Locust Street, from the intersection with Maplewood
Street to the Pine Street pedestrian bridge, the hours of enforcement
will be from 5:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. All other areas will be enforced 24
hours a day/seven days per week.
C. All Borough-designated holidays, which include New Year's Day, Good
Friday, Memorial Day, July 4th, Labor Day, Veteran's Day, Thanksgiving
Day, the day after Thanksgiving, Christmas Day and Community Day, no
enforcement of the Residential Permit Parking Ordinance will take
place.
D. Nothing herein shall limit the discretion of the Etna Borough Police
Department to issue warnings in lieu of tickets.
E. Council, by resolution, may change the enforcement hours as it deems
necessary. [Added 1-16-2018 by Ord. No. 1376]
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, upon appropriate
traffic citations, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $40
and costs; reduced to $20, if paid within the first three business days,
provided that it shall be the duty of the police officers and/or parking
enforcement personnel of the Borough of Etna to report to the
appropriate official all violations of any provisions of this chapter.
B. Each day a parked vehicle is not in compliance with this article shall be
considered a separate violation.
A. All ordinances, or parts of ordinances, which are inconsistent herewith
are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
B. If any sentence, clause, section or part of this article is determined, by a
court of competent jurisdiction, to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid,
such unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair
any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or parts of
this article.
C. It is hereby declared as the intent of the Borough Council that this
article would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or
invalid sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included
therein.
§ 560-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 560-76
1:413
Chapter 569
VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED
§ 569-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the Borough of Etna's "Abandoned and
Junked Vehicle Ordinance."
§ 569-2. Conflict; repealer of other ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances are repealed insofar as they conflict
with the provisions of this chapter; however, such repeal shall not affect any
act done or any liability or violation accrued under any such prior ordinance
herein repealed or superseded, and all such liabilities or violations shall
continue and may be enforced in the same manner as if such repeal or
supersession had not been made; and any offense or violation committed
and any penalty or forfeiture incurred under any such ordinance herein
repealed or superseded may be prosecuted in the same manner as if this
chapter had not been approved.
§ 569-3. Rules of construction.
In the construction of this chapter, the rules and definitions contained in
this section shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly
indicates otherwise:
§ 569-4. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
A. Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural the
singular.
B. Words used in the past or present tense shall include the future tense.
C. Words used in the masculine gender shall include the feminine and
neuter.
D. The word "shall" is always mandatory and is not discretionary.
E. The word "may" is permissive.
F. The Borough intends to favor the public interest as against any private
interest.
G. The headings prefixed to sections and other divisions of this chapter
shall not be considered to control but may be used to aid in the
construction thereof.
H. General words shall be construed to take their meaning and be
restricted by preceding particular words.
§ 560-76 ETNA CODE § 569-4
1:414
ABANDONED OR JUNKED VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle or parts thereof,
as defined in the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,79
which is inoperable as defined herein, and which is stored or kept outside
of a fully enclosed vehicle.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Etna.
DISMANTLED OR PARTIALLY DISMANTLED VEHICLE — Any motor
vehicle or part thereof, as defined in the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, which has been rendered inoperable because a part or
parts has or have been removed therefrom.
INOPERABLE — As applied to motor vehicles under this chapter:
MOTOR VEHICLE — A vehicle which is self-propelled, except one which
is propelled solely by human power or by electric power obtained from
overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails.
OR PARTS THEREOF — When used in a clause with "abandoned or junked
vehicles" or "dismantled or partially dismantled vehicles," the term shall
mean a component of a vehicle, including, but not limited to, bumpers,
doors, fenders, tires, windows or windshields, motors, transmissions, axles
or suspension frames, chassis, or any other component of a vehicle which is
either wrecked, discarded, dismantled, partially dismantled or inoperative
as well as including pieces or portions thereof.
PERSON — Includes both natural and artificial persons, associations,
partnerships, firms or corporations. When used in the clause imposing
a fine or imprisonment, the term "person," as applied to a partnership
or association, shall mean any member thereof and, as applied to a
corporation, shall mean the president, vice president, secretary, treasurer
or other high-managerial agent thereof. The terms shall also include all
owners of the property on which a violation occurs, including co-owners,
a husband and wife, as well as joint owners. Both an owner and a tenant
are jointly responsible for compliance with the terms of this chapter if the
owner knowingly allows the premises to be used for a prohibited purpose.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Real property which is owned by a municipal or
governmental entity, though not necessarily a place devoted solely to the
uses of the public, but shall include any public street, private street,
highway, road, alley, bridge, park, playground, vacant lot, stream, creek,
public building or similar place within the Borough of Etna which is open to
the public or to which the public or a substantial group has access.
A motor vehicle that does not have a current registration plate and a
current inspection sticker; or
A.
A motor vehicle that does not have the required number of wheels or
tires, does not have one or more of its doors or windows, does not
have an engine or does not have a battery or lacks any part which is
necessary to self-propel it.
B.
79.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 569-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 569-4
1:415
SALVOR — A person engaged in the business of acquiring abandoned
vehicles for the purpose of taking apart, recycling, selling, rebuilding or
exchanging the vehicle or parts thereof.
SCREENED — When used within this chapter, the use of any natural
objects, plantings, embankments, fencing, walls or structures, or a
combination of any of these, which will effectively hide any junked or
abandoned vehicle, dismantled or partially dismantled vehicle, or parts
thereof, so as not to be visible from the highway or abutting properties at
all times of the year or by an occupant of a motor vehicle from a height of
4 1/2 feet above the pavement.
VALUELESS EXCEPT FOR SALVAGE — A vehicle which is inoperable or
unable to meet the vehicle equipment and inspection standards under
Section IV (relating to vehicle characteristics) of the Vehicle Code of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4101 et seq., to the extent
that the cost of repairs would exceed the value of the required vehicle.
The term does not include a vehicle which would qualify as an antique or
classic vehicle under The Vehicle Code80 except for its lack of restoration or
maintenance. A vehicle which is inoperable or unable to meet the vehicle
equipment and inspection standards of Section IV (relating to vehicle
characteristics) to the extent that the cost of repairs would exceed the value
of the vehicle shall be presumed to be valueless except for salvage but the
presumption is rebuttable by a preponderance of the evidence.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices used
exclusively upon rails or tracks. The term does not include a self-propelled
wheelchair or an electrical mobility device operated by and designed for the
exclusive use of a person with a mobility-related disability.
VEHICLE SALVAGE YARD — Any land or structure which a salvor uses
for a salvaging operation of two or more unlicensed, inoperative vehicles.
Salvaging includes the storage and sale of vehicular parts or vehicles.
VEHICULAR FLUIDS — A substance or liquid used frequently in motor
vehicles such as gas, oil or antifreeze.
§ 569-5. Presumption of abandonment.
A. A vehicle shall be presumed to be abandoned under any of the following
circumstances, but the presumption is rebuttable by a preponderance
of the evidence:
(1) The vehicle is physically inoperable and is left unattended on a
highway or other public property for more than 48 hours.
(2) The vehicle has remained illegally on a highway or other public
property for a period of more than 48 hours.
80.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 569-4 ETNA CODE § 569-5
1:416
§ 569-6. Unlawful nuisance.
It shall be unlawful for any person, owner or lessee to store, maintain,
accumulate or keep any abandoned or junked vehicle, dismantled or
partially dismantled vehicle, or a vehicle valueless except for salvage, or
parts thereof, in violation of this chapter, and the same is hereby declared
to be a nuisance and is prohibited.
§ 569-7. Storage of inoperable motor vehicles.
(3) The vehicle is left unattended on a along a highway or other public
property for more than 48 hours and does not bear all of the
following:
(a) A valid registration plate.
(b) A certificate of inspection.
(c) An ascertainable vehicle identification number.
(4) The vehicle has remained on private property without the consent
of the owner or person in control of the property for more than 48
hours.
B. Vehicles and equipment used or to be used in construction or in the
operation or maintenance of highways or public utility facilities which
are left in a manner which do not interfere with the normal movement
of traffic shall not be considered to be abandoned.
A. Residential districts.
(1) No person shall keep, maintain or store, and no person in charge of
or in control of any premises or private property, whether as owner,
lessee, tenant, occupant or otherwise, shall allow any abandoned or
junked vehicle, dismantled vehicle, or wrecked, junked, discarded
or otherwise inoperable motor vehicle, or a vehicle valueless
except for salvage, or parts thereof, to remain outside an enclosed
structure on public or private property in any residential district
longer than 10 days.
(2) No person shall keep, maintain or store any motor vehicle which is
leaking any vehicular fluids outside an enclosed structure in any
residential district.
B. Central Commercial, Neighborhood Commercial, Limited Commercial
and Industrial Districts.
(1) No person shall keep, maintain or store, and no person in charge of
or in control of any premises or private property, whether as owner,
lessee, tenant, occupant or otherwise, shall allow, any abandoned
or junked vehicle, dismantled or partially dismantled vehicle, or
wrecked, junked, discarded or otherwise inoperable motor vehicle,
or a vehicle valueless except for salvage, or parts thereof, to remain
§ 569-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 569-7
1:417
§ 569-8. Salvage yards.
An abandoned or junked vehicle, dismantled or partially dismantled vehicle,
or wrecked, junked, discarded or otherwise inoperable motor vehicle, or a
vehicle valueless except for salvage, or parts thereof, held or stored upon
the property of a salvor in a vehicle salvage yard or by a person engaged
in the business of servicing, repairing, storing or disposing of such motor
vehicles, in conformity with the zoning laws81 of the Borough of Etna, shall
not be a violation of this chapter if, and only if:
§ 569-9. Relocation of cited vehicles prohibited.
After a warning is issued or a citation filed, it shall be unlawful for any
person to relocate an abandoned or junked vehicle, dismantled or partially
dismantled vehicle, or a vehicle valueless except for salvage, or parts
thereof, to another location in the Borough of Etna unless in full compliance
with this chapter.
on public or private property in a Central Commercial,
Neighborhood Commercial, Limited Commercial or Industrial
District longer than 10 days, unless screened so as not to be visible
from the highway or abutting properties at all times of the year.
(2) No person shall keep, maintain or store any motor vehicle which is
leaking any vehicle fluids outside an enclosed structure in any
Central Commercial, Neighborhood Commercial, Limited
Commercial or Industrial District.
A. Such business is in full compliance with the Act of June 17, 1976, P.L.
162, No. 81, § 1,\ et seq., as amended, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7301 (relating to
salvors), as well as Chapter 253 of the Pennsylvania Code, 67 Pa. Code
§ 253.1 et seq., which establishes rules governing the qualifications and
duties of salvors.
B. Each year upon renewal, such business shall provide the Borough
Building Inspector with a valid copy of its license or certificate of
authorization from the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
C. The certificate of authorization is displayed in its place of business.
D. All such vehicles or parts thereof in the salvage yard are screened so as
not to be visible from the highway or abutting properties at all times of
the year.
E. All such vehicles or parts thereof are not leaking vehicular fluids.
F. The salvage yard is located in an I-1 Industrial District.
81.Editor's Note: See Ch. 615, Zoning, of the Code.
§ 569-7 ETNA CODE § 569-10
1:418
§ 569-10. Notice to remove violations; failure to comply.
The Borough Manager, or his or her designee, and Borough of Etna police
officers are hereby authorized and directed to give notice, by personal
service or United States Mail, to the owner or occupant, as the case may be,
of any premises or location where violations of this chapter exist, directing
and requiring such owner or occupant to remove or eliminate such violation
within 10 days after the issuance of the notice. If any person shall neglect,
fail or refuse to comply with such notice within the period stated therein,
such person shall be subject to the penalties provided in this chapter for
the violations hereof, and in addition, the proper officers of the Borough
may remove such violation of this chapter; and the costs thereof, together
with any additional payment authorized by law, may be collected by the
Borough from such person in the manner provided by law, and upon the
neglect, failure or refusal to pay the costs of removal, the proper officers of
the Borough may cause a lien to be filed against the property.
§ 569-11. Covering of abandoned or junked vehicle, or parts
thereof.
Covering or draping a tarpaulin, car cover or other covering over an
abandoned or junked vehicle, a dismantled or partially dismantled vehicle,
or a vehicle valueless except for salvage or parts thereof, is not an
abatement of a violation of this chapter and does not constitute compliance
with § 569-7, Storage of inoperable motor vehicles, of this chapter.
§ 569-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any section of this chapter or knowingly permit
his or her property to be used in violation of any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$1,000 and costs of prosecution per day for each and every offense and, in
default of payment of any fines or costs imposed, may be sentenced to a
period of incarceration not exceeding 10 days in the Allegheny County Jail.
Whenever such person shall have been notified that he or she is committing
such a violation of this chapter, each day that he or she shall continue
such violation after such notification shall constitute a separate offense
punishable by a like fine or penalty.
§ 569-13. Judicial relief.
If the Borough shall deem it necessary to abate a nuisance or nuisances
under this chapter, nothing herein shall prevent the Borough of Etna from
instituting proceedings and seeking relief in the courts of equity to abate
said nuisance or nuisances.
Chapter 587
WATER
§ 569-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 569-13
1:419

ARTICLE I
Water Use and Rates
[Adopted 10-21-1986 by Ord. No. 1187 (Ch. XXVIII of the 1974 Code
of Ordinances); amended in its entirety 3-19-2013 by Ord. No.
1346.82]
§ 587-1. Unauthorized use of water prohibited.
If any person other than those who may be the actual occupants of a
building, lot of ground, or premises into which the water may have been
introduced by a private pipe, and use the water therefrom; or if any person
who has had the water so introduced shall knowingly suffer another to use
the water from his pipe who has not contracted for the use thereof, he, she
or they shall be subject to fines and penalty.
§ 587-2. Certain acts prohibited to protect water system and water
supply.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to damage, injure or molest
any pipes, fire plugs, stop cocks, hydrants, reservoirs, engines or anything
belonging to or appertaining to the water system, or to throw any dirt,
stones or any other articles into any of the reservoirs; any person or persons
so offending shall, upon conviction before a Magisterial District Judge, pay
a fine of not less than $25 or more than $300 together with costs of suit and,
in default of payment thereof, to undergo imprisonment in the Allegheny
County Jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 587-3. Unauthorized opening of fire hydrants, other interference
with water system prohibited.
No person except the superintendent of the water system and those under
him in the employ of the Borough of Etna shall open any fire hydrant except
in case of fire or for street washing purposes, or obstruct any stop cock,
remove the cover of any public or private stop gate or street washer, or
in any way interfere with the management of said water system, and any
such person or persons guilty of such offense shall be fined as hereinafter
provided.
82.Editor's Note: Ord. No. 1346 completed the transfer of ownership of the Etna Water
System to the Hampton Shaler Water Authority and repealed all but three sections of Ord.
No. 1187.
§ 587-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 587-3
1:421

ARTICLE II
Backflow and Cross-Connections
[Adopted 6-15-1993 by Ord. No. 1227]
§ 587-4. General policy.
§ 587-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AIR GAP SEPARATION — The unobstructed vertical distance through the
free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet
supplying potable water to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the
flood level rim of the receptacle. The differential distance shall be at least
double the diameter (2 x D) of the supply pipe measured vertically above
the top of the rim of the vessel. In no case shall the air gap be less than one
inch.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this article is:
(1) To protect the public water supply system from contamination or
pollution by isolating within the consumer's water system
contaminants or pollutants which could backflow through the
service connection into the public water supply system.
(2) To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections,
actual or potential, between the public or consumer's potable water
system and nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures and
sources or systems containing process fluids.
(3) To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of crossconnection
control which will systematically and effectively
prevent the contamination or pollution of the public's and
consumer's potable water system.
B. Application. This article shall apply to all premises served by the public
water supply system of the Borough of Etna.
C. Policy. The public water supplier and the consumer have the joint
responsibility for protection of the public water supply system from
contamination due to backflow of contaminants through the water
service connection. If in the judgment of the public water supplier or his
authorized representative an approved backflow prevention device is
required, the supplier shall give notice to the consumer to install such
approved backflow prevention device at each service connection to his
premises. The consumer shall immediately install such approved device
or devices at his own expense, and failure, refusal or inability on the
part of the consumer to install such device or devices shall constitute
grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises until such
device or devices have been installed.
§ 587-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 587-5
1:423
APPROVED — Means a backflow prevention device or method has been
accepted by the public water supplier as suitable for the proposed use.
ATMOSPHERIC VACUUM BREAKER — (Also known as the non-pressuretype
vacuum breaker.) A device containing a shutoff valve followed by a
valve body containing a float-check, a check seat and an air inlet port. When
the shutoff valve is open, the flow of water causes the float to close the air
inlet port. When the shutoff valve is closed, the float falls and forms a check
valve against backsiphonage and at the same time opens the air inlet port.
AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM — Any water source or system on the premises
of or available to the customer, except connections to other approved
community water supply systems.
BACKFLOW — A flow condition, induced by a differential in pressure, that
causes the flow of water or mixtures of water and other liquids, gases
or other substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply
system from a source other than its intended source.
BACKFLOW PREVENTER — A device or other means which will prevent the
backflow of water or liquids of questionable quality into the public water
supply system.
BACKSIPHONAGE — The backflow of water or mixture of water and other
liquids, gases or other substances from a plumbing fixture or other
customer source into a public water supply system main due to a temporary
negative or subatmospheric pressure within the public water supply system.
CONSUMER — The owner or person in control of any premises supplied by
or in any manner connected to a public water supply system.
CONSUMER'S WATER SYSTEM — Any water system located on the
consumer's premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public
water supply system. A household plumbing system is considered to be a
consumer's water system.
CONTAINMENT — Cross-connection control which isolates the customer's
entire facility from the public water supply system so as to provide the
protection necessary to prevent contamination of the public water supply in
the event of backflow from the customer's facility.
CONTAMINATION — The degradation of the quality of the drinking water
by wastewaters, processed fluids, or any water of a quality less than
accepted drinking water quality to a degree which would create an actual
hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of
disease.
CROSS-CONNECTION — An arrangement allowing either a direct or
indirect connection through which backflow, including backsiphonage, can
occur between the drinking water in a public water system and a system
containing a source or potential source of contamination.
DEGREE OF HAZARD — An evaluation of the potential risk to health and
the adverse effect upon the public water supply system.
§ 587-5 ETNA CODE § 587-5
1:424
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY — An assembly composed of two
single, independently acting, check valves, including tightly closing shutoff
valves located at each end of the assembly and suitable connections for
testing the water tightness of each check valve.
HEALTH HAZARD — Any condition, device or practice in a water system or
its operation that creates or may create a danger to the health and wellbeing
of its users. The word "severe," as used to qualify "health hazard,"
means a hazard to the health of the user that could reasonably be expected
to result in the significant morbidity or death.
INTERCHANGEABLE CONNECTION — An arrangement or device that will
allow alternate but not simultaneous use of two sources of water.
NONPOTABLE WATER — Water not safe for drinking, personal or culinary
use.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, company, corporation,
municipality, municipal authority, political subdivision or any agency of
federal or state government. The term includes the officers, employees and
agents of any partnership, association, company, corporation, municipality,
municipal authority, political subdivision or any agency of federal or state
government.
POLLUTION — The presence in water of any foreign substance that tends
to degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness
or quality of the water to a degree which does not create an actual hazard
to the public health but which does adversely and unreasonably affect such
waters for domestic use.
POTABLE WATER — Water which is satisfactory for drinking, culinary and
domestic purposes and meets the requirements of the Department of
Environmental Protection.
PROCESS FLUIDS — Any fluid or solution which may be chemically,
biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or
concentration, such as would constitute a health, pollutional or system
hazard if introduced into the public or a consumer's water system. This
includes but is not limited to:
A. Polluted or contaminated waters;
B. Process waters;
Used waters originating from the public water system which may have
deteriorated in sanitary quality;
C.
D. Cooling waters;
Contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes, streams or
irrigation systems;
E.
F. Chemicals in solution or suspension;
§ 587-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 587-5
1:425
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLIER — A person who owns or operates a public
water system.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM — A system which provides water to the
public for human consumption which has at least 15 service connections or
regularly serves an average of at least 25 individuals daily at least 60 days
out of the year. The term is either a community or noncommunity water
system and includes any collection, treatment, storage and distribution
facilities under control of the operator of the system and used in connection
with the system. The term includes collection or pretreatment storage
facilities not under such control which are used in connection with the
system. The term also includes a system which provides water for bottling
or bulk hauling for human consumption.
REDUCED PRESSURE ZONE (RPZ) DEVICE — A minimum of two
independently acting check valves, together with an automatically operated
pressure differential relief valve located between the two check valves.
During normal flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure
between these two checks shall be less than the supply pressure. In case of
leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to
the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure between the checks
at less than the supply pressure. The unit must include tightly closing
shutoff valves located at each end of the device, and each device shall be
fitted with properly located test cocks.
SERVICE CONNECTION — The terminal end of a service line from the
public water supply system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service,
then the service connection means the downstream end of the meter.
SYSTEM HAZARD — A condition posing an actual or potential threat of
damage to the physical properties of the public water system or the
consumer's potable water system.
§ 587-6. Water system.
Oils, gases, acids, alkalis, and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in
industrial or other processes, or for firefighting purposes;
G.
H. Heating system waters from boilers or heat pumps.
A. The water system shall be considered as made up of two parts: the
public water supply system and the consumer's water system.
B. The public water supply system shall consist of the source facilities and
the distribution system and shall include all those facilities of the public
water supply system under the control of the public water supplier up
to the point where the consumer's water system begins.
C. The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in the
production, treatment, storage and delivery of water to the public
distribution system.
§ 587-5 ETNA CODE § 587-6
1:426
§ 587-7. Cross-connections prohibited.
§ 587-8. Survey and investigations.
§ 587-9. Where protection is required.
D. The public distribution system shall include the network of conduits
used for delivery of water from the source to the consumer's water
system.
E. The consumer's water system shall include all facilities from the service
connection which are utilized in conveying water from the public
distribution system to points of use.
A. No water service connection shall be installed or maintained to any
premises where actual or potential cross-connections to the public
water supply system or consumer's water system may exist unless such
actual or potential cross-connections are abated or controlled to the
satisfaction of the public water supplier.
B. No connection shall be installed or maintained whereby water from an
auxiliary water supply may enter a public or consumer's water system
unless such auxiliary water supply and the method of connection and
use of such supply shall have been approved.
A. The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the
public water supplier or his authorized representative for the purposes
of conducting surveys and investigations of water use practices within
the consumer's premises to determine whether there are actual or
potential cross-connections to the consumer's water system through
which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into the public potable
water system.
B. On request by the public water supplier the consumer shall furnish
information on water use practices within his premises.
C. It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to conduct periodic
surveys of water use practices on his premises to determine whether
there are actual or potential cross-connections to his water system
through which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into the
public water supply system.
A. An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed prior to the
first branch line leading off each service line to a consumer's water
system where, in the judgment of the public water supplier, an actual or
potential hazard to the public water supply system exists.
B. An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system where the following
conditions exist:
§ 587-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 587-9
1:427
(1) Systems having an auxiliary water supply, unless such auxiliary
supply is accepted as an additional source by the public water
supplier and approved by the Department of Environmental
Protection.
(2) Systems where any substance is handled in such a fashion as to
create an actual or potential hazard to the public water supply
system. This shall include systems having sources or auxiliary
systems containing process fluids or waters originating from the
public water supply system which are no longer under the sanitary
control of the water purveyor.
(3) Systems having internal cross-connections that, in the judgment of
the public water supplier, are not correctable or intricate plumbing
arrangements which make it impractical to determine whether or
not cross-connections exist.
(4) Systems where, because of security requirements or other
prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make
a complete cross-connection survey.
(5) Systems having a repeated history of cross-connections being
established or reestablished.
(6) Others specified by the public water supplier.
C. An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system serving, but not necessarily
limited to, the following types of facilities unless the public water
supplier determines that no actual or potential hazard to the public
water supply system exists.
(1) Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes.
(2) Laboratories.
(3) Piers, docks, waterfront facilities.
(4) Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping station or stormwater
pumping station.
(5) Food or beverage processing plants.
(6) Chemical plants.
(7) Metal plating industries.
(8) Petroleum processing or storage plants.
(9) Radioactive material processing plants.
(10) Car wash or truck wash.
(11) Others specified by the water purveyor.
§ 587-9 ETNA CODE § 587-10
1:428
§ 587-10. Type of protection required.
The type of protection required under § 587-9A, B and C of this article shall
depend on the degree of hazard which exists, as follows:
§ 587-11. Backflow prevention devices.
A. An approved air gap separation shall be installed where the public
water supply system may be contaminated with substances that are
dangerous to the public health and could cause a severe health hazard.
B. An approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure zone
backflow prevention device shall be installed where the public water
supply system may be contaminated with a substance that could cause
a system or health hazard.
C. An approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure zone
backflow prevention device or an approved double check valve
assembly shall be installed where the public water supply system may
be polluted with substances that would be objectionable but not
dangerous to health.
A. Any backflow prevention device required by this article shall be of a
model or construction approved by the public water supplier and shall
comply with the following:
(1) Air gap separation to be approved shall be at least twice the
diameter of the supply pipe, measured vertically above the top rim
of the vessel, but in no case less than one inch.
(2) A double check valve assembly or a reduced pressure zone
backflow prevention device shall be approved by the public water
supplier and shall mean a device that has been manufactured in full
conformance with standards established by the American Water
Works Association, entitled "AWWA C506 Standards for Reduced
Pressure Principle and Double Check Valve Backflow Prevention
Devices." Said AWWA standards are herein adopted by the public
water supplier. Final approval, however, of the and the double
check valve assembly shall be evidenced by a certificate of full
approval issued by an approved testing laboratory certifying full
compliance with the said AWWA standards.
(3) An interchangeable connection to be approved shall be either a
swing-type connector or a four-way valve of the lubricated plug
type that operates through a mechanism which unseats the plug,
turns it 90° and reseats the plug. Four-way valves shall not be used
as stop valves but must have separate stop valves on each pipe
connected to the valve. The tell-tale port on the four-way valve shall
have no piping connected, and the threads or flange on this port
shall be destroyed so that a connection cannot be made.
§ 587-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 587-11
1:429
§ 587-12. Installation.
§ 587-13. Inspection and maintenance.
B. Existing backflow prevention devices approved by the public water
supplier at the time of installation and properly maintained shall,
except for inspection and maintenance requirements, be excluded from
the requirement of § 587-11A of this article, providing the public water
supplier is assured that they will satisfactorily protect the public
potable supply system. Whenever the existing device is moved from the
present location or requires more than minimum maintenance or when
the public water supplier finds that the maintenance of the device
constitutes a hazard to health, the device shall be replaced by a
backflow prevention device meeting the requirements of this article.
A. Backflow prevention devices required by this article shall be installed at
a location and in a manner approved by the public water supplier and
shall be installed by a person properly qualified and at the expense of
the water consumer.
B. Backflow prevention devices installed on the service line to a
consumer's water system shall be located on the consumer's side of the
water meter, as close to the meter as is reasonably practical, and prior
to any other connection.
C. Pits or vaults shall be of watertight construction, be so located and
constructed as to prevent flooding and shall be maintained free from
standing water by means of either a sump and pump or a suitable drain.
Such sump pump or drain shall not connect to a sanitary sewer nor
permit flooding of the pit or vault by reverse flow from its point of
discharge. An access ladder and adequate natural or artificial lighting
shall be provided to permit maintenance inspection and testing of the
backflow prevention device.
A. It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which backflow
prevention devices required by this article are installed to have
inspections, tests and overhaul made in accordance with the following
schedule or more often where inspections indicate a need.
(1) Air separation shall be inspected at time of installation and at least
every 12 months thereafter.
(2) Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested for
tightness at the time of installation and at least every 12 months
thereafter. They shall be dismantled, inspected internally, cleaned
and repaired whenever needed and at least every 30 months.
(3) Reduced pressure zone backflow prevention devices shall be
inspected and tested for tightness at the time of installation and at
least every 12 months thereafter. They shall be dismantled,
§ 587-11 ETNA CODE § 587-13
1:430
§ 587-14. Booster pumps.
§ 587-15. Violations and penalties.
inspected internally, cleaned and repaired when ever needed and
at least every five years.
(4) Interchangeable connections shall be inspected at the time of
installation and at least every 12 months thereafter.
B. Inspections, tests and overhaul of backflow prevention devices shall be
made at the expense of the water consumer and shall be performed by
the public water supplier or a person certified to inspect, test and
overhaul backflow prevention devices.
C. Whenever backflow prevention devices required by this article are
found to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the expense
of the consumer without delay.
D. The water consumer must maintain a complete record of each backflow
prevention device from purchase to retirement. This shall include a
comprehensive listing that includes a record of all tests, inspections
and repairs. Records of inspections, tests, repairs and overhaul shall be
submitted to the public water supplier upon request.
E. Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative,
removed or otherwise made ineffective without specific authorization
by the water supplier.
A. Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or
within any premises, such pump shall be equipped with a low-pressure
cutoff device designed to shut off the booster pump when the pressure
in the service line on the suction side of the pump drops to 10 pounds
per square inch gauge or less for a period of 30 seconds or longer.
B. It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low-pressure
cutoff device in proper working order and to certify to the public water
supplier, at least once a year, that the device is operating properly.
A. The public water supplier may deny or discontinue, after reasonable
notice to the occupants thereof, the water service to any premises
wherein any backflow prevention device required by this article is not
installed, tested and maintained in a manner acceptable to the public
water supplier, or if it is found that the backflow prevention device has
been removed or bypassed, or if an unprotected cross-connection exists
on the premises, or if a low-pressure cutoff device required by this
article is not installed and maintained in working order.
B. Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the consumer
has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance
with this article and to the satisfaction of the public water supplier.
§ 587-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 587-15
1:431
Chapter 596
WATERCOURSES
§ 587-15 ETNA CODE § 587-15
1:432
ARTICLE I
Pine Creek
[Adopted 1-18-1906 by Ord. 23383 (Ch. XXVII, Part 1, of the 1974
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 596-1. Width of Pine Creek established.
The width of Pine Creek from the junction of said creek with Allegheny River
northwardly to the junction of said Pine Creek with Little Pine Creek in the
Borough of Etna shall be and is hereby established and fixed at 60 feet, 30
feet on each side of the center line of said Pine Creek, and the width of
said Pine Creek from the junction with Little Pine Creek northwardly to the
Borough line shall be and is hereby established and fixed at 53 feet, 26 1/
2 feet on each side of the center line of said Pine Creek as established and
determined by the Engineer of said Borough in the survey and plan made
thereof, and filed in the office of the Borough Clerk (Secretary).
§ 596-2. Obstructions within certain distance of center line of creek
prohibited.
It is hereby declared unlawful for any person or persons or corporations to
make or erect, or cause to be made or erected, any wall, abutment, filling
or other obstruction in the bed of the said Pine Creek within 30 feet of
said center line of said creek, between the junction of said creek with the
Allegheny River and the junction of said creek with Little Pine Creek; and
26 1/2 feet of said center of said creek between the junction with Little Pine
Creek and the Borough line aforesaid.
§ 596-3. Prohibited obstructions constitute nuisance; abatement;
work on existing obstructions.
All obstructions in the bed of said Pine Creek within the distances aforesaid
of said center line, as established aforesaid, are hereby declared public
nuisances and it shall be the duty of the Street Commissioner of said
Borough to prevent and abate any such obstructions or erections as may
be made within said limits. No repairs or renewal of walls, abutments or
other obstructions heretofore made in the bed of said Pine Creek within the
distances aforesaid of said center line of the said creek as established shall
be made or caused to be made or allowed by any authority, except such
obstructions and erections be delimited and curtailed to such an extent that
they will cease to encroach on the natural watercourse of said Pine Creek,
within the limits hereafter established, it being the purpose and intention of
this section to eliminate gradually the obstructions now encroaching upon
the said watercourse as inexpensively as may be possible.
83.Editor's Note: Section 8 of this article repealed Ord. No. 221 and all other ordinances and
parts of ordinances conflicting with this article.
§ 596-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 596-4
1:433
§ 596-4. Abutments or walls for bridges, culverts, tunnels and
sewers; bridge clearance.
Hereafter, no bridges, culverts, tunnels or sewers shall be constructed or
reconstructed across or in Pine Creek in the Borough of Etna, unless the
abutment or walls thereof be constructed of stone, cement, concrete or a
similar composition of equal stability and durability approved by the Street
Commissioner of the Borough of Etna, provided that all bridges erected or
reconstructed over or in Pine Creek, from the mouth of said Pine Creek to
Bridge Street, shall be required to be of the height of not less than 16 feet;
from Bridge Street to Butler Street, shall be required to be the height of
not less than 14 feet; and from Butler Street to the Borough line, shall be
required to be of the height of not less than 12 feet in the clear above lowwater
mark and of such width as regulated herein.
§ 596-5. Walls and other structures along creek to be of stipulated
durable materials.
No wall or other device or structure hereinafter erected along the banks of
Pine Creek in said Borough shall be allowed unless the same be of stone,
cement, concrete or of a similar composition of equal stability and durability
to be approved by the Street Committee of said Borough.
§ 596-6. Structures undertaken in violation of ordinance constitute
nuisance; abatement.
All walls, abutments, fillings, bridges or other structures hereafter
undertaken in violation of this article are hereby declared public nuisances,
and it shall be the duty of the Street Commissioner to prevent and abate
such nuisances forthwith.
§ 596-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-8-1954 Ord. No. 806;
12-11-1989 by Ord. No. 1208]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$600 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of fine and costs,
to undergo imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
§ 596-4 ETNA CODE § 596-7
1:434
ARTICLE II
Little Pine Creek
[Adopted 4-13-1922 by Ord. No. 497 (Ch. XXVII, Part 2, of the 1974
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 596-8. Width of Little Pine Creek established.84
The width of Little Pine Creek from the junction of said Little Pine Creek
with Pine Creek, and thence northwardly to the Borough line, shall be and
is hereby established and fixed at 30 feet, 15 feet on each side of the center
line of said Little Pine Creek as established and determined by the Engineer
of said Borough in the survey and plan made thereof and filed in the office
of the Borough Clerk (Secretary).85
§ 596-9. Obstructions within 15 feet of center line of creek
prohibited.
It is hereby declared unlawful for any person or corporation to make or
erect, or cause to be made or erected, any wall, abutment, filling or other
obstruction in the bed of said Little Pine Creek within 15 feet of said center
line of said Creek between the junction of said Little Pine Creek with Pine
Creek and the Borough line aforesaid.
§ 596-10. Prohibited obstructions constitute nuisance; abatement;
work on existing obstructions; construction, operation and
maintenance of flood control projects. [Amended 3-18-1986 by Ord.
No. 1182]
All obstructions in the bed of said Little Pine Creek within the distance
aforesaid of said center line, as established, are hereby declared public
nuisances, and it shall be the duty of the Street Commissioner of said
Borough to prevent and abate any such obstructions or erections as may be
made within said limits. No repairs or renewals of walls, abutments or other
obstructions heretofore made in the bed of said Little Pine Creek within
the distances aforesaid of said center line of the said Creek as established
shall be made or caused to be made or allowed by any authority, except
such obstructions and erections be delimited and curtailed to such an extent
that they will cease to encroach on the natural watercourse of said Little
Pine within the limits herein established, it being the purpose of this section
to eliminate gradually the obstructions now encroaching upon the said
watercourse as inexpensively as may be possible.
84.Editor's Note: The preamble to this article stated that it was necessary for the
preservation of the health of the citizens of the Borough and for the security of their
property from damages and injury by reason of the overflowing of Little Pine Creek, that
the natural course of the Creek be preserved or unimpaired as may be feasible, and the
natural width thereof not be restricted to an extent that would dangerously hinder or
obstruct the passage of water therein in times of floods.
85.Editor's Note: Section 8 of this article repealed all conflicting ordinances and parts of
ordinances.
§ 596-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 596-10
1:435
It is further declared for the purpose of erecting or participating in the
erection of any flood control project on said West Little Pine Creek, the
Borough may construct, operate and maintain flood control facilities within
the width of the Creek as established by § 596-8 above or within any
easements which the Borough may acquire for said purpose.
§ 596-11. Abutments or walls for bridges, culverts, tunnels and
sewers; bridge clearance.
Hereafter no bridges, culverts, tunnels or sewers shall be constructed or
reconstructed across or in Little Pine Creek in the Borough of Etna, unless
the abutments or walls thereof be constructed of stone, cement, concrete
or a similar composition of equal stability and durability approved by the
Street Commissioner or other authorized authority of the Borough of Etna,
provided that all bridges erected or reconstructed over or in Little Pine
Creek, from the junction of said Creek with Pine Creek to the Borough line
aforesaid, shall be required to be of the height of not less than eight feet in
the clear above low-water mark and of such width as regulated herein.
§ 596-12. Walls and other structures along Creek to be of stipulated
durable material.
No wall or other device or structure hereinafter erected along the banks of
Little Pine Creek in said Borough shall be allowed unless the same be of
stone, cement, concrete or of a similar composition of equal stability and
durability to be approved by the Street Committee of said Borough.
§ 596-13. Structures undertaken in violation of ordinance
constitute nuisance; abatement.
All walls, abutments, fillings, bridges or other structures hereafter
undertaken in violation of the terms of this article are hereby declared
public nuisances, and it shall be the duty of the Street Commissioner or
other authorized officer to prevent and abate such nuisances forthwith.
§ 596-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-8-1954 by Ord. No.
809; 12-11-1989 by Ord. No. 1208]
Any person, firm or corporation, who or which violates any provision of this
article, shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$600 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of fine and costs,
to undergo imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
§ 596-10 ETNA CODE § 596-14
1:436
ARTICLE III
Dangerous Obstructions
[Adopted 2-19-1991 by Ord. No. 1215]
§ 596-15. Definition.
For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply:
DANGEROUS OBSTRUCTIONS — Any tree, structure, trash, debris or other
structure or thing which exists was placed, dumped or which has fallen or
is likely to fall during a subsequent flood or windstorm at a location within
or along a watercourse, streambed or creek, where said obstruction could
cause interference with or a diversion of the stream flow or creek or could
become waterborne during periods of heavy runoff.
§ 596-16. Duty to remove dangerous obstructions.
From and after the passage and approval of this article, all owners and
occupiers of property within the Borough through whose property streams,
creeks, or watercourses flow are required to remove from same all
dangerous obstructions, including all trash, debris or other structure or
things, which impede the flow of water through the stream, creek or
watercourse.
§ 596-17. Noncompliance a nuisance.
All dangerous obstructions, trees, structures, trash, debris or other
structure or thing which exists was placed, dumped or which has fallen or
is likely to fall during a subsequent flood or windstorm at a location within
or along a watercourse, streambed or creek, where said obstruction could
cause interference with or a diversion of the stream flow or creek or could
become waterborne during periods of heavy runoff within Etna Borough are
hereby declared to be a nuisance.
§ 596-18. Enforcing authority.
The Borough Engineer and the Building Inspector are hereby authorized to
make such inspections and take such action as may be required to enforce
the provisions of this article.
§ 596-19. Inspection.
The Borough Engineer and the Building Inspector shall inspect all trees,
structures, and other things within and adjacent to all streams, creeks,
channels and watercourses within the Borough to determine whether or not
such things constitute a dangerous obstruction, as defined herein.
§ 596-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 596-20
1:437
§ 596-20. Notice to owners or occupiers of property to remove
dangerous obstructions.
Whenever it shall be ascertained by the Borough Engineer or Building
Inspector that any owner or occupier of any real estate in Etna Borough
has failed or neglected to comply with any of the terms of this article, the
Building Inspector shall cause a written notice to be served upon the owner
or occupier, by personal service or by United States Mail, directing the
owner or occupier to comply with all the terms of this article within five
days. If the premises are vacant, service of such notice shall be made by
posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on the premises and mailing
a copy of such notice by certified mail to the owner or owner's last known
post office address.
§ 596-21. Failure of owner or occupier to comply.
In the event of the failure of the owner or occupier of said real estate within
the Borough of Etna to remove such dangerous obstruction within five days
after being notified to do so, the Borough of Etna shall remove and abate
such dangerous obstruction and bill the owner or occupier for the actual
cost thereof, together with a charge of $10.
§ 596-22. Report of dangerous obstruction.
Before the Borough removes any obstructions under the provisions of this
article, the Borough Engineer or Building Inspector shall prepare and file
with the Borough Secretary a report setting forth the reasons for finding
the existence of a dangerous obstruction. Whenever possible, photographs
should also be provided.
§ 596-23. Legal proceedings to force compliance.
In addition to the other penalties provided by this article, the Borough of
Etna may institute proceedings in courts of equity to require owners of real
estate in the Borough of Etna to comply with the provisions of this article.
§ 596-24. Penalties to be lien.
The cost of removal, fine and penalties hereinabove mentioned may be
entered by the Borough of Etna as a lien against the property in accordance
with existing provisions of law.
§ 596-25. Violations.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, deface or mutilate any
notice posted pursuant to the provisions of this article; and
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, impede or interfere with
any owner or his agent or with any representative of the Borough when
engaged in performing any reasonable act for the execution of any
order of abatement issued pursuant hereto.
§ 596-20 ETNA CODE § 596-26
1:438
§ 596-26. Penalties.
§ 596-27. Severability.
The provisions of this article shall be severable, and if any of its provisions
shall be held to be unconstitutional or unenforceable for any reason, the
validity of any of the remaining provisions of this article shall not be
affected.
§ 596-28. Conflict.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances conflicting herewith be and the same
are hereby repealed insofar as they conflict herewith.
A. Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof before any issuing authority, forfeit and
pay a fine of not more than $300 for each offense and, in default of
payment, shall be imprisoned for a period not exceeding five days in the
county jail.
B. Each and every day upon which any owner or occupier of real estate in
the Borough of Etna permits a violation to exist shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 596-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 596-28
1:439
Chapter 601
WELLHEAD PROTECTION
§ 596-28 ETNA CODE § 596-28
1:440
ARTICLE I
Wellhead Protection
§ 601-1. Findings.
The Borough of Etna finds that:
§ 601-2. Purpose.
The Borough of Etna desires to protect the public health, safety and welfare
through the preservation of the Borough's major groundwater resources
to ensure a future supply of safe, plentiful and healthful drinking water
for the Borough, as well as neighboring municipalities, local residents and
employees, and the general public. The designation of wellhead protection
areas and careful regulation of activities within these areas can reduce the
potential for groundwater contamination.
§ 601-3. Applicability.
A. The groundwater underlying the Borough is a major source of its
existing and future water supply, including drinking water.
B. The groundwater aquifers are integrally connected with, are recharged
by, and flow into the surface waters, lakes and streams, which
constitute a major source of drinking water for the region.
C. Accidental spills and discharges of toxic hazardous materials may
threaten the quality of such groundwater supplies and related water
resources in the Borough, posing potential public health and safety
hazards.
D. Unless preventative measures are adopted to control the discharge and
storage of toxic and hazardous materials within the Borough, spills and
discharges of such materials will predictably occur and with greater
frequency and degree of hazard by reason of increasing construction,
commercial and industrial development, population and vehicular
traffic in the Borough.
A. This chapter shall apply to those areas of the Borough which are
located within wellhead protection areas surrounding a protected
public water supply well as delineated on an official map available for
inspection at the Borough office. A map of the wellhead protection
areas is included in Appendix A for general reference.86 The chapter
shall not apply to any activities of the Borough of Etna or its agents,
servants or employees in performance of their governmental functions.
B. This chapter regulates the following land uses, physical facilities and
activities, which have the potential to deplete or contaminate
groundwater:
86.Editor's Note: The Wellhead Protection Area Map is on file in the Borough office.
§ 601-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 601-3
1:441
§ 601-4. Repealer.
Any ordinance of the Borough inconsistent with any of the provisions of this
chapter is hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
§ 601-5. Severability.
Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of
any of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
§ 601-6. Compatibility with other ordinance requirements.
Approvals issued pursuant to this chapter do not relieve the applicant of
the responsibility to secure the required permits or approvals for activities
regulated by other applicable code, rule or ordinance.
(1) Light industrial.
(2) Sewage disposal.
(3) Manufacturing.
(4) Injection wells.
(5) Storage tanks - underground and aboveground.
(6) Disposal facilities - solid waste dumpsites.
(7) Subdivisions.
(8) Land developments.
(9) Well drilling.
§ 601-3 ETNA CODE § 601-6
1:442
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 601-7. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACHD — The Allegheny County Health Department.
AGRICULTURAL OPERATIONS — Those operations which include tilling,
cultivation and animal husbandry and which qualify as earthmoving
pursuant to DEP Chapter 102 Rules and Regulations.87
BOROUGH — The Borough of Etna.
CONE OF DEPRESSION — The area surrounding a pumping well within
which the water table elevation has been lowered due to groundwater
withdrawal.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Allegheny County Conservation District.
CONSERVATION PLAN — An erosion and sedimentation control plan
prepared for agricultural properties as required by Chapter 102 of the DEP
Rules and Regulations and as reviewed and approved by the Conservation
District.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DETENTION POND — A basin designed to retard stormwater runoff by
temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a predetermined rate
through a defined outlet structure.
ENVIRONMENTAL HAZARD SURVEY FORM — A document authorized
by the Pennsylvania Worker and Community Right-to-Know Act, which, if
required by the Department of Labor and Industry for a facility, describes
the hazardous substances emitted, discharged or disposed of from the
workplace.
EPA — The Federal Environmental Protection Agency.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — A product or waste or combination of
substances that, because of the quantity, concentration, physical, chemical
or infectious characteristics, if not properly treated, stored, transported,
used or disposed of, or otherwise managed, would create a potential threat
to public health through direct or indirect introduction into groundwater
resources and the subsurface environment, which includes the soil and all
subsequent materials located below. Such hazardous materials include, but
is not limited to, materials which may be included on one or more of the
following lists:
Occupational Safety and Health Act, 29 CFR Part 1910, Subpart Z,
Extremely Hazardous Substance List.
A.
87.Editor's Note: See 25 Pa. Code Ch. 102.
§ 601-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 601-7
1:443
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SURVEY FORM — A document required by the
Pennsylvania Worker and Community Right-to-Know Act, which provides a
listing of all hazardous substances found in the workplace.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
LARGE VOLUME SUBSURFACE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — A sewage
disposal facility which is designed to discharge directly to the soil profile,
whether natural or enhanced, and which has a design capacity in excess of
10,000 gallons per day.
American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists, Threshold
Limit Values for Chemical Substances and Physical Agents in the Work
Environment (latest edition).
B.
National Toxicology Program, Annual Report on Carcinogens (latest
edition).
C.
International Agency for Research on Cancer Monographs (latest
edition).
D.
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Labor and Industry,
Hazardous Substance List (latest edition).
E.
"Hazardous substances" defined pursuant to Section 311 of the Federal
Clean Water Act.
F.
"Toxic materials" defined pursuant to Chapter 75 of DEP Rules and
Regulations.
G.
"Hazardous wastes" defined pursuant to Section 101 of the Federal
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
H.
The improvement of one lot or two more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of, streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the Municipalities
Planning Code.88
C.
88.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
§ 601-7 ETNA CODE § 601-7
1:444
LIGHT INDUSTRY — Industrial, commercial, public or retail establishments
which engage in manufacturing, fabrication or service activities and which
appear on the following list:
MANUFACTURING — Industrial establishments which produce primary
products from raw materials.
NUTRIENT MANAGEMENT PLAN — A document applicable to agricultural
properties which describes the storage, handling and application of
fertilizers, including manure, related to agricultural production.
PERSON — An individual, association, public or private corporation for
profit or not for profit, partnership, firm, trust, estate, department, board,
bureau or agency of the commonwealth, political subdivision, municipality,
A. Bulk agricultural products dealers and distributors.
B. Mining and quarrying.
C. Highway deicing material storage.
D. Textile and apparel products.
E. Lumber and wood preserving.
F. Printing and publishing.
G. Chemical products.
H. Leather products.
I. Mineral products: glass and cement.
J. Metal products.
K. Machine shops.
L. Electronics and electronic equipment.
M. Transportation maintenance.
N. Scrap trade and metal container recyclers.
O. Chemical and petroleum storage and sales.
P. Automotive repair, service and related parking.
Q. Personal services; laundry, pest control and photo-finishing.
R. Repair service, furniture, welding and septage services.
S. Amusement and recreation.
T. Educational, medical and engineering laboratories.
U. Landscapers.
§ 601-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 601-7
1:445
district authority or any other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized
by law as the subject of rights and duties.
PESTICIDE MANAGEMENT PLAN — A document applicable to agricultural
properties which describes the storage, handling and application of
products to control pests and undesirable vegetation related to agricultural
productions.
POLLUTION INCIDENT PREVENTION (PIP) PLAN — An environmental
emergency response document authorized by Chapter 101 of the DEP Rules
and Regulations, which is applicable to facilities which handle materials
with the potential for accidental pollution of the waters of the
commonwealth. Specific requirements for a PIP plan are contained in
"Guidelines for the Development and Implementation of Environmental
Emergency Response Plans," PADEP, September 1990.
PREPAREDNESS, PREVENTION AND CONTINGENCY (PPC) PLAN — An
environmental emergency response document required by the Federal
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act to facilities which generate, store,
treat or dispose of hazardous wastes. Hazardous wastes are those defined
within the DEP regulations or other wastes which meet specific
characteristic tests.
PROFESSIONAL — A person who, by education, experience, certification or
licensure, has demonstrated expertise in a particular field.
PROTECTED PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY WELL — Any well used or intended
to be used as a groundwater supply source as part of a public water supply
system for which wellhead protection areas have been established.
RETENTION POND — A basin designed to retard stormwater runoff by
temporarily storing the runoff, which does not have a defined outlet
structure and which empties through a combination of evaporation,
transpiration and infiltration.
SARA TITLE II TIER I AND TIER II REPORTS — Documents required
by the Federal Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act (SARA),
which apply to employers who have extremely hazardous substances in the
workplace. The Tier I document lists the amounts and locations within the
workplace or extremely hazardous substances by type of hazard (e.g., fire,
explosion, acute health hazard). The Tier II document provides a listing of
each specific extremely hazardous substance in the workplace and each
specific extremely hazardous substance exceeding 10,000 pounds at any
one time.
SARA TITLE III OFF-SITE PLAN — A document required by the Federal
Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act (SARA), which applies to
employers who have extremely hazardous substances in the workplace.
The document identifies the transportation route of extremely hazardous
substances, a description of the workplace and a risk analysis of the
operation to the surrounding community.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products or
excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals
§ 601-7 ETNA CODE § 601-7
1:446
and any noxious or deleterious substances being harmful or inimical to the
public health or to animal or aquatic life, or to the use of water for domestic
water supply or for recreation, or which constitutes pollution under the Act
of June 22, 1937 (P.L. 1987, No. 394), known as "The Clean Streams Law,"
as amended.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — A combination of piping, tanks or other
facilities for the collection, conveyance, treatment and disposal of sewage.
SEWAGE SLUDGE — The course screenings, grit and dewatered or airdried
products of sewage treatment, septic and holding tank pumping and
any other residues from sewage collection and treatment systems which
require disposal.
SILL PREVENTION CONTROL AND COUNTERMEASURE (SPCC) PLAN —
An environmental quality emergency response document required by the
federal Clean Water Act for facilities which handle hazardous substances
as defined in the Clean Water Act. The plan requirements are virtually the
same as for a PIP plan.
SINKHOLE — A closed, generally circular, depression in the land surface
of variable depths an and width, characterized by a distinct breaking of
the ground surface, and formed by solution of carbonate bedrock and
downward movement of soil into bedrock voids or by collapse of underlying
caves.
SPILL PREVENTION RESPONSE (SPR) PLAN — An environmental
emergency response document required by the Pennsylvania Storage Tank
and Spill Prevention Act (STSPA) for facilities with an aboveground storage
tank exceeding a volume of 21,000 gallons. The plan requirements are
specified in Sections 902 and 903 of the STSPA. A downstream notification
requirement applies to regulated tanks adjacent to surface waters.
STORAGE OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — The containment of hazardous
material on a temporary basis in such a manner as not to constitute disposal
of such waste. It shall be presumed that the containment of hazardous
material in excess of one year constitutes disposal. This presumption can be
overcome by clear and convincing evidence to the contrary.
STORAGE TANK —
ABOVEGROUND — A tank which contains substances as regulated
under the Storage Tank and Spill Prevention Act (STSPA), which meets
the following criteria: a stationary tank with 250 gallons or more of
capacity with greater than 90% of its capacity above ground. Specific
exceptions to this definition are included within the STSPA.
A.
UNDERGROUND — A tank which contains substances as regulated
under the Storage Tank and Spill Prevention Act (STSPA), which meets
the following criteria: a tank with 110 gallons or more of capacity with
10% or greater of its capacity beneath the ground surface. Specific
exceptions to this definition are included within the STSPA.
B.
§ 601-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 601-7
1:447
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by
any means into two or more lots, parcels or other divisions of land, including
changes in the existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or
future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs or devisees,
transfer of ownership or building or to development; provided, however,
that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels
of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of access
or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
UNDERGROUND INJECTION WELL — A bored, driven or dug well for the
emplacement of fluids into the ground (except drilling muds and similar
materials used in well construction).
WASTE — Garbage, refuse and other discarded materials, including, but not
limited to, solid and liquid materials resulting from municipal, industrial,
commercial, institutional, agricultural and residential activities.
WELL — Any excavation that is drilled, cored, bored, washed, driven,
dug, jetted or otherwise constructed and when the intended use of such
excavation is to conduct groundwater from an aquifer or aquifer system to
the surface by pumping or natural flow, or to monitor the characteristics of
groundwater within an aquifer system.
WELLHEAD PROTECTION AREA — The area of the land surface that is
within the area of protected public water supply wells.
§ 601-7 ETNA CODE § 601-7
1:448
ARTICLE III
Wellhead Protection Requirements
§ 601-8. General requirements.
No activity specified in Article I, § 601-3, shall occur within the wellhead
protection area except in strict conformance with the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 601-9. Wellhead protection areas.
A. Mapping of wellhead protection areas. To implement the provisions of
this Wellhead Protection Ordinance, wellhead protection areas
surrounding protected public water supply wells are hereby
established. The boundaries of wellhead protection areas are shown on
an official map, which is available for inspections at the Borough office.
A copy of the official map at a reduced scale is included in Appendix A
for general reference.89 The final boundary was determined by Moody
and Associates and the ACHD in 1995. This map is incorporated by
reference and may be amended by the Council of the Borough of Etna.
B. Examples of regulated activities include, but are not limited to, the
following:
(1) Facilities which generate, store, treat or dispose of hazardous
material and which are required to maintain a Pollution Incident
Prevention (PIP), Spill Prevention Control and Countermeasure
(SPCC), Preparedness, Prevention and Contingency (PPC), Spill
Prevention Response (SPR), or SARA Title III Off-Site Plan;
(2) Bulk agricultural products dealers and distributors;
(3) Large volume subsurface sewage disposal systems;
(4) Large volume spray irrigation sewage disposal systems;
(5) Underground injection wells;
(6) Aboveground storage tanks;
(7) Underground storage tanks;
(8) Waste disposal facilities;
(9) Land application of sewage sludge;
(10) Stormwater retention facilities;
(11) Unlined stormwater detention facilities;
(12)Well drilling;
89.Editor's Note: Appendix A and the official map are on file and available in the Borough
office.
§ 601-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 601-9
1:449
§ 601-10. Groundwater sources.
(13) Operations and/or facilities which are involved with the
manufacture, storage or processing of materials and which fall
within the following categories:
(a) Bulk agricultural products dealers and distributors.
(b) Mining, subsurface river activities, and quarrying.
(c) Highway deicing material storage.
(d) Textile and apparel products.
(e) Lumber and wood preserving.
(f) Printing and publishing.
(g) Chemical products.
(h) Leather products.
(i) Mineral products: glass and cement.
(j) Metal products.
(k) Machine shops.
(l) Electronics and electronic equipment.
(m) Transportation maintenance.
(n) Scrap trade and metal container recyclers.
(o) Chemical and petroleum storage and sales.
(p) Automotive repair, services and related parking.
(q) Personal services: laundry, pest control and photographic
finishing.
(r) Repair Services: furniture, welding and septage services.
(s) Amusements and recreation.
(t) Educational, medical and engineering laboratories.
(u) Landscapers.
A. The Pennsylvania State Drinking Water Act Regulations define a threetiered
wellhead protection area for groundwater sources serving public
water supplies. The default 1/2-mile radius (Zone II) has been
delineated for the water supply source(s).
B. Zone I is the innermost protective zone immediately surrounding the
well. It ranges from a radius of 100 to 400 feet depending on source and
§ 601-9 ETNA CODE § 601-10
1:450
aquifer characteristics. A calculated fixed radius method is used to
determine Zone I, which for new sources must be owned or
substantially controlled by the supplier.
C. Zone II is the capture zone. By default it is a 1/2-mile radius around the
source, unless a more detailed delineation is established to identify the
surface overlying the portion of the aquifer through which water is
diverted to a well or flows to a spring or infiltration gallery.
D. Zone III is the area beyond Zone II that contributes surface water or
groundwater recharge to the aquifer within the capture zone, which
may be significant to safeguard the source protection area.
E. NOTE: Zone III delineations may not be necessary for each well. These
delineations will be based on a more rigorous delineation.
§ 601-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 601-10
1:451

ARTICLE IV
General Regulations
§ 601-11. New or continuation of activities at existing or new
locations.
All activities within the protected wellhead area must meet the listed
requirements in Article VI.
§ 601-12. Public water supply projects.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Article III, public water supply projects
which require the use of chemicals for disinfection or treatment will be
allowed in all wellhead protection areas subject to their approval,
construction and operation in accordance with DEP regulations.
§ 601-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 601-12
1:453

ARTICLE V
Subdivision and Land Development
§ 601-13. General requirements.
No subdivision or land development shall occur within wellhead protection
areas except in strict conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 601-14. Wellhead protection areas mapping.
To implement the provisions of the Wellhead Protection Ordinance,
wellhead protection areas surrounding public water supply wells are hereby
established. The boundaries of wellhead protection areas are shown on an
official map, which is available for inspection at the Borough office.
§ 601-15. Wellhead protection area restrictions.
A. Subdivisions and land developments within wellhead protection areas
for which stormwater management controls are required pursuant to
the Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance shall be
designed consistent with the following:
(1) Stormwater retention basins shall be prohibited.
(2) Stormwater detention basins shall be designed with an
impermeable liner to prohibit the infiltration of impounded water to
the subsurface.
B. Subdivisions and land developments within wellhead protection areas
as mapped in Appendix A shall have the following requirements in
addition to those requirements of the Borough Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance:
(1) A recognized professional with competence in the field shall review
aerial photographs, soils, geologic and other available related data
as the data relates to the subject property. The professional shall
also conduct a site inspection of the property.
(2) Based on the work required in Subsection B(1), the professional
shall prepare a map of the site indicating all geologic features as
they may affect water quality.
(3) Based upon the work performed in Subsection B(1) and (2), the
professional shall determine what further testing should be done by
the applicant to ensure compliance with the performance
standards set forth in Subsection C of this section. Testing
methodology shall be reasonable under the circumstances,
including: a) the scale of the proposed development and b) the
hazards revealed by examination of available data and site
inspection.
§ 601-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 601-15
1:455
(4) The applicant shall cause the additional testing established in
Subsection B(5) to be done. A study report shall be submitted and
referred to the Borough Engineer. This study shall include a map of
the area, all test results, and a recommendation on the mitigating
measures to be taken to meet the standards of Subsection C.
(5) The Borough Engineer shall report to the Planning Commission,
with a copy to the landowner, his or her opinion as to the adequacy
of the study and as to the capability of the site to support the
proposed development in a manner in which the risks attendant to
the development are either eliminated or minimized.
Recommendations for site development, including stormwater
management, the layout of utility lines, grading and building
location may be included. Additional studies or testing as deemed
necessary by the Borough Engineer in order to produce an
adequate study given the scale of the proposed development and
the hazards revealed may be required of the applicant.
C. Subdivision and land developments within wellhead protection areas as
mapped in Appendix A shall have the following design requirements:
(1) All buildings, structures, impervious surfaces and utilities shall be
so situated, designed and constructed as to minimize the risk of
new sinkhole formation and of the accelerated introduction of
contaminants and pollution into the wellhead protection area
through existing or future sinkholes.
(2) Stormwater shall not be directed into a sinkhole.
§ 601-15 ETNA CODE § 601-15
1:456
ARTICLE VI
Special Wellhead Protection Provisions
§ 601-16. General requirements.
No activity specified in Article III, § 601-10, shall occur within wellhead
protection areas except in strict conformance with the requirements of this
article.
§ 601-17. Wellhead protection requirements.
A. The following activities, located within wellhead protection areas,
which are specifically allowed in Article III or Article IV of this chapter,
shall meet the following conditions:
(1) Facilities which generate, store, treat or dispose of hazardous
material which are required to maintain a Pollution Incident
Prevention (PIP), Spill Prevention Control and Countermeasure
(SPCC), Preparedness, Prevention and Contingency (PPC), Spill
Prevention Response (SPR), or SARA Title III Off-Site Plan.
(a) A current PIP, SPCC, PPC, SPR or SARA Title III Off-Site Plan
must be filed with the Borough.
(b) A current Hazardous Substance Survey Form, Environmental
Hazard Survey Form and SARA Title III Tier I and Tier II
Report must be filed with the Borough.
(2) Bulk agricultural products dealer and distributors.
(a) At a minimum, a current plan meeting the requirements of a
PIP plan must be filed with the Borough.
(b) A current Hazardous Substance Survey Form, Environmental
Hazard Survey Form and SARA Title III Tier I and Tier II
Report must be filed with the Borough.
(3) Large volume subsurface sewage disposal systems and large
volume spray irrigation sewage disposal systems.
(a) A current permit from the Department of Environmental
Protection must be filed with the Borough.
(b) DEP required water quality monitoring reports must be filed
with the Borough.
(4) Underground injection wells (Classes I, II, III and V).
(a) A current registration from the Environmental Protection
Agency must be filed with the Borough.
(5) Aboveground storage tanks and underground storage tanks.
§ 601-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 601-17
1:457
(a) A current registration from the Department of Environmental
Protection must be filed with the Borough.
(6) Waste disposal systems.
(a) A current permit from the Department of Environmental
Protection must be filed with the Borough.
(b) A current PPC plan, if required for the facility by DEP
regulations, must be filed with the Borough.
(c) DEP required water quality monitoring reports must be filed
with the Borough.
(d) DEP required water pollution abatement plans must be filed
with the Borough.
(7) Agricultural operations.
(a) The conservation plan prepared according to Chapter 102 of
DEP regulations must include a pesticide management plan
and a nutrient management plan.
(8) Sewage disposal facilities.
(a) Sewage disposal facilities must be operated and maintained to
prevent discharge of untreated or partially treated sewage to
the surface water or groundwater.
(9) Well drilling.
(a) An aquifer impact assessment, prepared by a qualified
hydrogeologist at the expense of the party conducting the
activity, must be filed with the Borough. The purpose of the
assessment is to demonstrate that the activity will not result in
substantial interference with the public groundwater supply of
the Borough of Etna. The assessment shall include all potential
impacts resulting from the activity to other users of the aquifer
in terms of levels, quantity of water available and induced
quality changes. Proposed measures to mitigate any adverse
impacts, the system for monitoring water quality and quantity
and a reporting schedule shall be specified.
(10) Paving or otherwise rendering impervious an area of 3,000 square
feet or more.
(a) An aquifer impact assessment, prepared by a qualified
hydrogeologist at the expense of the party conducting the
activity, must be filed with the Borough. The purpose of the
assessment is to demonstrate that the activity will not result in
substantial interference with the public groundwater supply of
the Borough of Etna. The assessment shall include all potential
impacts resulting from the activity to other users of the aquifer
§ 601-17 ETNA CODE § 601-17
1:458
in terms of levels, quantity of water available and induced
quality changes. Proposed measures to mitigate any adverse
impacts, the system for monitoring water quality and quantity
and a reporting schedule shall be specified.
(11) Subsurface river activities (i.e., dredging, drilling, boring or
driving).
(a) Applicants for Department of Army permits with the Army
Corps of Engineers under Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors
Act of 1899 must file a copy of the application with the Borough
of Etna within three days of making the application with the
Army Corps of Engineers.
(b) Thirty days' notice must be given prior to the start of any
subsurface river activity, including replacement of existing
facilities.
B. All required plans, reports, registrations, permits, assessments and
forms must be filed prior to commencing the activity and must be
renewed annually.
§ 601-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 601-17
1:459

ARTICLE VII
Inspections
§ 601-18. Municipal inspections.
§ 601-19. Inspections by county conservation district.
The county conservation district shall be authorized to inspect the following
activities located within wellhead protection areas on an as-needed basis:
§ 601-20. Right of entry.
Upon presentation of the proper credentials duly authorized
representatives of the Borough may enter at reasonable times upon any
property within a wellhead protection area to investigate or ascertain
whether the requirements of this chapter are being met.
A. The Borough Engineer or the Borough's designate shall be authorized
to inspect the following facilities located within wellhead protection
areas for purposes of determining compliance with this chapter and any
federal or state permit or regulation requirements upon direction by
the governing body:
(1) Facilities with PIP, SPECC, PPC, SPR or SARA Title III Off-Site
Plans.
(2) Bulk agricultural products dealers and distributors.
(3) Large volume subsurface sewage disposal systems.
(4) Large volume spray irrigation sewage disposal systems.
(5) Underground and aboveground storage tanks.
(6) Underground injection wells.
(7) Waste disposal facilities.
(8) Sewage sludge land application sites.
(9) Other industrial and commercial facilities.
B. This schedule of inspections shall be determined by the Borough for
each type of facility. Inspectors shall be responsible for reporting any
violations to the Borough. The Borough shall inform ACHD, DEP or EPA,
as appropriate, of any violations or their regulations for the purpose of
follow-up actions by those agencies.
A. Earthmoving activities covered by an erosion and sedimentation plan
under Chapter 102 of DEP regulations.
§ 601-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 601-20
1:461

ARTICLE VIII
Wellhead Protection Area Map
§ 601-21. Map.
The attached map depicting wellhead protection area is declared to be a
part of the ordinance, as amended, as Appendix A.90
90.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Borough office.
§ 601-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 601-21
1:463

ARTICLE IX
Enforcement
§ 601-22. Violations and penalties.
Any person or other entity who violates any provision of this chapter shall
be guilty of a summary offense and shall be sentenced, upon conviction, to
a fine not exceeding $1,000 every day that a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense.
§ 601-23. Restraint of violation.
If any person or other entity carries on any activity within wellhead
protection areas in violation of the requirements of this chapter or fails to
file any required plan, form, report or registration with the Borough of Etna,
then the Borough, in addition to any other remedies, may institute any legal
action to prevent, restrain or abate any act constituting a violation of the
ordinance and to require compliance with its provisions.
§ 601-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 601-23
1:465
Chapter 615
ZONING
§ 601-23 ETNA CODE § 601-23
1:466
ARTICLE I
Authority and Purposes
§ 615-1. Title.
This chapter is known as the "Zoning Ordinance of Etna Borough," and the
Zoning Map is designated as the "Official Zoning Map of Etna Borough."
§ 615-2. Authority.
This chapter is authorized under the grant of powers by the General
Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Act 247, the Municipalities
Planning Code, July 31, 1968, as amended hereinafter (PA MPC).
§ 615-3. General purpose, intent and objectives.
This chapter is made with consideration for Etna Borough's character, its
various parts, and the suitability of the various parts for particular uses and
structures. This chapter is enacted for the following purposes:
§ 615-4. Interpretation.
In applying this chapter, it serves as the minimum requirements for
promotion of health, safety, morals, and general welfare of Etna Borough. If
A. To retain existing residents and business and attract new ones to the
Borough because of its established and evolving development form.
B. To promote, protect and facilitate one or more of the following: public
health, safety, morals, general welfare, coordinated and practical
community development, proper density of population, emergency
preparedness, disaster evacuation, providing adequate light and air,
police protection, vehicle parking and loading berth/space,
transportation, water, sewerage, schools, public grounds and other
public requirements.
C. To provide individual and mixtures of uses, buildings and/or structures
compatible with the character of development or the permitted uses
within the specified zone districts.
D. To maintain the stability of residential, commercial, institutional,
industrial and open space areas within a framework of development for
Etna Borough.
E. To encourage and maintain walkability throughout the community.
F. To protect private sector and public sector investments being made to
the land and buildings.
G. To promote and to foster the community development goals and
objectives, including quality infill, redevelopment and/or adaptive
reuse, as identified in the Etna-Millvale-Sharpsburg Multi-Municipal
Comprehensive Plan, as amended.
§ 615-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-4
1:467
this chapter imposes more stringent restrictions upon the use of buildings,
structures and land than contained in applicable deeds or agreements, the
requirements of this chapter supersede.
§ 615-5. Application.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply uniformly to all buildings,
structures, uses, signs and land areas. The requirements of this chapter are
not applicable to temporary uses permitted by and/or conducted by Etna
Borough or its authorized municipal authorities.
§ 615-6. Abrogation.
It is not intended by this chapter to interfere with any other existing
ordinance or with any rule of Etna Borough in current effect. If this chapter
imposes greater restrictions upon the use of buildings or land, then the
provisions of this chapter will supersede.
§ 615-7. Repealer.
§ 615-8. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this chapter
is for any reason held illegal or invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such provision shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent provision, and such holding shall not render the remainder of
this chapter invalid.
§ 615-9. Police powers.
The Borough, by granting any permit or taking any other action pursuant
to this chapter, does not waive, reduce, lessen or impair the lawful police
powers vested in the Borough under applicable federal, state and local laws
and regulations.
A. Nothing in this chapter is construed to affect any suit or proceeding
pending in any court, or any rights acquired or liability incurred, or any
permit issued or approval granted, or any cause or causes of action
arising prior to the enactment of this chapter.
B. In accordance with the information presented on the signature page of
this Zoning Ordinance, for the purposes of any proposed development
or zoning-related application or activity within the Borough of Etna
occurring on or following the date of adoption of this document, this
chapter shall be in effect. All other previous zoning ordinance
documents adopted by Etna Borough shall be considered repealed.
§ 615-4 ETNA CODE § 615-9
1:468
ARTICLE II
Form and Function
§ 615-10. Zoning Map.
A. The Zoning Map is composed of a series of zoning districts. The
boundaries between zoning districts are, unless otherwise indicated,
either the center lines of streets, alleys, rights-of-way, lot lines,
railroads, rivers or such lines extended.
B. The water surface and the land under the water surface of all
waterways not otherwise zoned are placed in the same zoning district
as the land which it abuts as shown on the Zoning Map. Where the
zoning districts shown on the Zoning Map are different on opposite
sides of the water area, then the zoning district on each side extends to
the center line or midpoint of the water area.
C. Where zoning district boundaries are not clearly fixed by the above
methods, they will be determined by the use of the scale of the Zoning
Map.
D. Where a street or alley shown on the Zoning Map is officially vacated by
replatting or otherwise, the land formerly in such street or alley rightof-
way is included within the zoning district of adjoining lot(s) on either
side of the vacated street or alley. Where the street or alley was a
district boundary between two or more different zoning districts, the
district boundary is the former center line of the vacated street or alley.
E. When there is disagreement on the location of zoning district
boundaries, the Zoning Hearing Board will decide, as the Board has the
power and duty of interpreting the intent of the Zoning Map in
accordance with the spirit and purpose of the Zoning Ordinance of Etna
Borough.
F. Records of all Zoning Map amendments are located on file in Etna
Borough's Municipal Building Administrative Office.
G. Etna Borough is divided into zoning districts as shown on the Zoning
Map of Etna Borough, which is referred to as the "Official Zoning Map,"
together with all explanations on it, and is adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this chapter.
H. The Zoning Map of Etna Borough is identified by the signature of the
President of the Borough Council, attested by the Borough Manager/
Borough Secretary and bears the seal of Etna Borough under the
following words: "This is to certify that this is the Zoning Map of Etna
Borough, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania," together with the date of
adoption of this chapter.
I. No changes of any nature are made in the Official Zoning Map except in
conformity with the procedures set forth in this chapter. Any
unauthorized change will be considered a violation of this chapter.
§ 615-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-10
1:469
§ 615-11. Zoning districts and land uses.
J. The Official Zoning Map, located in Etna Borough's Municipal Building
Administrative Office, is the final authority as to the current zoning
status in Etna Borough.91
K. Any amendments, legally adopted to change any zoning district
boundaries of the Zoning Map, are to be noted on the Map by ordinance
number and date of adoption of the amendment.
L. Borough Council may by ordinance update the parcel lines as available
from Allegheny County on the Zoning Map, noting the applicable date
and source on the Map.
A. Table 1 identifies which land uses are permissible in each of the
Borough's zoning districts. After locating the zoning district in which
the lot is located, use the listing of uses described in the table below to
determine what uses are permissible by right, by conditional use and as
a use by special exception. If no letter denotation exists, the use is not
permissible in that zoning district. In accordance with Article VIII-A of
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (MPC), the Borough
shares some land uses with Millvale and Sharpsburg Boroughs. See the
Zoning Ordinances of Millvale Borough and/or Sharpsburg Borough for
any land use and corresponding definition that is not noted as
permissible in any zoning district of Etna Borough.
Primary District Character
R1: Lower to medium density residential uses
R2: Moderate to higher density residential uses
C1: Locally oriented retail, office and support business uses in a traditional downtown setting
C2: Locally and regionally oriented businesses servicing a variety of nonresidential activities
I: Industrial and supporting nonresidentially geared uses servicing local and regional needs
RO: District that promotes locally and regionally geared civic spaces and additional redevelopment
opportunities generally along the Allegheny River
Table 1: Principal Land Uses
R = Use by right; C = Conditional; S = Use by special exception
Zoning District
Land Use R1 R2 C1 C2 I RO
Residential
Uses
1 Single-family
dwelling
R R C C
2 Two-family
dwelling
R R C C
3 Townhouse R R C C
91.Editor's Note: A copy of the Zoning Map is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 615-10 ETNA CODE § 615-11
1:470
Zoning District
Land Use R1 R2 C1 C2 I RO
4 Apartment R C R C
5 Mobile home
park
6 Hi-rise
residential
C C C C
7 Boarding-house
8 Group care
facility
9 Personal care
boarding-home
10 All other
residential uses
C
Zoning District
Land Use R1 R2 C1 C2 I RO
Nonresidential
Uses
1 Amusement
arcade
2 Animal hospital C
3 All other
nonresidential
uses
4 Artisan
workspace/
sales
C C C C R R
5 Auto sales/
service and
repair
R R
6 Auto wrecking/
vehicle salvage
yard
7 Bakery/
confectionery
R R
8 Banks and
financial
institutions
C C
9 Bed-andbreakfast
C C C
10 Brewery/brew
pub/tap room
C C C
§ 615-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-11
1:471
Zoning District
Land Use R1 R2 C1 C2 I RO
11 Building
material yards
or
establishments
R
12 Catering
service
R
13 Clinic, largescale
14 Clinic, smallscale
C
15 Club/lodge C C C
16 Commercial
greenhouse
R R
17 Community
center
C C R R
18 Community
garden
C C C R
19 Convenience
store
C R
20 Day-care
facility
C C R
21 Day-care home R R
22 Emergency
services
R
23 Essential
services
R R R R R
24 Farmers'
market
R R R
25 Forestry R R R R R
26 Fuel/service
stations
R
27 Funeral home C
28 Grocery store/
butcher shop/
green grocer
C C
29 Health/fitness
club
C R
§ 615-11 ETNA CODE § 615-11
1:472
Zoning District
Land Use R1 R2 C1 C2 I RO
30 Home-based
business, noimpact
R R R R R
31 Home
occupation
C C C C
32 Hospital
33 Hotel/motel C
34 Laundromat R R
35 Laundry and/or
dry cleaning
plant
36 Library R R R R R
37 Light
manufacturing
R C
38 Livery C C
39 Manufacturing,
processing,
producing or
fabricating
operation
R
40 Marina, docks,
portals for
water access
R C
41 Market garden R
42 Medical office C R R
43 Mixed
nonresidential/
residential
R R
44 Municipal
building
R R R R R R
45 Noncommercial
greenhouse
R R R R
46 Parking lot or
facility, public
R R R
47 Parking lot,
private
C C
48 Personal
services
R R R
§ 615-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-11
1:473
Zoning District
Land Use R1 R2 C1 C2 I RO
49 Pharmacy C C
50 Place of
assembly/
worship
C C C
51 Planned mixed
use
development
52 Printing,
publication,
and engraving
plants
53 Professional
and business
offices
R C R R R
54 Public park,
recreation
area,
playground
R R R R R C
55 Public utility
building
C C
56 Research and
development
establishment
C C C C
57 Restaurant, sitdown
C R
58 Restaurant,
take-out
C C
59 Retail, smallscale
R R
60 Retail, largescale
C
61 Riverboat
gambling
R R
62 School,
academic
R R R R
63 School,
commercial/
other
R C
64 Scrapyard
§ 615-11 ETNA CODE § 615-11
1:474
§ 615-12. Lot dimension and building type standards.
Zoning District
Land Use R1 R2 C1 C2 I RO
65 Sewage
treatment
facility
66 Sexually
oriented
business
67 Storage
building for
retail on
premises
C
68 Storage firm R
69 Tattoo shop R
70 Terminal
facility
R
71 Tower,
communications
C
72 Tower,
noncommunications
R
73 Theater R
74 Warehouse R C
75 Wholesale
business
R
A. Dimensional criteria per street type and lot type (Code).
§ 615-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-12
1:475
Street Type
Code
S1
Arterial
S2
Collector
S3
Local
S4
Alley
S5
Way
S6
Lane
S7 No
Outlet
A Depth (min. feet) 100 100 100 100 100 100 100
B Front lot line width (min. feet) 35 20 25 25 25 25 25
C Principal
structures
setbacks
Front Min.
feet
0 0 0 0 0 0 0
D Max.
feet
0 - Butler Street; average
of adjacent lots - all others
Average of adjacent lots
E Side Min.
feet
2 0 0 2 2 2 0
F Max. NA NA NA NA NA NA NA
G Rear Min.
feet
10 25 25 25 25 25 25
H Setbacks Parking
setback
Front
(feet)
NA NA NA 5 5 5 NA
Side
(feet)
5 5 5 5 5 5 5
Rear
(feet)
5 5 5 5 5 5 5
Fences on side
yard
0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Accessory
structure
NA NA NA 5 5 5 5
Building height (max. feet) 50 50 50 40 50 40 40
NOTE:
Accessory structure height shall be limited to 1 1/2 stories to a maximum of 20 feet: accessory structures
shall be located no closer than five feet from any side lot line (denoted as letter H in above diagram) and
five feet from any lot line on an alley, way and/or lane; See also § 615-13E(1)(b)[5]. No accessory building/
structure, carport, parking pad or parking area will be permitted to be constructed unless there is at
least 10-foot distance from the outer edge of the said carport parking pad or parking area to a building
or structure of the abutting lot.
B. Building and street type schedule.
§ 615-12 ETNA CODE § 615-12
1:476
§ 615-13. General application types/submission items.
Land use applications to the Borough shall, at a minimum, contain:
A. Residential land use applications.
(1) Application form.
(2) Site plan with utilities.
B. Nonresidential land use applications
(1) Application form.
(2) Building elevation (at street).
(3) Parcel map.
(4) Site plan with utilities.
(5) Cross-section front yard to rear yard.
(6) Copies of highway occupancy permit, national pollutant discharge
elimination system submissions, as well as Department of
Environmental Protection and municipal authority application
submissions.
C. Applications for land within the Riverfront Overlay shall follow a twostep
process.
§ 615-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-13
1:477
(1) Step 1: Development Overview. In accordance with the Borough
Application Form for Land within the Riverfront Overlay, the
development overview shall present the overall proposed
development, relationship(s) of land uses, the scale, quantity and
density of development, generally anticipated phasing and
vehicular/pedestrian circulation.
(2) Step 2: Immediate Phase-Specific Plan. Following Borough
Planning Commission review and recommendation associated with
the development overview; the immediate phase-specific plan shall
present the portion(s) of development that is proposed for Borough
Planning Commission review and Borough Council approval.
D. Applications for land within the design overlay as submitted for
Borough staff review.
(1) Application form and site plan package.
(2) Design overlay checklist. To uphold the intent of the community
planning and development objectives and policies, these design
standards are intended to apply to all development in the C1
District, including those proposed as part of building permit.
(3) Application review and approval process.
(a) These standards apply to the formal review of proposed
development within the design overlay. The application review
process is triggered for any applicant seeking new
construction or exterior changes or alteration to an existing
building. Conformance with the design overlay standards may
be reviewed concurrently with development, change of land
use or building permit application.
(b) Any application identifying a proposed request for modification
to these standards shall be subject to Borough Planning
Commission review and recommendation. Borough Council
reserves the right to grant modifications to these standards
based upon findings from application review and subsequent
Planning Commission recommendation.
(4) The purpose of these standards is to provide regulations and
written and graphic standards to:
(a) Implement the Borough's Comprehensive Plan and related
planning documents.
(b) Create standards that are sensitive to the context of the
Borough and architectural character of the community's
traditional neighborhoods and downtown.
(c) Address the legislative intent of each design standard within
this article.
§ 615-13 ETNA CODE § 615-13
1:478
(d) Promote general consistency of the built environment within
the Borough. Buildings play a critical role in defining and
activating streets which in turn define the Neighborhood
Development Overlay area.
(5) Overall intent for general consistency.
(a) Borough intent.
[1] These standards are enabled by Section 708-A of the MPC,
titled "Manual of Written and Graphic Design Guidelines."
[2] The sense of place within the neighborhood is intended to
create a more functional and attractive outcome for the
quality of life in the Borough.
[3] Images provided are intended to represent general
applications of design or preferred examples, not specific
details to specific sites.
(b) Standards.
[1] Planning design, construction and maintenance of new
and/or redeveloped buildings, structures, public realm,
landscapes and hardscapes are to be generally consistent
with this article.
E. Criteria.
(1) Building location (build-to line).
(a) Objective.
[1] Buildings are intended to be located close to sidewalks,
with parking located in the rear and/or side.
[2] Traditional development in the Borough's downtown is
intended to form a continuous street wall along all streets.
(b) Standards.
[1] Buildings shall be located on a build-to line adjoining the
sidewalk.
[2] New buildings on a block shall be located in alignment
with existing buildings.
[3] For a lot with a front lot line of 30 feet or greater in width,
a maximum of 25% of the front face of the building may be
set back a maximum of three feet from the front line of the
building.
[4] Buildings shall be located to anchor street corners, except
where a Borough open space may be located.
§ 615-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-13
1:479
[5] No accessory structure, utilities or dumpsters shall be
located between the front line of a building and the front
lot line.
(2) Building size and types.
(a) Objective.
[1] Smaller footprint mixed-use buildings are intended to
predominate the building stock found in the overlay area.
[2] Maintain a diversity of building types based on the
character of the overlay area and adjoining
neighborhoods.
(b) Standards.
[1] New buildings shall be designed to be compatible in size
with the predominate size of buildings on the same block.
[2] Vertical mixed-use buildings shall be maintained and
created in the overlay area.
(3) Building height.
(a) Objective.
§ 615-13 ETNA CODE § 615-13
1:480
[1] Redeveloped and infill buildings are intended to reflect the
predominate height pattern of established development
within the overlay.
[2] New buildings shall be at least two stories.
(b) Standards.
[1] The minimum height of principal buildings in the overlay
shall be 20 feet.
[2] The maximum height of buildings shall be 50 feet unless
otherwise defined by this chapter.
[3] Additional height is encouraged at gateway and corner
locations for architectural features, such as designated
entrances.
(4) Building frontage.
(a) Objective.
[1] Building configuration must reinforce the urban character
of the Borough.
[2] Buildings must be designed to reinforce public streets and
open spaces.
[3] Facade composition helps establish the visual interest of a
building and determine how it blends in with its
surroundings.
(b) Standards.
[1] Primary entrances of buildings must be located on public
streets or open spaces and must be easily identifiable;
buildings must not be oriented to front on parking or
service areas.
[2] A minimum of 60% of the square footage of the facade
adjacent to the right-of-way on the ground floor shall be
window surface area. On each story above the ground
§ 615-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-13
1:481
floor, the facade of said story shall have a transparency of
at least 35% of the gross square footage of said facade.
[3] No more than 30% of the window surface area for the
ground-floor facade shall be blocked by interior fixtures,
opaque surfaces and/or signs unless such a fixture is used
for the display of merchandise visible to patrons from the
street.
(5) Building massing.
(a) Objective.
[1] Vertically proportioned buildings are to predominate
neighborhood development.
(b) Standards.
[1] Buildings are to be taller than they are wide or have a
facade design that emphasizes vertical proportions.
[2] Building massing should reflect human-scaled elements.
[3] Any new or redeveloped existing building visible from the
public right-of-way shall contain a minimum of two stories
from grade. Each story shall be capable of occupancy by a
use as permitted within the underlying zoning district/
overlay.
(6) Building materials.
(a) Objective.
§ 615-13 ETNA CODE § 615-13
1:482
[1] Common architectural language is encouraged.
[2] Building materials must reinforce the sustainable attitudes
the Borough upholds.
(b) Standards.
[1] Building facades visible from Borough streets should use
durable, high quality materials with brick and finished
wood preferred. Masonry, stone and terra cotta along with
detailing are acceptable secondary materials.
[2] The following materials are prohibited on all facades
visible from public streets: particle board, plywoods and
plastic sheathing; asphalt and fiberglass shingles as
siding, vinyl siding, mirrored glass, industrial metal
panels, concrete masonry units, including prefinished
types, exposed aggregate pre-cast concrete block, exterior
finish insulation systems and simulated brick.
[3] Use of the following materials is discouraged: vinyl siding,
wood roof shingles, split-faced concrete, reflective glass
and imitation stone.
[4] Roofscapes must be considered as important aspects of
building design, as they are visible from the higher
elevations of surrounding communities and Route 28.
Roofing materials must be selected to be visually pleasing.
Arrangement of mechanical equipment must be orderly
and either screened or painted.
(7) Lighting.
(a) Objective.
[1] Lighting must create a safe, attractive nighttime
environment.
[2] Lighting must express a hierarchy of pedestrian and
vehicular zones.
§ 615-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-13
1:483
[3] Lighting must define building entrances as well as
highlight architectural and landscaping features.
[4] Lighting must provide the required functional lighting for
safety and clarity of movement.
[5] Lighting must minimize negative impacts, such as high
illumination levels, distracting glare and spillover into
surrounding areas.
(b) Standards.
[1] Building illumination. Illumination must be indirect (no
light source visible). Indirect wall lighting, overhead
downlighting, or interior illumination which spills outside
is encouraged.
[2] Building entrance and architectural features should be
clearly highlighted and defined.
[3] Parking areas should be well lit and accented to provide a
safe environment. Fixtures should be selected to minimize
distracting glare and hazardous interference of any kind
while complementing the scale of surrounding buildings.
[4] Open spaces. Maximum pole height of 14 feet should be
used.
F. Building permit form: On file at the Etna Borough Municipal Building
administrative offices.
§ 615-13 ETNA CODE § 615-13
1:484
ARTICLE III
Conditional Uses
§ 615-14. Procedure for approval.
A. In evaluating an application for a conditional use, the Borough shall
apply the guidelines and procedures set forth in the MPC.
B. Where the application is contested or denied, each decision shall be
accompanied by findings of fact or conclusions based thereon, together
with any reasons therefor. Conclusions based on any provisions of this
or any other ordinance should contain a reference to the provision
relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in
the light of the facts found.
C. Nothing in this section shall prejudice the right of any party opposing
the application to appeal the decision to a court of competent
jurisdiction. A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called
for, the findings, shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed
to him no later than the day following its date.
D. The Borough Council shall not evaluate a conditional use application
unless and until:
(1) A written application for conditional use approval is submitted to
the Borough Zoning Officer no less than 10 working days prior to
the regular meeting of the Borough Planning Commission. The
application shall indicate the section of this chapter under which
conditional use approval is sought and shall state the grounds upon
which it is requested. The Borough Zoning Officer shall determine
the completeness of the application and either accept the
application as complete and properly filed or return the application
to the applicant for resubmission if the application is incomplete
and improperly filed. If the application is returned as incomplete, a
written notice, which cites the specific requirements of this chapter
which have not been met, shall be sent to the applicant. The
application shall include the following:
(a) A development plan.
(b) A written statement showing compliance with the applicable
express standards and criteria of this article for the proposed
use.
(c) A map showing and identifying all lots within 200 feet of the lot
for which conditional use approval is requested and a list of the
names and addresses of the owners of these lots from the most
recent records of Allegheny County.
(d) A traffic impact analysis, if required by the Allegheny County
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance or by the
requirements of this article.
§ 615-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-14
1:485
§ 615-15. Expiration of conditional use approval.
Conditional use approval shall expire automatically without written notice
to the applicant if no application for a grading permit, building permit or
zoning certificate to undertake the construction or authorize the occupancy
described in the application for conditional use approval is submitted within
12 months of said approval, unless the Borough Council, in its sole
discretion, extends conditional use approval upon written request of the
applicant received prior to its expiration. The maximum extension permitted
shall be one twelve-month extension.
§ 615-16. Expiration of conditional use approval granted prior to
effective date of ordinance.
Conditional use approval granted prior to the effective date of this chapter
shall expire automatically without written notice to the applicant if no
application for a grading permit, building permit or zoning certificate to
undertake the construction or authorize the occupancy described in the
application for conditional use approval is submitted within 12 months of
the effective date of this chapter or as specified in the approval, unless the
Borough Council, in its sole discretion, extends conditional use approval
upon written request of the applicant received prior to its expiration. The
maximum extension permitted shall be one twelve-month extension.
§ 615-17. General standards and criteria.
Before approving a conditional use application, the Borough Council shall
determine that the proposed use will not alter the established character and
use of the neighborhood or district in which it is located and that it will
not substantially impair the use of development of adjacent properties. The
Borough Council shall use the following general standards, among other
things, in its evaluation. These standards shall be in addition to any other
requirements in this chapter for a specific type of use or development.
(e) Application fee, as required.
(2) A written recommendation is received from the Borough Planning
Commission.
(3) A public hearing is held by the Borough Council pursuant to public
notice.
E. In granting a conditional use, the Borough Council may attach such
reasonable conditions and safeguards in addition to those expressed in
this chapter as it may seem necessary to implement the purposes of the
MPC and this chapter.
A. The proposed use complies with all applicable provisions and
requirements for that type of use contained in this chapter, unless a
variance to any provision has been granted by the Zoning Hearing
Board, and with other applicable Borough, county and commonwealth
§ 615-14 ETNA CODE § 615-17
1:486
§ 615-18. Standards for specific uses.
In addition to the general standards and criteria for conditional uses listed
in the sections above, an application for any of the following uses which
are listed in any zoning district as a conditional use shall comply with the
following applicable standards and criteria.
and federal ordinances, laws and regulations. The proposed use shall
obtain applicable permits, licenses and approvals from the Borough,
Allegheny County, Pennsylvania and federal agencies before final
approval of the conditional use application shall be granted.
B. The proposed use is compatible with the surrounding land uses. It does
not have a negative impact on the existing neighborhood or
development in terms of air and water quality, noise, illumination and
glare, restrictions to natural light and air circulation or other hazardous
conditions that could endanger surrounding residents or impair the use
of surrounding properties.
C. The proposed site for the conditional use is suitable in terms of
topography and soil conditions and size, based on number of projected
users and the frequency of use of the proposed use.
D. The proposed use and site provides for safe, adequate vehicular and
pedestrian access. It has access from a street capable of handling the
traffic generated by the proposed use, and it will not result in undue
traffic congestion and hazardous conditions on adjacent streets. The
use provides for safe, efficient internal circulation and sufficient offstreet
parking and loading.
E. The proposed use complies with all applicable standards and
requirements for providing sanitary sewage disposal, water supply,
storm drainage, solid and toxic waste storage and disposal.
F. The proposed use provides screening or buffer areas as required by this
chapter.
G. The proposed use/development conforms to the scale, character and
exterior appearance of existing structures and uses in the
neighborhood in which it is located.
A. Single-family dwelling.
(1) Parking shall be provided on the same lot upon which the dwelling
unit is located.
B. Two-family dwelling.
(1) Parking shall be provided on the same lot upon which the dwelling
unit is located.
C. Townhouse.
§ 615-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-18
1:487
(1) All open space associated with the development of townhouse
dwellings shall be accessible to the public.
(2) Parking shall be provided on the same lot upon which the dwelling
unit is located and be no more than 300 feet from any one unit.
(3) In order to ensure that any proposed development does not create
adverse conditions to the public road right-of-way, a traffic impact
study, in accordance with Institute of Transportation Engineers
(ITE) standards, shall be required to be submitted as part of any
proposed development to determine peak-hour volumes and the
traffic movements produced by such development. A description of
future levels of service and their compliance with standards for
traffic capacity of streets, intersections and driveways shall be
provided. New streets shall be designed for adequate traffic
capacity. All reference to levels of service (LOS) shall be defined by
the Highway Capacity Manual, published by the Transportation
Research Board. These standards may be waived by the Borough if
sufficient evidence is provided that the criteria cannot be met with
reasonable mitigation.
D. Apartment.
(1) All open space associated with the development of apartment
dwellings shall be accessible to the public.
(2) Parking shall be provided on the same lot upon which the dwelling
unit is located and be no more than 300 feet from any one unit.
(3) In order to ensure that any proposed development does not create
adverse conditions to the public road right-of-way, a traffic impact
study, in accordance with Institute of Transportation Engineers
(ITE) standards, shall be required to be submitted as part of any
proposed development to determine peak-hour volumes and the
traffic movements produced by such development. A description of
future levels of service and their compliance with standards for
traffic capacity of streets, intersections and driveways shall be
provided. New streets shall be designed for adequate traffic
capacity. All reference to levels of service (LOS) shall be defined by
the Highway Capacity Manual, published by the Transportation
Research Board. These standards may be waived by the Borough if
sufficient evidence is provided that the criteria cannot be met with
reasonable mitigation.
E. Hi-rise residential.
(1) Parking shall be provided on the same lot upon which the dwelling
unit is located and be no more than 300 feet from any one unit.
(2) All parking spaces and driveways shall be surfaced with
bituminous, brick, concrete, stone block or permeable paving
material (not including gravel surface, aggregate or the like).
§ 615-18 ETNA CODE § 615-18
1:488
(3) The means of a building's ingress and egress shall meet
requirements as outlined in the Borough's Building Code.
(4) A twelve-foot-wide fire/emergency access route shall be provided
around the perimeter of each building. Topography or other
characteristics of the site or the development that might affect the
use of emergency equipment between buildings may dictate a
greater separation of structures.
(5) The maximum number of units per building shall not exceed 36.
(6) The primary vehicular entrance to a hi-rise residential development
shall, at a minimum, have direct access to a collector road.
(7) Maximum height of lighting for outdoor parking areas and
roadways shall be 25 feet.
(8) As part of all land development, the landowner and/or developer
shall provide a plan for photometrics of the lot. Illumination, when
measured at a lot line, shall be a maximum of one footcandle.
(9) Buffer yards between a hi-rise residential development and any
other adjacent residential lot shall be increased by 10 feet in
addition to the Borough's required buffer-yard width. Landscaping
within this additional width shall be provided according to spacing,
quantity and type of plants specified by the Borough Planning
Commission.
(10) Slopes shall be graded at a maximum of a three-foot horizontal to
one-foot vertical (3:1) ratio.
(11) If the parking area for a hi-rise residential development is adjacent
to a single-family residential lot and demands greater than 10
automobiles, the following shall apply:
(a) An additional ten-foot buffer yard with one of the following
shall be provided along the parking lot's perimeter to minimize
the impact of inappropriate noise, dust, light and other
disturbances on adjacent residential lots.
[1] One-and-one-half times the required number of plants for
screening and buffering off-street parking and loading
areas; or
[2] A mound, a minimum of 3.5 feet in height at its peak, shall
be constructed whereas the sides do not exceed a four-foot
horizontal to one-foot vertical change in elevation. The
mound shall be landscaped in its entirety with plants that
provide four seasons of interest but shall not include turf
grass. The landowner and/or developer shall coordinate
site drainage so that site development and grading do not
create any adverse effects on adjacent lots.
§ 615-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-18
1:489
(12) Dumpsters, if located on the lot, shall be located in the rear setback
yard and shall be screened with an earth berm, landscaped buffer
yard, fence or wall with a minimum height of eight feet if the
dumpster has a peaked roof, and otherwise six feet, and a minimum
opacity of 80%.
(13) The design and size of the hi-rise residential conforms to all
applicable state and Borough standards/codes.
F. All other residential uses.
(1) Parking shall be provided on the same lot upon which the dwelling
unit is located and be no more than 300 feet from any one unit.
(2) All parking spaces and driveways shall be surfaced with
bituminous, brick, concrete, stone block or permeable paving
material (not including gravel surface, aggregate or the like).
(3) The means of a building's ingress and egress shall meet
requirements as outlined in the Borough's Building Code.
(4) A twelve-foot-wide fire/emergency access route shall be provided
around the perimeter of each building. Topography or other
characteristics of the site or the development that might affect the
use of emergency equipment between buildings may dictate a
greater separation of structures.
(5) The maximum number of units per building shall not exceed 18.
(6) The primary vehicular entrance to the residential development
shall, at a minimum, have direct access to a collector road.
(7) Maximum height of lighting for outdoor parking areas and
roadways shall be 25 feet.
(8) As part of all land development, the landowner and/or developer
shall provide a plan for photometrics of the lot. Illumination, when
measured at a lot line, shall be a maximum of one footcandle.
(9) Buffer yards between the residential development and any other
adjacent residential lot shall be increased by 10 feet in addition to
the Borough's required buffer-yard width.
(10) Landscaping within this additional width shall be provided
according to spacing, quantity and type of plants specified by the
Borough Planning Commission.
(11) Slopes shall be graded at a maximum of a three-foot horizontal to
one-foot vertical ratio.
(12) If the parking area for the residential development is adjacent to a
single-family residential lot and demands greater than 10
automobiles, the following shall apply:
§ 615-18 ETNA CODE § 615-18
1:490
(a) An additional ten-foot buffer yard with one of the following
shall be provided along the parking lot's perimeter to minimize
the impact of inappropriate noise, dust, light and other
disturbances on adjacent residential lots.
[1] One and one-half times the required number of plants for
screening and buffering off-street parking and loading
areas; or
[2] A mound, a minimum of 3.5 feet in height at its peak, shall
be constructed whereas the sides do not exceed a four-foot
horizontal to one-foot vertical change in elevation. The
mound shall be landscaped in its entirety with plants that
provide four seasons of interest but shall not include turf
grass. The landowner and/or developer shall coordinate
site drainage so that site development and grading do not
create any adverse effects on adjacent lots.
(13) Dumpsters, if located on the lot, shall be located in the rear setback
yard and shall be screened with an earth berm, landscaped buffer
yard, fence or wall with a minimum height of eight feet if the
dumpster has a peaked roof, and otherwise six feet, and a minimum
opacity of 80%.
(14) The design and size of the residential use's living quarters shall
conform to all applicable state and Borough standards/codes.
(15) For any proposed use that will occupy an existing residential
structure, exterior modifications shall be limited to occur in only
rear and side as part of said reuse.
G. Animal hospital.
(1) No outdoor pens shall be constructed or provided.
(2) Overnight boarding of animals is prohibited unless necessary for
medical or surgical reasons in conjunction with on-site treatment.
(3) Noise shall not exceed the levels outlined as acceptable within the
performance standards of this chapter.
H. Artisan workplace/sales.
(1) Nonresidential districts.
(a) A listing of products which contain toxic and/or explosive
materials shall be kept on record at all times.
(b) As regulated by the chapter's performance standards, no
offensive noise, vibration, smoke or other particulate matter,
heat, humidity, glare or other objectionable effects shall be
produced.
§ 615-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-18
1:491
(c) Under no circumstances shall an artisan workplace/sales be
interpreted to permit a commercial stable or a dog kennel,
automobile sales, small engine repair shop, donut shop, or any
occupation where the principal activity involves sales offered
across the counter.
(d) If said land use is within the C1 Zoning District, soundproofing
shall be constructed on any walls that are shared with adjacent
land uses.
(e) A delivery and storage plan shall be submitted. The plan shall
be subject to Borough review and approval in order to
minimize potential conflicts associated with circulation of
surrounding uses.
(2) Residential districts.
(a) There shall be no exterior display or sign (except as permitted
in the regulation of signs in this chapter), no exterior storage of
materials, and no other exterior indication of the home
occupation or variation of the residential character of the main
building. In order to minimize conflict with surrounding
residential neighborhood activity, an artisan workplace/sales
area shall occupy a structure which is residential in character.
(b) As regulated by the chapter's performance standards, no
offensive noise, vibration, smoke or other particulate matter,
heat, humidity, glare or other objectionable effects shall be
produced.
(c) Under no circumstances shall an artisan workplace/sales be
interpreted to permit a commercial stable or a dog kennel,
automobile sales, small engine repair shop, donut shop, or any
occupation where the principal activity involves sales offered
across the counter.
(d) Sound proofing shall be constructed on any wall that are
shared with adjacent land uses. A delivery and storage plan
shall be submitted. The plan shall be subject to Borough review
and approval in order to minimize potential conflicts
associated with circulation of surrounding uses.
I. Banks and financial institutions.
(1) No drive-through facilities shall be permitted in the C1 District.
(2) In the C2 District, a circulation plan shall be prepared illustrating
the flow, stacking and other applicable site relationships to ensure
on-site traffic and adjacent off-site traffic are not negatively
impeded.
J. Bed-and-breakfast.
§ 615-18 ETNA CODE § 615-18
1:492
(1) The operator of the bed-and-breakfast must be the owner of the
business and shall reside on the premises.
(2) Meals shall only be served to overnight guests of the bed-andbreakfast.
(3) Guests shall be limited to a maximum length of stay of 14
consecutive days in any thirty-day period.
(4) No more than five guest sleeping rooms shall be available and/or
utilized at any one time for the transient guests. Each guest room
may provide lodging for up to two individuals, unless children
under the age of 16 years are accompanying the guest. In no
instance shall the total number of guests in the bed-and-breakfast
exceed 14 people.
(5) There shall be only one lodging house located on the lot.
(6) The lot shall meet all area and bulk regulations of the district in
which it is located.
(7) Objectionable noise, vibration, smoke, dust, electrical disturbance,
odors, heat or glare shall not be produced. The use shall comply
with the performance standards of this chapter.
(8) No more than one identification sign shall be permitted. The
identification sign must conform to Article VI of this chapter for the
zoning district in which it exists.
(9) All required parking spaces shall be provided on the lot and shall
not be located in the front yard. There shall be one space provided
for each room and one space provided for each permanent
resident.
(10) The conditional use of a bed-and-breakfast expressly excludes
alternative housing for criminal offenders, drug or alcohol
rehabilitation, halfway house and similar uses.
K. Brewery/brew pub/tap room.
(1) The establishment shall be located in accordance with the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board.
(2) Such establishment shall not remain open and/or transact business
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m., prevailing time of
each day. No brewery/brew pub/tap room located within 500 feet of
a residence or place of worship shall be open or operated on a
Sunday.
(3) No more than one identification sign shall be permitted. The
identification sign must conform to Article VI of this chapter for the
zoning district in which it exists.
L. Clinic, small-scale.
§ 615-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-18
1:493
(1) An hours-of-operation (including deliveries) plan shall be submitted
to the Borough as part of the conditional use application.
M. Community center.
(1) The community center shall occupy an existing structure.
(2) Any expansion of said existing structure shall not exceed 10% of
the existing structure's gross floor area (total square footage).
N. Community garden.
(1) Operations using machinery may begin at sunrise or 7:00 a.m.,
whichever is earlier, on weekdays and at 9:00 a.m. on Saturday and
Sunday. Operations using machinery must end at sunset or 9:00
p.m., whichever is later. Automatically functioning equipment, such
as sprinklers, are exempted from hours of operation.
(2) Community gardens may include any of the following features:
raised and/or accessible planting beds, compost bins, picnic tables,
garden art, rain barrel systems, restroom facilities or portable
toilets, signage, storage sheds, and children's play areas.
(3) All community gardens shall have suitable containers for waste and
recyclables that are regularly serviced.
(4) A community garden may include a seasonal farm stand only for the
sale of items grown at the site or products made from items grown
at the site. Sales for fund-raising purposes and associated
promotional materials are permitted at events held on the site.
Stands shall be removed from the premises or stored inside a
building on the premises or off site when the garden is not in
operation. Sales must occur on site and only between 7:00 a.m. and
9:00 p.m.
(5) Signage. Permitted signs, not to exceed nine square feet in area per
side and six feet in height, shall be limited to identification (of
gardens, individual plants, etc.), information, and directional signs,
including sponsorship information where such information is
clearly secondary to other permitted information on the sign.
(6) Parking. If a community garden includes a seasonable farm stand,
adequate off-street parking must be provided and shall be either
unpaved or surfaced with gravel or pervious paving material.
Interior walkways shall be unpaved except as necessary to meet
the needs of individuals with disabilities.
O. Convenience store.
(1) Convenience stores located in the C1 Zoning District shall not
include facilities for the dispensing of fuel.
§ 615-18 ETNA CODE § 615-18
1:494
(2) Parking facilities shall not be constructed between the building
front facade and the front lot line.
(3) The maximum gross floor area for convenience stores located in the
C1 Zoning District is 2,500 square feet.
P. Day-care facility.
(1) A circulation plan shall be provided as part of the submitted
application.
(2) Parking shall be provided on the lot where the land use occurs.
(3) A designated dropoff location shall be provided that is free and
clear of traffic and circulation within the right-of-way.
Q. Club/lodge.
(1) The hours of operation must be conspicuously posted at the
business premises such that patrons are sufficiently apprised of the
same.
(2) Such club shall not remain open and/or transact business between
the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m., prevailing time of each day.
No club located within 500 feet of a residence or place of worship
shall be open or operated on Sunday.
R. Grocery store, butcher shop, green grocer.
(1) The maximum gross floor area for grocery store, butcher shop and/
or green grocer located in the C1 Zoning District shall be 2,500
square feet; 12,000 square feet in the C2 Zoning District.
(2) No fuel sales or accessory fuel/service stations are permitted in
association with or otherwise on the same lot as a grocery store,
butcher shop and/or green grocer.
S. Health/fitness club.
(1) Health/fitness clubs are permitted only on the second floor of a
building in the C1 Zoning District.
(2) The maximum gross floor area for health/fitness clubs located in
the C1 Zoning District is 2,500 square feet.
T. Home occupation.
(1) The home occupation shall be carried on wholly within the
principal or accessory structures.
(2) No more than 15% of the gross floor area of the principal dwelling
and any accessory structures used shall be devoted to the conduct
of the home occupation.
§ 615-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-18
1:495
(3) Articles not produced on the premises shall not be sold on the
premises.
(4) There shall be no display of merchandise available for sale on the
premises; however, merchandise may be stored on the premises for
delivery off the premises.
(5) Exterior displays or signs other than those permitted in this
chapter, exterior storage of material, and exterior indication of the
home occupation or variation from the residential character of the
principal structure shall not be permitted.
(6) Objectionable noise, vibration, smoke, dust, electrical disturbance,
odors, heat or glare shall not be produced. The use shall comply
with the performance standards of this chapter.
(7) The use shall not significantly intensify vehicular or pedestrian
traffic, which is normal for the residences in the neighborhood.
(8) The use shall not require internal or external alterations or
construction features which are not customary to a dwelling or
which change the fire rating of a structure.
(9) There shall be no use of materials or equipment except that of
similar power and type normally used in a residential dwelling for
domestic or household purposes.
(10) The use shall not cause an increase in the use of water, sewage,
garbage, public safety or any other municipal services beyond that
which is normal for the residences in the neighborhood.
(11) The use shall not cause a negative impact on lot values in the
immediate neighborhood.
(12) The home occupation shall not involve the use of commercial
vehicles for regular delivery of materials to or from the premises,
and commercial vehicles shall not be permitted to be parked on the
premises.
(13) The following uses shall not be considered home occupations and
shall be restricted to the zoning districts in which they are
specifically authorized as permitted uses or uses by special
exception, including but not limited to:
(a) Beauty shops or barber shops containing more than two chairs;
(b) Clinics, hospitals or nursing homes;
(c) Kennels, veterinary offices and clinics;
(d) Mortuaries;
(e) Private clubs;
§ 615-18 ETNA CODE § 615-18
1:496
(f) Private instruction to more than three students at a time;
(g) Restaurants or tearooms;
(h) Stables;
(i) Tourist or boarding homes;
(j) Vehicle or equipment rental, repair or sales;
(k) Auto sales/service and repair, as defined by this chapter.
(14) Day-care homes, other than those defined in this chapter, shall
meet all of the foregoing requirements for a home occupation as
well as the following additional requirements:
(a) Adequate areas for outdoor recreation shall be provided and
shall be secured by a fence with self-latching gate.
(b) A safe area shall be provided for the dropoff and pickup of
children which does not obstruct the free flow of traffic on any
public street.
(c) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.
U. Hotel/motel.
(1) Dropoff/temporary parking areas shall remain free and clear of
obstructions for general safety and Fire Department access.
(2) Parking shall be located to the side and/or rear of the principal
building on the lot.
(3) A twelve-foot-wide fire/emergency access route shall be provided
around the perimeter of each building. Topography or other
characteristics of the site or the development that might affect the
use of emergency equipment between buildings may dictate a
greater separation of structures.
(4) Service of meals and/or beverages (alcoholic/nonalcoholic) must be
secondary to the principal use of room or suite rental.
(5) Secondary eating establishments serving alcoholic beverages or
secondary bars or nightclubs must be licensed by the Pennsylvania
Liquor Control Board.
(6) The owner(s)/operator(s) of a hotel/motel shall be responsible for
the conduct and safety of the renters and guests and shall be
available to respond to inquiries and promptly quell any
disturbances caused by renters or guests.
V. Light manufacturing.
§ 615-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-18
1:497
(1) Buffering of parking and loading areas shall be provided in
accordance with this chapter.
(2) Objectionable noise, vibration, smoke, dust, electrical disturbance,
odors, heat or glare shall not be produced.
(3) As part of all land development or conversion of an existing
building, the landowner and/or developer shall provide a plan for
photometrics of the lot.
(4) All materials and equipment shall be stored within a completely
enclosed building.
(5) The use shall comply with all performance standards specified in
this chapter.
(6) Hours of operation and activities must be appropriately scheduled
to protect the operation of the surrounding neighborhood from
detrimental noise, dust, odor, vibration, light or other disturbance
or interruption.
(7) An inventory of toxic, corrosive, flammable, carcinogenic or
explosive materials, chemical, liquids, gases or solids stored and/or
used on site shall be available upon request.
W. Livery.
(1) The landowner and/or developer shall be required to prepare and
submit a traffic impact analysis of the proposed development.
Potential implementation strategies of necessary infrastructure
and/or safety improvements shall be identified in response to the
analysis findings.
X. Marina, dock, portals for water access.
(1) The landowner and/or developer shall be required to prepare and
submit a traffic impact analysis of the proposed development.
Potential implementation strategies of necessary infrastructure
and/or safety improvements shall be identified in response to the
analysis findings.
(2) A delivery zone plan acceptable to the Borough Engineer shall be
submitted to demonstrate adequate delivery and associated
circulation areas do not conflict with existing Borough development
and circulation patterns.
Y. Medical office.
(1) The landowner and/or developer shall be required to prepare and
submit a traffic impact analysis of the proposed development.
Potential implementation strategies of necessary infrastructure
and/or safety improvements shall be identified in response to the
analysis findings.
§ 615-18 ETNA CODE § 615-18
1:498
(2) Medical offices are permitted only on the second floor of a building
in the C1 Zoning District.
Z. Parking lot, private.
(1) A private parking lot shall be provided for an institutional use only.
AA. Pharmacy.
(1) The maximum gross floor area for a pharmacy is 2,500 square feet
in the C1 Zoning District and 5,000 square feet in the C2 Zoning
District.
(2) Drive-through facilities are not permitted in the C1 Zoning District.
(3) Parking facilities shall not be constructed between the building
front facade and the front lot line.
BB. Place of assembly/worship.
(1) A place of assembly/worship's primary visitor dropoff and pickup
area shall be located in a manner that minimizes detrimental traffic
impacts (both pedestrian and vehicular) on the surrounding
neighborhood.
(2) The landowner and/or developer shall be required to prepare and
submit a traffic impact analysis of the proposed development.
Potential implementation strategies of necessary infrastructure
and/or safety improvements shall be identified in response to the
analysis findings.
(3) The number of points of ingress/egress shall be based upon
projected peak-hour traffic for the use and approved by the
Borough Engineer to ensure employee and visitor safety.
(4) Hours of operation and events shall be scheduled to minimize
negative impacts on the surrounding neighborhood.
(5) As part of all land development, the landowner and/or developer
shall provide a plan for photometrics of the lot. Illumination, when
measured at a lot line, shall be a maximum of one footcandle.
(6) For parking demands greater than 300 automobiles, additional
setbacks, screening and buffering of off-street parking and loading
areas may be required to be provided in order to protect the
surrounding neighborhood from inappropriate noise, dust, light
and other disturbances.
CC. Professional and business offices.
(1) Professional and business offices are permitted only on the second
floor of a building in the C1 Zoning District.
DD. Public park, recreation area, playground.
§ 615-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-18
1:499
(1) Such use may only be constructed in association with an
institutional or municipal land use.
(2) All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent streets and properties.
(3) Any facility located within 200 feet of a property line adjoining a
residential use or zoning classification shall cease operations at
12:00 midnight.
EE. Public utility building.
(1) Unhoused equipment shall be enclosed within a fence constructed
of materials present on the majority of adjacent principal
structures. Said fence shall be a minimum of six feet in height.
(2) Housed equipment. When the equipment is totally enclosed within
a building, no fence or screen planting shall be required, and the
yards shall be maintained in accordance with the zoning district in
which the facility is located.
(3) The external design of the building shall be to the greatest extent
possible in conformity with the design of the majority of buildings
on the block, face and adjacent lots of the subject lot.
FF. Research and development establishment.
(1) Any outdoor storage conducted on the lot shall comply with the
regulations for outdoor storage as defined in this chapter.
(2) A research and development facility shall have one point of ingress
and egress to a public arterial or collector street.
(3) Hours of operation and activities must be appropriately scheduled
to protect the surrounding neighborhood from detrimental noise,
dust, odor, vibration, light or other disturbance or interruption.
(4) An inventory of toxic, corrosive, flammable, carcinogenic or
explosive materials, chemicals, liquids, gases or solids shall be
updated annually and submitted to the Borough for record.
GG. Restaurant, sit-down.
(1) Sit-down restaurants located in the C1 Zoning District must
designate at least 60% of its gross floor area accessible for use by
customers.
(2) The total size of a sit-down restaurant in the C1 Zoning District
must not exceed 5,000 square feet.
(3) Outdoor seating is permitted but will be included in the total gross
floor area. Outdoor seating may not exceed 25% of the total gross
floor area.
§ 615-18 ETNA CODE § 615-18
1:500
(4) If outdoor seating is adjacent to a residential zoning district, a
planted or structural buffer shall be designed and constructed
supporting the principals and intents of the Borough's Design
Guidelines.
(5) Dumpster and service areas shall be screened from the public
right-of-way and not conflict with off-street parking associated with
the use. No dumpster and/or service areas shall be located between
the front lot line of the lot and the front facade of the principal
structure in which it is located.
(6) Outdoor storage of materials shall not be permitted.
(7) Restaurants in the C1 Zoning District are not permitted to have
drive-through facilities.
HH. Restaurant, take-out.
(1) The total size of a take-out restaurant in the C1 Zoning District
must not exceed 2,500 square feet.
(2) Exterior trash receptacles shall be provided and routinely emptied
so as to prevent the scattering of litter.
(3) Restaurants in the C1 Zoning District are not permitted to have
drive-through facilities.
(4) For restaurants with drive-through facilities in the C2 Zoning
District:
(a) Drive-through window lanes shall be separated from the
parking lot's interior driveways and shall provide at least 100
feet of on-site stacking per lane preceding the food order
location.
(b) Any exterior speaker/microphone system shall be arranged
and/or screened to prevent objectionable noise impact on
adjoining lots.
(c) All exterior seating/play areas shall be completely enclosed by
a minimum three-foot-high fence.
(5) Dumpster and service areas shall be screened from the public
right-of-way and not conflict with off-street parking associated with
the use. No dumpster and/or service areas shall be located between
the front lot line of the lot and the front facade of the principal
structure in which it is located.
(6) Outdoor storage of materials shall not be permitted.
II. Retail, large-scale.
§ 615-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-18
1:501
(1) No fuel sales or accessory fuel/service stations are permitted in
association with or otherwise on the same lot as a large-scale retail
use.
(2) No outdoor display or storage of items for sale is permitted, unless
by permit issued by the Borough for the display of seasonal
agricultural items.
JJ. School, commercial/other.
(1) Required off-street parking for the school shall be clearly
designated and shall be located within 300 feet of the entrance to
the school.
(2) All buildings shall be set back at least 15 feet from any adjoining
land used for residential purposes. Buffer yards shall be
landscaped with a combination of deciduous and evergreen trees,
shrubs, ornamental grasses, and ground covers. Grass, sod, lawn or
turf shall not be considered an acceptable plant for use within
landscaped buffer yards when not used in combination with trees
and shrubs.
(3) Enrollment shall be defined as the largest number of students on
the site at any one time during a seven-day period.
(4) Student dropoff and pickup areas shall be provided and arranged
so that students do not have to cross traffic lanes on or adjacent to
the site. The configuration of access drives and parking lots shall be
aligned to minimize circulation conflict with surrounding uses.
(5) Parking shall be provided based upon peak class time in
accordance with the following ratio: one space for every two
persons enrolled plus 1 per faculty/staff of said peak class time.
KK. Storage building for retail on premises.
(1) The building shall be lit on the interior and exterior for safety.
(2) Primary access to the building shall be designed to ensure that
vehicular and pedestrian traffic has access to the right-of-way but
does not encumber circulation within the right-of-way.
(3) To maintain continuity of existing Borough development, the retail
structure and the storage building shall appear similar and related
in character and function.
LL. Tower, communications. See § 615-21N.
MM.Warehouse.
(1) All vehicular maneuvering for warehouse uses shall be located on
site.
§ 615-18 ETNA CODE § 615-18
1:502
(2) Curb cuts shall be minimized to the maximum extent feasible in
order to achieve access to the site.
(3) The applicant shall provide a detailed description of the nature of
the on-site activities and operations, the types of materials stored,
the frequency of distribution and restocking, the duration period of
storage of materials, and the methods for disposal of any surplus or
damaged materials. In addition, the applicant shall furnish
evidence that the disposal of materials will be accomplished in a
manner that complies with state and federal regulations.
(4) The Borough Council shall determine that such use will not create
detrimental impacts on the surrounding lots, taking into
consideration the probable traffic generation, the physical
relationship of the proposed use and structure to surrounding uses
and structures, the emission of noise or glaring light, and proposed
accessory uses, such as meeting facilities.
(5) Loading areas shall not be visible at ground level from a public
right-of-way or an adjacent residence. A landscaped buffer yard of a
minimum of 25 feet in width shall be provided adjacent to all
existing residences. Buffer yards shall be landscaped with a
combination of deciduous and evergreen trees, shrubs, ornamental
grasses, and ground covers. Grass, sod, lawn or turf shall not be
considered an acceptable plant for use within landscaped buffer
yards when not used in combination with trees and shrubs.
(6) Outdoor storage of foods and/or materials shall not be permitted.
(7) The ground surface of off-street parking and loading spaces shall
be paved with bituminous paving, brick, concrete or stone block
paving to protect the surrounding neighborhood from
inappropriate dust and other disturbances.
(8) The building height of a warehouse located in the Riverfront
Overlay District shall be compatible with the height of buildings on
adjacent lots.
§ 615-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-18
1:503

ARTICLE IV
Special Exceptions
§ 615-19. Granting and evaluation of special exception uses.
A. In evaluating an application for a special exception use, the Borough
shall apply the guidelines and procedures set forth in the MPC.
B. The consideration of a special exception use by the Zoning Hearing
Board upon review of recommendations by the Planning Commission
shall be predicated on the applicant's submission of a written
application containing all of the information required under Subsection
C of this section, together with a site plan meeting the requirements of
Subsection F of this section.
C. The written submission shall demonstrate that the development for
which the special exception use is sought will meet the primary criteria
outlined below:
(1) Will not endanger the public health and safety if located where
proposed and will not deteriorate the environment or generate
nuisance conditions such as traffic congestion, noise, dust, smoke,
glare or vibration as regulated by the Borough.
(2) Meets all other requirements of this chapter in the zoning district
where the use is proposed.
(3) Is in general conformity with the Etna-Millvale-Sharpsburg Multi-
Municipal Comprehensive Plan and is attractive and in harmony
with the area in which it is proposed.
(4) Is an appropriate use on the proposed lot as a use by special
exception.
D. If defined as part of any special exception approval, said special
exception use shall be completed within the identified time frame. Also,
the Zoning Hearing Board may grant an extension of time for any
completion date if the applicant or his agent requests such an extension
and if good cause for the extension is shown. If, at the end of the
identified time frame or extended completion period, the special
exception use is not completed, and if no extension has been granted,
the approval of the special exception use shall be null and void.
E. Upon approval of any special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board,
any prior approved special exception for the same tract of land shall
become null and void.
F. Information, including the address of the applicant, the location of the
site, a listing of lot owners who shall receive notice of such zoning
application, the zoning district and other relevant information as
defined by the Borough, shall be submitted.
§ 615-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-19
1:505
G. In proceedings involving a request for a special exception, both the duty
of initially presenting evidence and the burden of persuading the
Zoning Hearing Board that the proposed use is available by special
exception and satisfies the specific or objective requirements for the
grant of a special exception as set forth in this chapter rest upon the
applicant.
H. The site plan shall show to scale the entire lot to be ultimately
developed and shall indicate the location, height and use of structures,
driveways, signs, parking areas and topographical and/or natural
features of the lot. An architectural rendering of the structures
proposed shall also be submitted.
I. The Zoning Hearing Board may attach reasonable conditions in order to
protect the public's health, safety and welfare. These reasonable
conditions may include but are not limited to increased screening.
J. Approval of all uses by special exception contained in this chapter shall
be subject to periodic inspections by the Zoning Officer to ensure
compliance with the required conditions of approval. Such periodic
inspections shall be conducted annually while the use is conducting
active operations.
§ 615-19 ETNA CODE § 615-19
1:506
ARTICLE V
Performance Standards and Supplementary Regulations
§ 615-20. Performance standards.
A. Compliance required.
(1) All uses must comply with the requirements of this chapter, and the
landowner and/or developer must demonstrate that a proposed use
can comply with the standards below prior to Etna Borough issuing
approval and operation commencing on the lot. Compliance must
be determined by the Zoning Officer with respect to permitted
uses, by the Zoning Hearing Board with respect to special
exceptions, and by the Borough Council with respect to conditional
uses.
In order to determine whether a proposed use will conform to the
requirements of this article, Etna Borough may obtain a qualified
consultant's report, whose cost for services will be borne by the
applicant.
(2) All uses that require new facilities or expansion of existing
facilities, such as sewers, storm drains, fire hydrants, potable
water, public streets, street lighting and similar services, will
obtain such approval as required by the agency providing such
service prior to project approval. No availability of essential
services is permitted to be grounds for denying permits for
additional development until such services are available. Etna
Borough is not obligated to extend or supply essential services if
capacity is not available. If capacity is available, the extension of
services will be by and at the cost of the landowner and/or
developer, unless Etna Borough agrees otherwise.
All service extensions are to be designed and installed in full
conformance with Etna Borough's standards for such service, and
be subject to review, permit and inspection as required by other
policies or ordinances of Etna Borough.
B. Fire protection. Fire-protection and firefighting equipment, procedures
and safety protocols acceptable to the National Fire Protection
Association must be readily available and followed where there is any
activity involving the handling or storage of flammable or explosive
material. All other portions of the Borough Code relevant to fire
protection shall also be applicable.
C. Radioactivity; electrical disturbances. Unless otherwise permitted by
Etna Borough for medical purposes, no activity can emit radioactivity at
any point or cause electrical disturbance adversely affecting the
operation of radio or other equipment in the vicinity.
D. Noise. The sound level of any use within this district may not exceed, at
any point along the boundary of the lot on which the use is to be
§ 615-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-20
1:507
§ 615-21. Supplementary regulations.
undertaken, federal standards or recommended decibel levels in the
designated octave bands, except for emergency alarm systems. Sound
levels can be projected in accordance with similar or identical
operations or uses and be measured with a sound level meter and
associated octave band analyzer manufactured according to standards
prescribed by the American Standards Association. Measurements
must be made using the same measuring system which may now or
hereafter be utilized by the United States Government for this purpose.
E. Vibrations. Except temporary vibration resulting from construction
activity, vibrations detectable without instruments on any adjacent lot
in any zone will be prohibited.
F. Dust, fumes, vapor and gas control. The emission of dust, dirt, flash,
fumes, vapors or gases which cause any damage to human health,
animals, vegetation or other forms of property, or which can cause
soiling or staining of persons or property at any point beyond the lot
line of the use creating such emission is hereby prohibited. No emission
of liquid or solid particulate from any chimney or stack or otherwise can
exceed 0.03 grains per cubic foot of the covering gas at any point
beyond the lot line of the use creating the emission. Identical processes
or facilities may be compared to determine compliance with this
subsection. For measurement for the amount of particles discharged as
stated above, measurement procedures will follow those employed by
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection for similar or
identical measurements.
A. Drainage facilities and floodplains. The provisions of Chapter 518 of
this Code (Borough Ordinance 1378), related to stormwater, and
Chapter 300 of this Code (Borough Ordinance 1353), related to
floodplains, are applicable to matters of zoning within the Borough.
B. Solar collectors and solar-related equipment.
(1) Purpose. It is the purpose of this regulation to promote the safe,
effective and efficient use of installed solar energy systems that
reduce on-site consumption of utility-supplied energy while
protecting the health, safety and welfare of adjacent and
surrounding land uses and lots. This section seeks to:
(a) Provide lot owners and business owners/operators with
flexibility in satisfying their on-site energy needs.
(b) Reduce overall energy demands within the community and to
promote energy efficiency.
(c) Integrate alternative energy systems seamlessly into the
community's neighborhoods and landscapes without
diminishing quality of life in the neighborhoods.
§ 615-20 ETNA CODE § 615-21
1:508
(2) Applicability.
(a) This section applies to building-mounted and ground-mounted
systems installed and constructed after the effective date of
the chapter.
(b) Solar PV systems constructed prior to the effective date of this
section are not required to meet the requirements of this
chapter.
(c) Any upgrade, modification or structural change that materially
alters the size or placement of an existing solar PV system shall
comply with the provisions of this chapter.
(3) Permitted zoning districts.
(a) Building-mounted and ground-mounted systems are permitted
in all zoning districts as an accessory use to any lawfully
permitted principal use on the same lot upon issuance of the
proper permit and upon compliance with all requirements of
this section and as elsewhere specified in this chapter.
(b) Building-integrated systems are not considered an accessory
use and are not subject to the requirements of this chapter.
(4) Location within a lot.
(a) Building-mounted systems are permitted to face any rear, side
and front yard or any unregulated yard area. Building-mounted
systems may only be mounted on lawfully permitted principal
or accessory structures.
(b) Ground-mounted systems are permitted based on the
requirements for accessory uses or structures in the property's
zoning district.
Permitted Location: Building-Mounted Solar PV System Isometric
(5) Design and installation standards.
(a) The solar PV system must be constructed to comply with the
Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code (UCC), Act 45 of
§ 615-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-21
1:509
1999, as amended, and any regulations adopted by the
Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry as they relate
to the UCC, except where an applicable industry standard has
been approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and
Industry under its regulatory authority.
(b) All wiring must comply with the National Electrical Code, most
recent edition, as amended and adopted by the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania. For ground-mounted systems, all exterior
electrical lines must be buried below the surface of the ground
where possible or be placed in conduit.
(c) The solar PV system must be constructed to comply with the
most recent Fire Code, as amended and adopted by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(6) Setback requirements.
(a) Ground-mounted systems. Ground-mounted systems are
subject to the accessory use or structure setback requirements
in the zoning district in which the system is to be constructed.
The required setbacks are measured from the lot line to the
nearest part of the system. No part of the ground-mounted
system shall extend into the required setbacks due to a
tracking system or other adjustment of solar PV related
equipment or parts.
(7) Height restrictions.
(a) Notwithstanding the height limitations of the zoning district:
[1] For a building-mounted system installed on a sloped roof
that faces the front yard of a lot, the system must be
installed at the same angle as the roof on which it is
installed with a maximum distance, measured
perpendicular to the roof, of 18 inches between the roof
and highest edge or surface of the system.
Height Restriction, Sloped Roof Facing Front Yard: Building-Mounted Solar PV
System Elevation
§ 615-21 ETNA CODE § 615-21
1:510
[2] For a building-mounted system installed on a sloped roof,
the highest point of the system shall not exceed the
highest point of the roof to which it is attached.
Height Restriction, Sloped Roof Facing Rear or Side Yard: Building-Mounted Solar PV
System Elevation
(b) Notwithstanding the height limitations of the zoning district:
[1] For a building-mounted system installed on a flat roof, the
highest point of the system shall be permitted to extend up
to six feet above the roof to which it is attached.
Height Restriction, Flat Roof: Building-Mounted Solar PV System Isometric
[2] Ground-mounted systems may not exceed the permitted
height of accessory structures in the zoning district where
the solar PV system is to be installed.
Height Restriction: Ground-Mounted Solar PV System Elevation
(8) Screening and visibility.
(a) Building-mounted systems on a sloped roof shall not be
required to be screened.
(b) Building-mounted systems mounted on a flat roof shall not be
visible from the public right-of-way within a fifty-foot radius of
the lot, exclusive of an alley as defined by this chapter, at a
level of five feet from the ground in a similar manner as to any
other rooftop HVAC or mechanical equipment. This can be
§ 615-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-21
1:511
accomplished with architectural screening, such as a building
parapet or by setting the system back from the roof edge in
such a manner that the solar PV system is not visible from the
public right-of-way within a fifty-foot radius when measured at
a distance of five feet from the ground.
Screening and Visibility, Flat Roof: Building-Mounted Solar PV System Plan
Screening and Visibility, Flat Roof: Building-Mounted Solar PV System Plan
Screening and Visibility, Flat Roof: Building-Mounted Solar PV System Elevation
§ 615-21 ETNA CODE § 615-21
1:512
Screening and Visibility, Flat Roof: Building-Mounted Solar PV System Elevation
(9) Impervious lot coverage restrictions.
(a) The surface area of any ground-mounted system, regardless of
the mounted angle of any portion of the system, is considered
impervious surface and shall be calculated as part of the lot
coverage limitations for the zoning district. If the groundmounted
system is mounted above existing impervious surface,
it shall not be calculated as part of the lot coverage limitations
for the zoning district.
(10) Nonconformance.
(a) Building-mounted systems:
[1] If a building-mounted system is to be installed on any
building or structure that is nonconforming because its
height violates the height restrictions of the zoning district
in which it is located, the building-mounted system shall
be permitted so long as the building-mounted system does
not extend above the peak or highest point of the roof to
which it is mounted and so long as it complies with the
other provisions of this chapter.
Nonconforming Building, Sloped Roof Facing Front Yard: Building-Mounted Solar PV
System Elevation
§ 615-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-21
1:513
Nonconforming Building, Sloped Roof Facing Rear or Side Yard: Building-Mounted
Solar PV System Elevation
[2] If a building-mounted system is to be installed on a
building or structure on a nonconforming lot that does not
meet the minimum setbacks required and/or exceeds the
lot coverage limits for the zoning district in which it is
located, a building-mounted system shall be permitted so
long as there is no expansion of any setback or lot
coverage nonconformity and so long as it complies with
the other provisions of this chapter.
Nonconforming Lot, Setbacks, and/or Lot Coverage Limits: Building-Mounted Solar
PV System Isometric
(b) Ground-mounted systems. If a ground-mounted system is to be
installed on a lot containing a structure that is nonconforming
because the required minimum setbacks are exceeded, the
proposed system shall be permitted so long as the system does
not encroach into the established setback for the lot. If a
ground-mounted system is to be installed on a lot that is
nonconforming because it violates zoning district
requirements other than setbacks, then a variance must be
obtained for the proposed installation.
§ 615-21 ETNA CODE § 615-21
1:514
Nonconforming Lot, Setbacks: Ground-Mounted Solar PV System Isometric
(11) Signage and/or graphic content.
(a) No signage or graphic content may be displayed on the solar
PV system except the manufacturer's badge, safety information
and equipment specification information. Said information
shall be depicted within an area no more than 36 square inches
in size.
(12) Performance requirements.
(a) All solar PV systems are subject to compliance with applicable
performance standards detailed elsewhere in the chapter.
(13) Inspection, safety and removal.
(a) The Borough of Etna reserves the right to inspect a solar PV
system for building or fire code compliance and safety.
(b) If upon inspection the Borough determines that a fire code or
building code violation exists, or that the system otherwise
poses a safety hazard to persons or property, the Borough may
order the lot owner to repair or remove the system within a
reasonable time. Such an order shall be in writing, shall offer
the option to repair, shall specify the code violation or safety
hazard found, and shall notify the lot owner of his or her right
to appeal such determination.
§ 615-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-21
1:515
(c) If a lot owner fails to repair or remove a solar PV system as
ordered, and any appeal rights have been exhausted, the
Borough may enter the lot, remove the system and charge the
lot owner and or facility owner and operator for all costs and
expenses of removal, including reasonable attorneys' fees or
pursue other legal action to have the system removed at the lot
owner's expense.
(d) In addition to any other available remedies, any unpaid costs
resulting from the Borough's removal of a vacated, abandoned
or decommissioned solar PV system shall constitute a lien upon
the lot against which the costs were charged. Legal counsel of
the Borough shall institute appropriate action for the recovery
of such cost, plus attorneys' fees, including but not limited to
filing of municipal claims pursuant to 53 P.S. § 7107 et seq., for
the cost of such work, 6% interest per annum, plus a penalty of
5% of the amount due plus attorneys' fees and costs incurred
by the Borough in connection with the removal work and the
filing of the municipal claim.
(14) Permit requirements.
(a) Before any construction or installation on any solar PV system
shall commence, a permit issued by the Borough of Etna shall
be obtained to document compliance with this chapter.
C. Temporary construction trailers or sheds. Temporary construction
trailers or sheds are permitted in all zones, subject to the following:
(1) Temporary construction trailers or sheds are permitted only during
the period that the construction work is in progress. A permit for
the temporary structure must be obtained from the Zoning Officer
prior to the commencement of construction and must be renewed
every six months.
(2) Temporary construction trailers or sheds must be located on the lot
on which the construction is progressing and cannot be located
within 10 feet of any lot line adjoining an existing residential use.
(3) Temporary construction trailers or sheds must be used only as
temporary field offices and for storage of incidental equipment and
supplies and cannot be used for any dwelling use.
(4) A temporary construction trailer may be permitted for use as a
sales center for residential lots. The maximum gross floor area of
such a temporary sales center is 500 square feet. A permit for the
temporary trailer must be obtained from the Zoning Officer.
(5) No combustible materials can be stored in temporary construction
trailers or sheds.
D. Height exceptions.
§ 615-21 ETNA CODE § 615-21
1:516
(1) The height limitations of this chapter do not apply to the following
structures: Place of worship steeples or spires; steeples; chimneys;
elevator bulk heads and other mechanical equipment that is part of
a primary structure; conveyors; flagpoles; silos; standpipes;
elevated water tanks; derricks; public utility structures; and other
structures not intended for human habitation which do not exceed
the height limitations of the zoning district by more than 15 feet.
(2) All buildings or structures are subject to all applicable Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA) height and lighting restrictions.
E. No more than one dwelling unit shall be permitted on a lot.
F. In instances where a building constructed prior to the passing of this
chapter straddles multiple lots or an alley, the landowner and/or
developer is responsible for verifying with the Borough that no
easements or rights-of-way exist.
(1) If there is a recorded right-of-way, the Borough reserves the right
to determine if abandonment of the right-of-way for construction is
appropriate in context of Etna Borough's community development
objectives and the intent of this chapter. If abandonment is not
appropriate, an application could be subject to denial.
(2) If there is an easement, the Borough reserves the right to
determine if construction is or is not appropriate to occur on the
easement in the context of Etna Borough's community development
objectives and the intent of this chapter. If construction on said
easement is not appropriate, an application could be subject to
denial.
G. Fences and walls.
(1) Within residential districts, residential fences and enclosure walls
may be erected, provided:
(a) A fence along the rear property line shall not exceed eight feet
in height;
(b) A fence located along the side property line shall not exceed six
feet in height;
(c) No fence higher than four feet shall be erected between the
front facade of the principal structure and the street line.
(d) All fence posts, rails or piers shall be so installed so that they
face the interior of the lot of the one installing same.
(e) Barbed wire, electrical or other hazardous fencing materials
are prohibited.
§ 615-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-21
1:517
(2) Within residential districts, fences for a nonresidential use located
adjacent to a residential use shall be at maximum of four feet high
in a front yard and six feet in any other yard.
(3) The exterior side of a fence and/or wall must be oriented to the
exterior of the lot on which it is erected or towards a public right-ofway.
(4) Fences may be placed on a front lot line so long as they possess a
minimum of 50% transparency. For each 10% of transparency less
than 50% (e.g., 40, 30, 20, 10, 0%), the fence shall be placed an
additional increment of six inches from the lot line.
H. Parking and driveways.
(1) Parking and loading. To encourage vehicular circulation and avoid
congestion on public streets, unless precluded by topography, there
shall be provided, for a lot measuring 2,500 square feet or greater
in area, at the time of the erection or increase by units or
dimensions of any building or structure or at the time of creation or
change of any use not involving a building or structure, minimum
off-street motor vehicle parking spaces plus adequate space for
ingress, egress and general vehicular circulation. Minimum offstreet
parking and other such provisions shall be provided as
follows. If the minimums cannot be met, the applicant may apply
for a conditional use related to development, subject to Borough
review and determination.
(a) For one- and two-family dwellings, one off-street parking space
for each family dwelling unit. As single- and two-family
dwellings, no vehicle parking shall be allowed in front yard
areas or side yard areas except in an improved driveway on the
interior side of the front lot line.
(b) For any other type of land use that is residential, one parking
space for each family dwelling unit, plus one additional parking
space for every two dwelling units.
(c) For nonresidential uses in the C2 District, parking shall not
exceed one parking space per 300 square feet of development
or one space for each four seats within an establishment
serving food and/or beverages or one seat for each four seats
within the main congregational space of a place of worship, as
applicable.
(d) For nonresidential uses in the I District, parking shall not
exceed one parking space per 500 square feet or one space per
peak-hour employee, whichever is greater.
(e) For any and all other uses, buildings or structures not
specifically provided for, other than those in the C1 District,
one parking space for every 300 square feet of floor area or
§ 615-21 ETNA CODE § 615-21
1:518
one space for each four seats within an establishment serving
food and/or beverages or one space for each four seats within
the main congregational space of a place of worship/place of
assembly, as applicable.
(2) Parking area permeable paving.
(a) The Borough desires to reduce the impacts of stormwater
runoff and to improve local water quality by reducing
untreated stormwater. The landowner of any required parking
area other than that of a one- or two-family dwelling shall:
[1] Provide a minimum of 20% permeable surfaces.
[2] Coordinate permeable surfaces of grading so that
stormwater can infiltrate the surface in areas with less
than 5% slope.
(3) Driveways.
(a) All private garages, carports and all off-street parking enclosed
within a principal building must be connected directly to a
public street or a public alley by a private driveway. Where
there are multiple off-street parking spaces in a private garage,
carport or enclosed within the principal building, the driveway
may be widened to access said parking spaces.
(b) The entire flare of any return radius on a driveway must fall
within the right-of-way.
I. Utilities.
(1) All utilities for lots that have improvements or are redeveloped
must be located underground unless otherwise approved by the
Borough Council.
(2) Utility connections such as gas meters, electric meters, phone and
cable must be located so as to minimize their visibility from the
street.
J. Drive-through facility.
(1) The site shall be in the C2 or I District and have frontage on and
direct vehicular access to an arterial or collector street as
delineated by Etna Borough.
(2) In addition to the parking spaces required for the principal use, a
minimum of five standing spaces, in tandem, with a total length of
100 feet, in direct line with each window or stall, shall be provided
for vehicles to wait in line. The standing spaces shall not interfere
with the use of any required parking spaces and shall not inhibit
the free flow of traffic on the site. The standing spaces shall be
§ 615-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-21
1:519
designed so that waiting vehicles shall not stand in any right-of-way
or overflow onto adjacent properties, streets or berms.
(3) Entrances, exits and standing spaces shall be adequately indicated
with pavement markings and/or directional signs.
(4) Parking areas and circulation patterns shall be adequately striped
and marked to facilitate traffic circulation on the site.
K. Dumpsters and dumpster enclosures.
(1) Dumpsters existing as of the effective date of this chapter and
dumpsters constructed subsequent to the effective date of this
chapter shall comply with the following:
(a) No dumpster or dumpster enclosure shall be located within a
required landscape buffer yard and may be located within a
required yard only if a street or dedicated alley separates the
lot from any adjacent residential lot. Required enclosures shall
be defined by the Borough, based upon review of proposed
dumpster location and service area access in relationship to
public right-of-way, building locations and vehicular/pedestrian
circulation routes.
(b) Dumpsters shall be maintained free of jagged or sharp edges
or inside parts that could prevent the free discharge of their
contents and closed lids.
(c) Dumpster pads shall be required and shall be at least two feet
larger than the dumpster on all sides. Wheel stops or bollards
shall be permanently affixed to the pad at least one foot inside
the perimeter of the pad to prevent the dumpster from striking
the enclosure during collection. The base of the enclosure must
be poured concrete. The base shall extend three feet beyond
the front opening of the enclosure as an apron, and all concrete
must be level with adjacent asphalt.
(2) Businesses shall be encouraged to share dumpsters.
L. General landscaping.
(1) One landscaped island for every 10 parking spaces must be
provided within all nonresidential, apartment and hi-rise
residential parking areas. All landscaped islands shall contain one
tree a minimum of two inches diameter at breast height (dbh); one
tree per residential unit or one tree per 1,000 square feet of
development in the C2 District and Riverfront Overlay is required
on a lot.
(2) For any plan prepared and submitted as part of an application that
involves nonresidential redevelopment, infill, construction,
excavation or building expansion, it is recommended to include,
§ 615-21 ETNA CODE § 615-21
1:520
and illustrate at scale, the location of trees, shrubs and ground
covers for the following:
(a) All Borough required buffer yards with proposed plantings.
(b) All Borough required planting independent of any buffer yard
requirements.
(c) Any planting in excess of the requirements of this chapter.
(d) Any existing trees or vegetation which are to be preserved.
(e) Any existing trees or vegetation which will be removed.
(f) The location and species of all existing trees six inches in dbh.
Applicants are encouraged to maximize the retention of all
healthy existing trees six inches or more in dbh.
M. Outdoor storage.
(1) The Borough aims to provide a safe and healthy environment to its
residents and businesses.
(2) The following items associated with outdoor storage are considered
public health or safety menaces which may endanger the health or
safety of the public and, as such, are subject to Borough inspection.
Such items cannot be stored on a lot.
(a) Unsanitary or improper storage or disposal of trash, garbage,
refuse, debris, other solid waste or hazardous waste.
(b) Unburied dead animals.
(c) Accumulation of water causing mosquito or other vector
breeding or proliferation.
(d) Rodent or insect infestation.
(e) Accumulation of bees, fowl or animals in such a manner to
create a condition that may be injurious to the public health or
safety.
(f) Uncovered woodpiles and woodpiles exceeding 120 cubic feet;
(g) Fuel sources and fire hazards stored freely out of doors.
(h) Furniture typically intended/constructed for indoor use stored
out of doors.
(i) Inoperable appliances, vehicles and equipment.
(j) Mechanical equipment not intended for traditional landscaping
purposes stored between the front facade of a main building
and the front lot line.
§ 615-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-21
1:521
(k) Motorized, mechanical and other powered vehicles and
equipment stored between the front facade of a main building
and the front lot line that is not in concealed storage (that
which exceeds 85% or greater opacity) or between rear or side
facades and rear or side yards that is not screened from
adjacent lot(s).
(l) Any other condition or objects that may be injurious or cause
adverse effect to public health or safety.
(3) Except for retail/wholesale landscape plant (living) species which
require outside storage of materials for growth within the
environment, the storage and display of materials outside a
completely enclosed structure shall not be permitted.
(4) Any material or equipment stored outside an enclosed building
shall be incidental to the principal use of the lot and shall be stored
to the rear of the building or a location otherwise approved by the
Borough which screens the display/storage area from public view
from the street or from any adjacent residential use.
(5) All organic rubbish and discarded materials shall be contained in
tight, verminproof containers, which shall be screened from public
view by an opaque fence or hedge which is at least six feet in height
and achieves 85% opacity.
(6) When any condition that constitutes a public health or safety
menace is found on occupied or vacant land or premises, the
Borough shall notify in writing the landowner and the occupant of
the land or premises on which the condition exists and/or any other
person who it believes is responsible for the health or safety
menace. Such notice shall contain a description of the health or
safety menace; the time within which the menace shall be abated,
corrected or eliminated; and a statement that the landowner,
occupant of the land or other person responsible may request a
review meeting with the Zoning Officer within 10 days of the
receipt of the notice. Notice sent by registered or certified mail to
the last-known address of the owner whose name is shown on the
current real estate tax assessment records or occupant or other
identified person responsible shall be deemed compliance with the
notice requirement to the person responsible.
(7) Upon receipt of the written notice from the Borough, the
landowner, occupant of the land or other person responsible shall
abate, correct or eliminate the health or safety menace. The
amount of time allowed to abate, correct or eliminate the health or
safety menace condition shall be determined by the Borough and
shall not be less than 24 hours nor more than 10 days. If the
Borough determines that the menace cannot be abated, corrected
or eliminated within 10 days, the Borough may order temporary
abatement measures and allow a longer period of time to abate,
§ 615-21 ETNA CODE § 615-21
1:522
correct or eliminate the condition. The Borough may allow such a
longer period of time only upon request of the landowner, occupant
of the land or other person responsible and only upon a good faith
showing that such longer period of time is necessary.
(8) After receipt of the written notice, it is unlawful for the landowner,
occupant of the land or other person responsible to fail to abate,
correct or eliminate the health or safety menace within the time
determined by the Borough.
(9) If the written notice is undeliverable, or if after receipt of the
written notice, the landowner, occupant of the land or other person
responsible fails to abate, correct or eliminate the health or safety
menace, the Borough may request Borough representatives to take
reasonable steps to abate, correct or eliminate the health or safety
menace, whether the land or premises are occupied or vacant. If
the landowner, occupant of the land or other person responsible
denies free access for such purposes, the Borough may proceed
after obtaining the applicable legal authorization.
(10) Costs and expenses incurred by the Borough in abating, correcting
or eliminating a health or safety menace on private property shall
be assessed against the owner and/or occupant of the land or
premises and/or any other person responsible for the health or
safety menace, and shall be recoverable from the owner in the
same way as taxes and levies. Costs and expenses incurred by the
Borough in abating, correcting or eliminating a health or safety
menace on public property shall be recoverable from the person or
persons responsible for causing the health or safety menace.
N. Wireless communications facilities.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of these provisions is to establish uniform
standards for the siting, design, permitting, maintenance, and use
of wireless communications facilities in Etna Borough. While the
Borough recognizes the importance of wireless communications
facilities in providing high quality communications service to its
residents and businesses, the Borough also recognizes that it has
an obligation to protect public safety and to minimize the adverse
visual effects of such facilities through the standards set forth in
the following provisions. The final authority on the regulation of
wireless communication facilities are under the jurisdiction of the
Federal Telecommunications Act and related regulations adopted
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Zoning regulations on this
use are permitted to protect the public, health, safety and welfare,
unless specifically excluded by federal and state acts. By enacting
this chapter, the Borough intends to:
(a) Provide for the managed development of wireless
communications facilities in a manner that enhances the
benefits of wireless communication and accommodates the
§ 615-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-21
1:523
needs of both Borough residents and wireless carriers in
accordance with federal and state laws and regulations.
(b) Establish procedures for the design, siting, construction,
installation, maintenance and removal of both tower-based and
non-tower-based wireless communications facilities in the
Borough, including facilities both inside and outside the public
rights-of-way.
(c) Address new wireless technologies, including but not limited
to, distributed antenna systems, data collection units, cable wifi
and other wireless communications facilities.
(d) Encourage applicant to seek joint use of existing wireless
communications facilities and other tall structures.
(e) Minimize the adverse visual effects and the number of such
facilities through proper design, siting, screening, material,
color and finish, and by requiring that competing providers of
wireless communications services co-locate their commercial
communications antennas and related facilities on existing
towers.
(f) Promote the health, safety and welfare of the Borough's
residents.
(2) General requirements for all non-tower wireless communications
facilities.
(a) The following regulations shall apply to all non-tower wireless
communications facilities located within the Borough:
[1] Accessory use to existing electrical transmission
structures and utility poles. Non-tower WCFs shall be
considered to be an accessory use to existing electrical
transmission structures and utility poles, when affixed to
such transmission structures, and shall be permitted in all
zoning districts in the Borough.
[2] Standard of care. Any non-tower WCF shall be designed,
constructed, operated, maintained, repaired, modified and
removed in strict compliance with all current applicable
technical, safety and safety-related codes, including but
not limited to the most recent editions of the American
National Standards Institute (ANSI) Code, National
Electrical Safety Code, and National Electrical Code. Any
WCF shall at all times be kept and maintained in good
condition, order and repair by qualified maintenance and
construction personnel, so that the same shall not
endanger the life of any person or any property in the
Borough.
§ 615-21 ETNA CODE § 615-21
1:524
[3] Wind. All non-tower WCF structures shall be designed to
withstand the effects of wind according to the standard
designed by the American National Standards Institute as
prepared by the engineering departments of the
Electronics Industry Association, and Telecommunications
Industry Association (ANSI/EIA/TIA-222, as amended).
[4] Aviation safety. Non-tower WCFs shall comply with all
federal and state laws and regulations concerning aviation
safety.
[5] Public safety communications. No non-tower WCF shall
interfere with public safety communications or the
reception of broadband, television, radio or other
communication services enjoyed by occupants of nearby
properties.
[6] Radio frequency emissions. No non-tower WCF may, by
itself or in conjunction with other WCFs, generate radio
frequency emissions in excess of the standards and
regulations of the FCC, including but not limited to the
FCC Office of Engineering Technology Bulletin 65 entitled
"Evaluating Compliance with FCC Guidelines for Human
Exposure to Radio Frequency Electromagnetic Fields," as
amended.
[7] Removal. In the event that use of a non-tower WCF is
discontinued, the owner shall provide written notice
within 90 days to the Borough of its intent to discontinue
use and the date when the use shall be discontinued.
Unused or abandoned WCFs or portions of WCFs shall be
removed as follows:
[a] All abandoned or unused WCFs and accessory
facilities shall be removed within two months of the
cessation of operations at the site unless a time
extension is approved by the Borough.
[b] If the WCF or accessory facility is not removed within
two months of the cessation of operations at a site, or
within any longer period approved by the Borough,
the WCF and/or associated facilities and equipment
may be removed by the Borough, and the cost of
removal assessed against the owner of the WCF.
[8] Timing of approval. Within 30 calendar days of the date
that an application for a non-tower WCF is filed with the
Borough, the Borough shall notify the applicant in writing
of any information that may be required to complete such
application. Within 90 calendar days of receipt of a
complete application, the Borough shall make its final
decision on whether to approve the application and shall
§ 615-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-21
1:525
advise the applicant in writing of such decision. If
additional information was requested by the Borough to
complete an application, the time required by the
applicant to provide the information shall not be counted
toward the Borough's review period. This timing of
approval shall not apply to any non-tower WCF required to
proceed through conditional use approval.
[9] Insurance. Each person that owns or operates a non-tower
WCF shall provide the Borough with a certificate of
insurance evidencing general liability coverage in the
minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence and
property damage coverage in the minimum amount of
$1,000,000 per occurrence covering the non-tower WCF.
[10] Indemnification. Each person that owns or operates a nontower
WCF shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify,
defend and hold harmless the Borough, its elected and
appointed officials, employees and agents at all times
against any and all claims for personal injury, including
death, and property damage arising in whole or in part
from, caused by or connected with any act or omission of
the person, its officers, agents, employees or contractors
arising out of, but not limited to, the construction,
installation, operation, maintenance or removal of the nontower
WCF. Each person that owns or operates a nontower
WCF shall defend any actions or proceedings
against the Borough in which it is claimed that personal
injury, including death, or property damage was caused by
the construction, installation, operation, maintenance or
removal of a non-tower WCF. The obligation to indemnify,
hold harmless and defend shall include, but not be limited
to, the obligation to pay judgments, injuries, liabilities,
damages, reasonable attorneys' fees, reasonable expert
fees, court costs and all other costs of indemnification.
[11] Maintenance. To the extent permitted by law, the following
maintenance requirements shall apply:
[a] The non-tower WCF shall be fully automated and
unattended on a daily basis and shall be visited only
for maintenance or emergency repair.
[b] Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure the
upkeep of the facility in order to promote the safety
and security of the Borough's residents.
[c] All maintenance activities shall utilize nothing less
than the best available technology for preventing
failures and accidents.
§ 615-21 ETNA CODE § 615-21
1:526
(b) In addition to the regulations of Subsection N(2)(a), the
following regulations shall apply to all non-tower WCFs that do
not substantially change the physical dimensions of the
wireless support structure to which they are attached:
[1] Permit required. Applicants proposing the modification of
an existing tower-based WCF, in order to accommodate a
non-tower WCF applicant, shall obtain the applicable
permit from the Borough Zoning Office. In order to be
considered for such permit, the WCF applicant must
submit a permit application to the Borough Zoning Official
in accordance with applicable permit policies and
procedures.
[2] Related equipment. Ground-mounted related equipment
greater than three cubic feet shall not be located within 25
feet of a lot in residential use or zoned residential.
[3] Permit fees. The Borough may assess appropriate and
reasonable permit fees directly related to the Borough's
actual costs in reviewing and processing the application
for approval of a non-tower WCF or $1,000, whichever is
less.
(c) In addition to the regulations in Subsection N(2)(b), the
following additional regulations shall apply to all non-tower
wireless communications facilities that do substantially change
the wireless support structure to which they are attached:
[1] Prohibited on certain structures. Non-tower WCFs shall
not be located on single-family detached residences,
single-family attached residences, or any residential
accessory structure.
[2] Conditional use authorization. When the Pennsylvania
Wireless Broadband Collocation Act does not apply to the
proposed siting of a new non-tower WCF application, the
approval process for such application shall be conditional
use. When a conditional use application is required, the
regulations set forth in this section shall apply to the
facility, dependent upon its proposed location. New
construction and modifications that do not fall within the
provisions of the WBCA shall be prohibited without
conditional use authorization.
[3] Historic buildings. No non-tower WCF may be located on a
building or structure that is listed on either the National or
Pennsylvania Registers of Historic Places, or is eligible to
be so listed; the Pittsburgh History and Landmark
Foundation; or is listed on the official historic structures
and/or historic districts list maintained by the Borough; or
§ 615-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-21
1:527
has been designated by the Borough to be of historical
significance.
[4] Retention of experts. The Borough may hire any
consultant(s) and/or expert(s) necessary to assist the
Borough in reviewing and evaluating the application for
approval of the WCF and, once approved, in reviewing and
evaluating any potential violations of the terms and
conditions of this chapter. The applicant and/or owner of
the WCF shall reimburse the Borough for all costs of the
Borough's consultant(s) in providing expert evaluation and
consultation in connection with these activities.
[5] Permit fees. The Borough may assess appropriate and
reasonable permit fees directly related to the Borough's
actual costs in reviewing and processing the application
for approval of a non-tower WCF, as well as related
inspection, monitoring and related costs.
(3) Non-tower wireless facilities outside the rights-of-way. The
following additional regulations shall apply to non-tower WCFs
located outside the rights-of-way that do substantially change the
wireless support structure to which they are attached:
(a) Development regulations. Non-tower WCFs shall be co-located
on existing structures, such as existing buildings or towerbased
WCFs, if possible, subject to the following conditions:
[1] In accordance with industry standards, all non-tower WCF
applicants must submit documentation to the Borough
justifying the total height of the non-tower structure. Such
documentation shall be analyzed on an individual basis.
[2] The total height of any wireless support structure and
mounted WCF shall not exceed the maximum height
permitted in the underlying zoning district by more than
20 feet.
[3] If the WCF applicant proposes to locate the related
equipment in a separate building, the building shall
comply with the minimum setback and building
requirements for the applicable zoning district.
[4] A security fence of not less than 10 feet shall surround any
separate communications equipment building. Vehicular
access to the communications equipment building shall
not interfere with the parking or vehicular circulations on
the site for the principal use.
(b) Design regulations.
§ 615-21 ETNA CODE § 615-21
1:528
[1] Non-tower WCFs shall employ stealth technology and be
treated to match the supporting structure in order to
minimize aesthetic impact. The application of the stealth
technology chosen by the WCF applicant shall be subject
to the approval of the Borough.
[2] Noncommercial usage exemption. Borough citizens
utilizing satellite dishes and antennas for the purpose of
maintaining television, phone and/or Internet connections
at their respective residences shall be exempt from the
design regulations enumerated in this chapter.
(c) Removal, replacement, modification. The removal and
replacement of non-tower WCFs and/or accessory equipment
for the purpose of upgrading or repairing the WCF is
permitted, so long as such repair or upgrade does not increase
the overall size of the WCF or the numbers of antennas. Any
material modification to a wireless telecommunications facility
shall require a prior amendment to the original permit or
authorization.
(d) Reservation of rights. In accordance with applicable law, the
Borough reserves the right to deny an application for the
construction or placement of any non-tower WCF for numerous
factors, which include, but are not limited to, visual impact,
design, and safety standards.
(e) Inspection. The Borough reserves the right to inspect any WCF
to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and
any other provisions found within the Borough Code or state or
federal law. The Borough and/or its agents shall have the
authority to enter the property upon which a WCF is located at
any time, upon reasonable notice to the operator, to ensure
such compliance.
(4) Non-tower wireless facilities in the public rights-of-way. The
following additional regulations shall apply to all non-tower
wireless communications facilities located in the public rights-ofway:
(a) Co-location. non-tower WCFs in the ROW shall be co-located on
existing poles, such as existing utility poles or light poles. If colocation
is not technologically feasible, the applicant shall
locate its non-tower WCFs on existing poles that do not already
act as wireless support structures.
(b) Design requirements:
[1] WCF installations located above the surface grade in the
public ROW, including on streetlights and joint utility
poles, shall consist of equipment components that are no
more than six feet in height and that are no greater than 1/
§ 615-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-21
1:529
2 the width of the structures upon which they are
mounted. Such installations are prohibited on any
decorative streetlights. All equipment shall be the smallest
and least visibly intrusive equipment feasible.
[2] Antennas and all support equipment shall be treated to
match the supporting structure. WCFs and accompanying
equipment shall be painted, or otherwise coated, to be
visually compatible with the support structure upon which
they are mounted.
(c) Time, place and manner. The Borough shall determine the
time, place and manner of construction, maintenance, repair
and/or removal of all non-tower WCFs in the ROW based on
public safety, traffic management, physical burden on the ROW,
and related considerations. For public utilities, the time, place
and manner requirements shall be consistent with the police
powers of the Borough and the requirements of the Public
Utility Code.
(d) Equipment location. Non-tower WCFs and accessory
equipment shall be located so as not to cause any physical or
visual obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to
otherwise create safety hazards to pedestrians and/or
motorists, or to otherwise inconvenience public use of the
ROW, as determined by the Borough. In addition:
[1] In no case shall ground-mounted equipment, walls or
landscaping be located within 18 inches of the face of the
curb or within an easement extending onto a privately
owned lot.
[2] Ground-mounted equipment that cannot be
undergrounded shall be screened, to the fullest extent
possible, through the use of landscaping or other
decorative features to the satisfaction of the Borough.
[3] Required electrical meter cabinets shall be screened to
blend in with the surrounding area to the satisfaction of
the Borough.
[4] Any graffiti on the tower or on any accessory equipment
shall be removed at the sole expense of the owner within
10 business days of notice of the existence of the graffiti.
[5] Any proposed underground vault related to non-tower
WCFs shall be reviewed and approved by the Borough.
(e) Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days following
written notice from the Borough, or such longer period as the
Borough determines is reasonably necessary or such shorter
period in the case of an emergency, an owner of a WCF in the
§ 615-21 ETNA CODE § 615-21
1:530
ROW shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently
remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any WCF
when the Borough, consistent with its police powers and
applicable Public Utility Commission regulations, shall have
determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration
is reasonably necessary under the following circumstances:
[1] The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of
any Borough or other public improvement in the right-ofway;
[2] The operations of the Borough or other governmental
entity in the right-of-way;
[3] Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility
easement; or
[4] An emergency as determined by the Borough.
(f) Reservation of rights. In accordance with applicable law, the
Borough reserves the right to deny an application for the
construction or placement of any non-tower WCF for numerous
factors, which include but are not limited to visual impact,
design, and safety standards.
(5) General requirements for all tower-based wireless communications
facilities. The following regulations shall apply to all tower-based
wireless communications facilities in the Borough:
(a) Standard of care. Any tower-based WCF shall be designed,
constructed, operated, maintained, repaired, modified and
removed in strict compliance with all current applicable
technical, safety and safety-related codes, including but not
limited to the most recent editions of the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) Code, National Electrical Safety
Code, National Electrical Code, as well as the accepted and
responsible workmanlike industry practices of the National
Association of Tower Erectors. Any tower-based WCF shall at
all times be kept and maintained in good condition, order and
repair by qualified maintenance and construction personnel, so
that the same shall not endanger the life of any person or any
property in the Borough.
(b) Notice. Upon submission of an application for a tower-based
WCF and the scheduling of the public hearing upon the
application, the applicant shall mail notice to all owners of
every property within 500 feet of the proposed facility. The
applicant shall provide proof of the notification to the Borough.
(c) Conditional use authorization required. Tower-based WCFs are
permitted in certain zoning districts by conditional use and
only in such location within such districts and at a minimal
§ 615-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-21
1:531
height necessary to satisfy their function in the applicant's
wireless communications system. An applicant shall
demonstrate the necessity of the proposed height. The
applicant shall demonstrate that the antenna/tower/pole for
the tower-based WCF is the minimum height necessary for the
service area.
[1] Prior to Council's approval of a conditional use authorizing
the construction and installation of tower-based WCF in a
zoning district where the same is a permitted conditional
use, it shall be incumbent upon the applicant for such
conditional use approval to prove to the reasonable
satisfaction of Council that the applicant cannot
adequately extend or infill its communications system by
the use of antennas and/or non-tower WCFs.
[2] The conditional use application shall be accompanied by a
propagation study evidencing the need for the proposed
tower or other communication facilities and equipment, as
well as a description of the type and manufacturer of the
proposed equipment.
[3] The conditional use application shall also be accompanied
by documentation demonstrating that the proposed towerbased
WCF complies with all state and federal laws and
regulations concerning aviation safety.
[4] Where the tower-based WCF is located on a property with
another principal use, the applicant shall present
documentation to Council that the owner of the property
has granted an easement for the proposed WCF and that
vehicular access will be provided to the facility.
[5] The conditional use application shall demonstrate that the
proposed facility complies with all other applicable
regulations in this subsection.
(d) Engineer inspection. Prior to the Borough's issuance of a
permit authorizing construction and erection of a tower-based
WCF, a structural engineer registered in Pennsylvania shall
issue to the Borough a written certification of the proposed
WCF's ability to meet the structural standards offered by either
the Electronic Industries Association or the
Telecommunication Industry Association and certify the proper
construction of the foundation and the erection of the
structure.
(e) Visual appearance. Tower-based WCFs shall employ stealth
technology. All wireless communications equipment buildings
and other accessory facilities shall be aesthetically and
architecturally compatible with the surrounding environment
and shall maximize the use of a like facade to blend with the
§ 615-21 ETNA CODE § 615-21
1:532
existing surroundings and neighboring buildings to the
greatest extent possible.
[1] Borough Council may require that wireless
communications equipment buildings which house
electrical transmitter equipment be placed underground,
unless determined to be detrimental to the functioning and
physical integrity of such equipment.
[2] In making this determination, Council shall consider
whether its decision will promote the harmonious and
orderly development of the zoning district involved;
encourage compatibility with the character and type of
development existing in the area; benefit neighboring
properties by preventing a negative impact on the
aesthetic character of the community; preserve woodlands
and trees existing at the site to the greatest possible
extent; and encourage sound engineering and land
development design and construction principles, practices
and techniques.
(f) Co-location and siting. An application for a new tower-based
WCF shall not be approved unless the Borough finds that the
antenna and related equipment planned for the proposed
tower-based WCF cannot be accommodated on an existing or
approved structure or building or on Borough property.
Council may deny an application to construct a new towerbased
WCF if the applicant has not made a good faith effort to
mount the antenna(s) on an existing structure as set forth in
this section. The applicant shall demonstrate that it contacted
the owners of tall structures, buildings and towers within a 1/4
of a mile radius of the site proposed, sought permission to
install an antenna on those structures, buildings and towers,
and was denied for one of the following reasons:
[1] The proposed antenna and related equipment would
exceed the structural capacity of the existing building,
structure or tower, and its reinforcement cannot be
accomplished at a reasonable cost.
[2] The proposed antenna and related equipment would cause
radio frequency interference with other existing
equipment for that existing building, structure or tower,
and the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable
cost.
[3] Such existing buildings, structures or towers do not have
adequate location, space, access or height to
accommodate the proposed equipment or to allow it to
perform its intended function.
§ 615-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-21
1:533
[4] A commercially reasonable agreement could not be
reached with the owner of such building, structure or
tower.
(g) Permit required for modifications. To the extent permissible
under applicable state and federal law, any applicant proposing
the modification of an existing tower-based WCF, which
increases the overall height of such WCF, shall first obtain the
applicable permit from the Borough Zoning Office, in
accordance with the Borough's permitting practices.
Nonroutine modifications shall be prohibited without a permit.
(h) Gap in coverage. An applicant for a tower-based WCF must
demonstrate that a significant gap in wireless coverage exists
with respect to all wireless operators in the applicable area
and that the type of WCF being proposed is the least intrusive
means by which to fill that gap in wireless coverage. The
existence or nonexistence of a gap in wireless coverage shall
be a factor in the Borough's decision on an application for
approval of tower-based WCFs.
(i) Additional antennas. As a condition of approval for all towerbased
WCFs, the WCF applicant shall provide the Borough
with a written commitment that it will allow other service
providers to co-locate antennas on tower-based WCFs where
technically and economically feasible. The owner of a towerbased
WCF shall not install any additional antennas without
obtaining the prior written approval of the Borough.
(j) Wind. Any tower-based WCF structures shall be designed to
withstand the effects of wind according to the standard
designed by the American National Standards Institute as
prepared by the engineering departments of the Electronics
Industry Association and Telecommunications Industry
Association (ANSI/EIA/TIA-222-E, as amended).
(k) Height. Any tower-based WCF shall be designed at the
minimum functional height. All tower-based WCF applicants
must submit documentation to the Borough justifying the total
height of the structure. The maximum total height of any
tower-based WCF which is not located in the public ROW shall
not exceed 150 feet, as measured vertically from the ground
level, including any base pad, to the highest point on the
structure, including antennas and subsequent alterations.
(l) Related equipment building. Any building or other structure
housing related equipment shall comply with the required yard
and height requirement of the applicable zoning district for an
accessory structure.
(m) Public safety communications. No tower-based WCF shall
interfere with public safety communications or the reception of
§ 615-21 ETNA CODE § 615-21
1:534
broadband, television, radio or other communication services
enjoyed by occupants of nearby properties.
(n) Maintenance. The following maintenance requirements shall
apply:
[1] Any tower-based WCF shall be fully automated and
unattended on a daily basis and shall be visited only for
maintenance or emergency repair.
[2] Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure the
upkeep of the facility in order to promote the safety and
security of the Borough's residents.
[3] All maintenance activities shall utilize nothing less than
the best available technology for preventing failures and
accidents.
(o) Radio frequency emissions. No tower-based WCF may, by itself
or in conjunction with other WCFs, generate radio frequency
emissions in excess of the standards and regulations of the
FCC, including but not limited to, the FCC Office of
Engineering Technology Bulletin 65, entitled "Evaluating
Compliance with FCC Guidelines for Human Exposure to Radio
Frequency Electromagnetic Fields," as amended.
(p) Historic buildings or districts. No tower-based WCF may be
located on a building or structure that is listed on either the
National or Pennsylvania Registers of Historic Places, or is
eligible to be so listed, or is included in the official historic
structures and/or historic districts list maintained by the
Borough.
(q) Signs. All tower-based WCFs shall post a sign in a readily
visible location identifying the name and phone number of a
party to contact in the event of an emergency. The only other
signage permitted on the WCF shall be those required by the
FCC or any other federal or state agency.
(r) Lighting. No tower-based WCF shall be artificially lighted,
except as required by law. If lighting is required, the applicant
shall provide a detailed plan for sufficient lighting
demonstrating as unobtrusive and inoffensive an effect as is
permissible under state and federal regulations. The applicant
shall promptly report any outage or malfunction of FAAmandated
lighting to the appropriate governmental authorities
and to the Borough Manager.
(s) Noise. Tower-based WCFs shall be operated and maintained so
as not to produce noise in excess of applicable noise standards
under state law and the Borough Code, except in emergency
§ 615-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-21
1:535
situations requiring the use of a backup generator, where such
noise standards may be exceeded on a temporary basis only.
(t) Aviation safety. Tower-based WCFs shall comply with all
federal and state laws and regulations concerning aviation
safety.
(u) Retention of experts. The Borough may hire any consultant(s)
and/or expert(s) necessary to assist the Borough in reviewing
and evaluating the application for approval of the tower-based
WCF and, once approved, in reviewing and evaluating any
potential violations of the terms and conditions of this chapter.
The applicant and/or owner of the WCF shall reimburse the
Borough for all costs of the Borough's consultant(s) in
providing expert evaluation and consultation in connection
with these activities.
(v) Timing of approval. Within 30 calendar days of the date that an
application for a tower-based WCF is filed with the Borough,
the Borough shall notify the applicant in writing of any
information that may be required to complete such application.
All applications for tower-based WCFs shall be acted upon
within 150 days of the receipt of a fully completed application
for the approval of such tower-based WCF, and the Borough
shall advise the applicant in writing of its decision. If additional
information was requested by the Borough to complete an
application, the time required by the applicant to provide the
information shall not be counted toward the 150-day review
period.
(w) Nonconforming uses. Nonconforming tower-based WCFs
which are hereafter damaged or destroyed due to any reason
or cause may be repaired and restored at their former location
but must otherwise comply with the terms and conditions of
this chapter. Co-location on existing nonconforming WCFs is
permitted.
(x) Removal. In the event that use of a tower-based WCF is
planned to be discontinued, the owner shall provide written
notice to the Borough of its intent to discontinue use and the
date when the use shall be discontinued. Unused or abandoned
WCFs or portions of WCFs shall be removed as follows:
[1] All unused or abandoned tower-based WCFs and accessory
facilities shall be removed within six months of the
cessation of operations at the site unless a time extension
is approved by the Borough.
[2] If the WCF and/or accessory facility is not removed within
six months of the cessation of operations at a site, or
within any longer period approved by the Borough, the
WCF and accessory facilities and equipment may be
§ 615-21 ETNA CODE § 615-21
1:536
removed by the Borough and the cost of removal assessed
against the owner of the WCF.
[3] Any unused portions of tower-based WCFs, including
antennas, shall be removed within six months of the time
of cessation of operations. The Borough must approve all
replacements of portions of a tower-based WCF previously
removed.
(y) Permit fees. The Borough may assess appropriate and
reasonable permit fees directly related to the Borough's actual
costs in reviewing and processing the application for approval
of a tower-based WCF, as well as related inspection,
monitoring and related costs.
(z) FCC license. Each person that owns or operates a tower-based
WCF shall submit a copy of its current FCC license, including
the name, address and emergency telephone number for the
operator of the facility.
(aa) Reservation of rights. In accordance with applicable law, the
Borough reserves the right to deny an application for the
construction or placement of any tower-based WCF for
numerous factors, including but not limited to visual impact,
design, and safety standards.
(bb) Insurance. Each person that owns or operates a tower-based
WCF greater than 40 feet in height shall provide the Borough
with a certificate of insurance evidencing general liability
coverage in the minimum amount of $5,000,000 per
occurrence and property damage coverage in the minimum
amount of $5,000,000 per occurrence covering the towerbased
WCF. Each person that owns or operates a tower-based
WCF 40 feet or less in height shall provide the Borough with a
certificate of insurance evidencing general liability coverage in
the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence and
property damage coverage in the minimum amount of
$1,000,000 per occurrence covering each tower-based WCF.
(cc) Indemnification. Each person that owns or operates a towerbased
WCF shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify,
defend and hold harmless the Borough, its elected and
appointed officials, employees and agents, at all times against
any and all claims for personal injury, including death, and
property damage arising in whole or in part from, caused by or
connected with any act or omission of the person, its officers,
agents, employees or contractors arising out of, but not limited
to, the construction, installation, operation, maintenance or
removal of the tower-based WCF. Each person that owns or
operates a tower-based WCF shall defend any actions or
proceedings against the Borough in which it is claimed that
§ 615-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-21
1:537
personal injury, including death, or property damage was
caused by the construction, installation, operation,
maintenance or removal of a tower-based WCF. The obligation
to indemnify, hold harmless and defend shall include, but not
be limited to, the obligation to pay judgments, injuries,
liabilities, damages, reasonable attorneys' fees, reasonable
expert fees, court costs and all other costs of indemnification.
(dd) Engineer signature. All plans and drawings for a tower and
antenna shall contain a seal and signature of a professional
structural engineer, licensed in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(ee) Financial security. Prior to receipt of a zoning permit for the
construction or placement of a tower-based WCF, the applicant
shall provide to the Borough financial security sufficient to
guarantee the removal of the tower-based WCF. Said financial
security shall remain in place until the tower-based WCF is
removed.
(6) Tower-based facilities outside the rights-of-way. The following
additional regulations shall apply to tower-based wireless
communications facilities located outside the rights-of-way:
(a) Development regulations.
[1] Location. No tower-based WCF shall be located in an area
in which utilities are underground, or within 75 feet of
such an area, except as permitted by this chapter. Such
tower-based WCFs may be located in the following: the I
Industrial District, subject to the following restrictions:
[a] The WCF may not be sited in any public parks or on
municipally-owned property.
[b] The WCF may not be sited along the river area or
along any scenic trails or roadways in the Borough.
[2] Sole use on a lot. A tower-based WCF shall be permitted as
a sole use on a lot, provided that the underlying lot is at
least 6,000 feet. The minimum distance between the base
of a tower-based WCF and any adjoining property line or
street right-of-way line shall equal 110% of the proposed
WCF structure height.
(b) Design regulations.
[1] The WCF shall employ the most current stealth technology
available in an effort to appropriately blend into the
surrounding environment and minimize aesthetic impact.
In addition to the other design requirements enumerated
in this section, the application of the stealth technology
§ 615-21 ETNA CODE § 615-21
1:538
chosen by the WCF applicant shall be subject to the
approval of the Borough.
[2] To the extent permissible by law, any height extensions to
an existing tower-based WCF shall require prior approval
of the Borough.
[3] Any proposed tower-based WCF shall be designed
structurally, electrically, and in all respects to
accommodate both the WCF applicant's antennas and
comparable antennas for future users.
[4] Any tower-based WCF over 40 feet in height shall be
equipped with an anti-climbing device, as approved by the
manufacturer.
(c) Surrounding environs.
[1] The WCF applicant shall ensure that the existing
vegetation, trees and shrubs located within proximity to
the WCF structure shall be preserved to the maximum
extent possible.
[2] Evergreen bushes, a minimum of five feet in height, shall
be planted immediately adjacent to the fencing at an
interval not greater than three feet on center, except
adjacent to that portion of the fence at which is located an
access gate.
(d) Fence/screen.
[1] A security fence, having a minimum height of 10 feet, shall
completely surround any tower-based WCF greater than
40 feet in height, as well as guy wires, or any building
housing WCF equipment.
[2] Landscaping. Landscaping shall be required to screen as
much of a newly constructed tower-based WCF as
possible. Council may permit any combination of existing
vegetation, topography, walls, decorative fences or other
features instead of landscaping, if, in the discretion of
Council, they achieve the same degree of screening.
Existing vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum
extent possible.
(e) Accessory equipment.
[1] Ground-mounted equipment associated to, or connected
with, a tower-based WCF shall be underground or
screened from public view using stealth technologies, as
described in this section.
§ 615-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-21
1:539
[2] All utility buildings and accessory structures shall be
architecturally designed to blend into the environment in
which they are situated and shall meet the minimum
setback and building requirements of the underlying
zoning district.
(f) Access road. An access road of at least 20 feet in width,
turnaround space and parking, shall be provided to ensure
adequate emergency and service access to a tower-based WCF.
Maximum use of existing roads, whether public or private,
shall be made to the extent practicable. Road construction
shall at all times minimize ground disturbance and the cutting
of vegetation; surfacing shall be bituminous, brick, concrete or
permeable paving material (not including gravel surface,
aggregate or the like). Road grades shall closely follow natural
contours to assure minimal visual disturbance and minimize
soil erosion. Where applicable, the WCF owner shall present
documentation to the Borough that the property owner has
granted an easement for the proposed facility.
(g) Parking. For each tower-based WCF greater than 40 feet in
height, there shall be two off-street parking spaces or one
space per employee, whichever is greater.
(h) Inspection. The Borough reserves the right to inspect any
tower-based WCF to ensure compliance with the provisions of
this chapter and any other provisions found within the Borough
Code or state or federal law. The Borough and/or its agents
shall have the authority to enter the property upon which a
WCF is located at any time, upon reasonable notice to the
operator, to ensure such compliance.
(7) Tower-based facilities in the rights-of-way. The following
regulations shall apply to tower-based wireless communications
facilities located in the rights-of-way:
(a) Prohibited in underground utility areas.
(b) Tower-based WCFs shall not be located in the front facade zone
of any structure.
(c) Tower-based WCFs 40 feet or shorter in height shall be
permitted along the arterial and collector roads where public
utilities are located above ground.
(d) Tower-based WCFs shall not be sited along any internal
residential roads, regardless of the underlying zoning district.
(e) Tower-based WCFs in the ROW shall not be sited within 50 feet
of an area in which public utilities are underground.
§ 615-21 ETNA CODE § 615-21
1:540
(f) Time, place and manner. The Borough shall determine the
time, place and manner of construction, maintenance, repair
and/or removal of all tower-based WCFs in the ROW based on
public safety, traffic management, physical burden on the ROW,
and related considerations. For public utilities, the time, place
and manner requirements shall be consistent with the police
powers of the Borough and the requirements of the Public
Utility Code.
(g) Equipment location. tower-based WCFs and accessory
equipment shall be located so as not to cause any physical or
visual obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to
otherwise create safety hazards to pedestrians and/or
motorists or to otherwise inconvenience public use of the ROW
as determined by the Borough. In addition:
[1] In no case shall ground-mounted equipment, walls or
landscaping be located within 18 inches of the face of the
curb.
[2] Ground-mounted equipment that cannot be
undergrounded shall be screened, to the fullest extent
possible, through the use of landscaping or other
decorative features to the satisfaction of the Borough.
[3] Required electrical meter cabinets shall the screened to
blend in with the surrounding area to the satisfaction of
the Borough.
[4] Any graffiti on the tower or on any accessory equipment
shall be removed at the sole expense of the owner within
10 business days of notice of the existence of the graffiti.
[5] Any underground vaults related to tower-based WCFs
shall be reviewed and approved by the Borough.
(h) Design regulations.
(i) The WCF shall employ the most current stealth technology
available in an effort to appropriately blend into the
surrounding environment and minimize aesthetic impact. In
addition to the design requirements enumerated in this
section, the application of the stealth technology chosen by the
WCF applicant shall be subject to the approval of the Borough.
[1] Tower-based WCFs in the public ROW shall not exceed 40
feet in height.
[2] To the extent permissible under state and federal law, any
height extensions to an existing tower-based WCF shall
require prior approval of the Borough and shall not
§ 615-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-21
1:541
increase the overall height of the tower-based WCF to
more than 40 feet.
[3] Any proposed tower-based WCF shall be designed
structurally, electrically, and in all respects to
accommodate both the WCF applicant's antennas and
comparable antennas for future users.
(j) Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days following
written notice from the Borough, or such longer period as the
Borough determines is reasonably necessary or such shorter
period in the case of an emergency, an owner of a tower-based
WCF in the ROW shall, at its own expense, temporarily or
permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of
any WCF when the Borough, consistent with its police powers
and applicable Public Utility Commission regulations, shall
determine that such removal, relocation, change or alteration
is reasonably necessary under the following circumstances:
[1] The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of
any Borough or other public improvement in the right-ofway;
[2] The operations of the Borough or other governmental
entity in the right-of-way;
[3] Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility
easement; or
[4] An emergency as determined by the Borough.
(k) Reimbursement for ROW use. In addition to permit fees as
described in this chapter, every tower-based WCF in the ROW
is subject to the Borough's right to fix annually a fair and
reasonable compensation to be paid for use and occupancy of
the ROW. Such compensation for ROW use shall be directly
related to the Borough's actual ROW management costs,
including but not limited to the costs of the administration and
performance of all reviewing, inspecting, permitting,
supervising and other ROW management activities by the
Borough. The owner of each tower-based WCF shall pay an
annual fee to the Borough to compensate the Borough for the
Borough's costs incurred in connection with the activities
described above.
O. Sidewalk cafes.
(1) A sidewalk cafe is defined as an extension of the services of an
existing establishment, including, but not limited to, serving food
and beverages for consumption within an existing building, to the
extent that food and beverages are permitted to be served and
consumed at tables placed on the public sidewalk adjacent to and
§ 615-21 ETNA CODE § 615-21
1:542
within the confines of the frontage of that portion of the building
in which the establishment is situated. A sidewalk cafe contains
readily removable tables and chairs, is enclosed by rope and
stanchion unless some other barrier system is approved by the
Borough as an architectural design element and shall be otherwise
open to the air.
(2) The sidewalk cafe shall be located on the public right-of-way
adjoining the owner's property and in a location where it shall be
determined to be appropriate by this chapter and all applicable
related ordinances.
(3) A sidewalk cafe shall only be granted to an establishment with a
valid retail food license.
(4) The site plan of the sidewalk cafe must include:
(a) Size of encroachment onto publicly owned sidewalk.
(b) Not less than three contiguous feet of sidewalk clear of
obstructions to allow unimpeded pedestrian and disabled
pedestrian traffic. No obstructions shall be placed within 18
inches of the face of any curb, within five feet of any fire exit or
fire hydrant.
(c) The width of the storefront. A sidewalk cafe is limited to the
width of the storefront of the establishment with which the
cafe is associated. The area of ingress and egress is to be
shown.
(d) Gross square footage.
(e) Compliance with federal accessibility standards to
accommodate persons with disabilities.
(f) Compliance with Building Code standards for egress from the
cafe and from the establishment in case of fire or other
emergency.
(g) Borough and other approved obstructions are shown outside
the required ADA clear passageway. Obstructions shall
include, but not be limited to, light poles, traffic signal poles,
fire hydrants, utility structures, bike racks, parking meters,
street trees, and street signs. Further, the sidewalk cafe cannot
obstruct the clear sight distance for vehicles or access or
crossings for the disabled.
(h) The seating, table layout, and barrier system, to scale, along
with passageway/aisle clearances.
(5) Design aspects to be included in the site plan are:
§ 615-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-21
1:543
(a) Sidewalk cafes shall have a rope and stanchion as an
enclosure, unless some other barrier system is approved by the
Borough as an architectural design element.
(b) Sidewalk cafes are comprised of tables for dining. There shall
be no standing room. No service equipment is permitted.
(c) Furnishings for sidewalk cafes shall consist solely of moveable
tables, chairs and decorative accessories. There shall be at
least one table that is ADA compliant.
(d) The square footage of the sidewalk cafe area shall determine
the number of permitted tables and chairs based on the
Building Code requirements in effect at the time of the initial
application. The proprietor is also required to update sidewalk
cafe seating to meet Building Code requirements in effect at
the time of annual renewal.
(e) If umbrellas are proposed, they are to be included in the
submitted site plan and must meet ADA standards for
encroachment into the public right-of-way; that is, umbrellas
must be totally within the sidewalk cafe area and the edges and
prongs must leave the path of travel clear and unobstructed.
(f) Sidewalk cafes shall be at the same elevation as the public
sidewalk. Paint, carpeting, artificial turf, or other floor
coverings of any kind shall not be permitted at any time in the
sidewalk cafe area.
(g) No permanent signage shall be allowed in any sidewalk café or
on the adjacent sidewalk, with the exception that small lighted
menu boards may be permitted.
(6) Operational procedures:
(a) Operation shall be during the normal business hours of the
permitted use, but no earlier than 7:00 a.m. and no later than
10:00 p.m.
(b) Furnishings must be kept in a state of good repair and in a
clean and safe condition at all times.
(c) Where rope and stanchion is used as the barrier, furnishings
and rope and stanchion must be off the sidewalk by close of
business, but no later than 12:00 midnight each evening. Rope
and stanchion must also be removed at the time.
(d) Sidewalk cafe permits are not transferable.
(e) Permittees are bound by all applicable rules for alcohol and
tobacco consumption, including state statutes and Borough
ordinances.
§ 615-21 ETNA CODE § 615-21
1:544
(f) The sidewalk surface in the sidewalk cafe area shall be
maintained in good repair.
(g) Busing stations, trash receptacles, food preparation stations,
cashier stations, and music shall not be permitted in the
sidewalk cafe.
(h) Sanitary cleaning of the sidewalk cafe dining area before,
during, and after food service is required.
(i) The proprietor shall maintain on site copies of both the
certificate of occupancy for a sidewalk cafe and the certified
site plan. Both shall be presented on request of an enforcement
official from the Borough of Etna or other authorized
representative of the Borough. The sidewalk cafe permit shall
be displayed in the front window, clearly visible from the
street.
(7) Failure to comply with these requirements will result in the
following:
(a) The permit holder will be subject to a fine for each offense, and
each day such a violation continues shall be deemed a separate
and distinct offense. The Borough of Etna Police or Code
Enforcement Officer shall provide enforcement if the permit
holder violates the terms of the permit.
(b) Any sidewalk cafe or other business activity, including signage,
on publicly owned sidewalk in front of a business
establishment without a valid permit is subject to removal from
the public way by the Borough of Etna.
(c) In addition to fines and other penalties as provided for herein,
three or more violations of any provision of this article or
regulations promulgated hereunder within a permit period
shall subject the permittee to revocation of the sidewalk cafe
permit by the Borough of Etna.
(d) Penalties may be applied to proprietors who place furnishings
or other obstructions on the sidewalk without having applied
for a sidewalk cafe permit, or who have applied but have not
received a permit.
P. Windmills, windwheels or wind energy conversion systems. Windmills,
windwheels or wind energy conversion systems (WECS) shall be
permitted in all zoning districts, subject to the following conditions:
(1) No said systems or equipment shall be erected in a front yard or
within the area between a front lot line and the front building
facade of the principal building on the lot.
(2) The structure supporting the wind rotor unit, including any
necessary guideposts and supporting cables, shall be independent
§ 615-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-21
1:545
of any occupied structure and shall not be more than 45 feet in
height.
(3) The minimum distance between grade and the lowest point of the
rotor blade shall be 20 feet.
(4) All electric lines/utility wires shall be buried underground.
(5) Any mechanical equipment associated and necessary for operation,
including a building for batteries and storage cells, shall be
enclosed by a six-foot fence with screening planted in accordance
with this chapter. The supporting structure shall also be enclosed
by a six-foot fence, unless the base of the tower is not climbable for
a distance of 12 feet.
(6) When a building is necessary for storage cells or related
mechanical equipment, the building shall not exceed 140 square
feet.
(7) One windmill, windwheel or WECS shall be permitted per lot.
(8) The resultant energy harnessed from the wind shall not be used on
property other than that on which located, unless all applicable
cogeneration requirements are met.
(9) The supporting structure and generating unit shall be kept in good
repair and sound condition. Upon abandonment of use, the
supporting structure and related structures shall be dismantled
and removed from the property within 60 days.
(10) The applicant shall demonstrate that any noise from the wind
energy generating unit shall not exceed 45 dBA measured at the
property line.
(a) A "decibel" shall mean a unit for measuring the relative
intensity of sounds. More specifically, a unit for expressing the
ratio of two amounts of acoustic signal power equal to 10 times
the common logarithm of this ratio.
(b) A "weighted" sound level shall mean the total sound level in
decibels of all sound as measured with a sound level meter
with a reference pressure of 20 micro-pascals using the "A"
weighted network (scale) at slow response. The unit of
measurement shall be defined as dB(A).
Q. Urban agriculture.
(1) The following types of urban agricultural activities may be
permitted as accessory uses on residential lots in the R1 and R2
Zoning Districts:
(a) The keeping of domestic fowl;
(b) The keeping of miniature goats and sheep; and
§ 615-21 ETNA CODE § 615-21
1:546
(c) The keeping of bees.
(2) The following types of urban agricultural activities may be
permitted as accessory uses in the C1 Zoning District:
(a) Farmers' markets.
(3) The following types of urban agricultural activities may be
permitted as accessory uses in the C2 Zoning District:
(a) Market gardens; and
(b) Farmers' markets.
(4) The following types of urban agricultural activities may be
permitted as accessory uses in the I Zoning District:
(a) Community garden;
(b) Market garden; and
(c) Farmers' market.
(5) The keeping of domestic fowl shall be governed by the following
regulations:
(a) Domestic fowl shall only be kept on a residential lot on which
there is an occupied dwelling or on a lot abutting a school
when the activity is for an educational purpose accessory to
the school.
(b) Domestic fowl may be kept in the following numbers:
[1] On lots smaller than 20,000 square feet but at least 2,000
square feet, up to six fowl may be kept.
[2] On lots of 20,000 square feet in area or larger, up to 12
fowl may be kept.
(c) If a lot has more than one dwelling unit, all adult residents and
the owners of the lot must consent in writing to allow fowl on
the property.
(d) The fowl must be provided with a covered, predator-resistant
coop that is properly ventilated, designed to be easily
accessed, cleaned and maintained. The coop must be at least
three square feet per fowl.
(e) All animal feed shall be stored in a secured, rodent-proof
container and housed within an enclosed structure.
(f) Fowl shall be located at least 10 feet from any property line. In
the instance of multiple contiguous lots under the same
ownership, the lots shall be treated as one lot.
§ 615-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-21
1:547
(g) During daylight hours, fowl must have access to the coop and
also have access to an outdoor area that is adequately fenced
to protect them from predators and to prevent them from
roaming onto neighboring properties.
(h) Fowl must be closed in a coop from dusk to dawn to be further
protected from predators.
(i) Fowl may be humanely killed by or at the direction of the
owner or keeper thereof in accordance with existing state and
federal regulations.
(j) No predatory birds, guinea fowl, or roosters may be kept.
(6) The keeping of miniature goats and sheep shall be governed by the
following regulations:
(a) Miniature, pygmy, dwarf goats or sheep shall only be kept on a
residential lot on which there is an occupied dwelling or on a
lot abutting a school, when the activity is for an educational
purpose accessory to the school.
(b) Two miniature, pygmy, dwarf goats or sheep, plus any number
of their offspring younger than 12 weeks, may be kept. The
keeping of only one miniature, pygmy, dwarf goat or sheep is
prohibited. Only female or altered male miniature, pygmy or
dwarf goats or female sheep shall be permitted. No bucks or
larger breeds of rams shall be allowed.
(c) Goats shall be located at least 10 feet from any property lines.
In the instance of multiple contiguous lots under the same
ownership, the lots shall be treated as one lot.
(d) Goats must be provided with a covered, predator-resistant
shelter that is properly ventilated, designed to be easily
accessed, cleaned and maintained.
(e) All animal feed shall be stored in a secured, rodent-proof
container and housed within an enclosed structure.
(f) During daylight hours, goats must have access to the shelter
and also have access to an outdoor area, which shall be in total
at least 150 square feet per goat, as well as adequately fenced
to protect them from predators and prevent them from
roaming onto neighboring properties.
(g) Goats must be closed in the shelter from dusk to dawn.
(h) Goats may be humanely killed by or at the direction of the
owner or keeper thereof in accordance with existing state and
federal regulations.
§ 615-21 ETNA CODE § 615-21
1:548
(7) The keeping of bees (beekeeping) shall be governed by the
standards of the Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture in
addition to the following regulations:
(a) Bee colonies shall only be kept on a residential lot on which
there is an occupied dwelling or on a lot abutting a school,
when the activity is for an educational purpose accessory to
the school.
(b) Bee colonies shall consist of only European honey bees.
(c) All bee colonies shall be kept in hives with moveable combs,
which shall be kept in sound and usable condition.
(d) In each instance in which a colony is situated within 25 feet of
a public or private property line of the tract upon which the
apiary is situated, as measured from the nearest point on the
hive to the property line, the beekeeper shall establish and
maintain a flyway barrier at least six feet in height, consisting
of a solid wall, fence, dense vegetation, or combination thereof,
which is parallel to the property line and extends 10 feet
beyond the colony in each direction so that all bees are forced
to fly at an elevation of at least six feet above ground level over
the property lines in the vicinity of the apiary.
(e) Each beekeeper shall ensure that a convenient source of water
is available at all times to the bees so that the bees will not
congregate at swimming pools, bibcocks, pet water bowls,
birdbaths or other water sources where they may come in
contact with humans, birds or domestic pets.
(f) In any instance in which a colony exhibits unusually aggressive
characteristics by stinging or attempting to sting without due
provocation or exhibits an unusual disposition toward
swarming, it shall be the duty of the beekeeper to requeen the
colony.
(g) It shall be unlawful to keep more than the following number of
colonies on any lot, based upon the size or configuration of the
lot on which the apiary is situated:
[1] On lots of at least 2,000 square feet, the resident is
permitted to keep two colonies. For every 2,000 additional
square feet, the resident is permitted two additional
colonies.
[2] Regardless of lot size, where all hives are situated at least
200 feet in any direction from all properties of the tract on
which the apiary is situated, there shall be no limit to the
number of colonies.
§ 615-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-21
1:549
(h) For each two colonies authorized under colony densities, there
may be maintained upon the same tract one nucleus colony in a
hive structure not exceeding one standard nine-and-fiveeighths-
inch depth, ten-frame hive body with no supers
attached, as required from time to time for management of
swarms. Each such nucleus colony shall be disposed of or
combined with an authority colony within 60 days after the
date it is acquired.
(8) Community gardens shall be governed by the following regulations:
(a) Operations using machinery may begin at sunrise or 7:00 a.m.,
whichever is earlier, on weekdays and at 9:00 a.m. on Saturday
and Sunday. Operations using machinery must end at sunset or
9:00 p.m., whichever is later. Automatically functioning
equipment, such as sprinklers, are exempted from hours of
operation.
(b) Community gardens may include any of the following features:
raised and/or accessible planting beds, compost bins, picnic
tables, garden art, rain barrel systems, restroom facilities or
portable toilets, signage, storage sheds, and children's play
areas.
(c) All community gardens shall have suitable containers for waste
and recyclables that are regularly serviced.
(d) A community garden may include a seasonal farm stand only
for the sale of items grown at the site or products made from
items grown at the site. Sales for fund-raising purposes and
associated promotional materials are permitted at events held
on the site. Stands shall be removed from the premises or
stored inside a building on the premises or off site when the
garden is not in operation. Sales must occur on site and only
between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
(e) Signage. Permitted signs, not to exceed nine square feet in
area per side and six feet in height, shall be limited to
identification (of gardens, individual plants, etc.), information,
and directional signs, including sponsorship information,
where such information is clearly secondary to other permitted
information on the sign.
(f) Parking. If a community garden includes a seasonable farm
stand, adequate off-street parking as determined by the
Borough must be provided and shall be either unpaved or
surfaced with gravel or pervious paving material. Interior
walkways shall be unpaved except as necessary to meet the
needs of individuals with disabilities.
(9) Market gardens shall be governed by the following regulations:
§ 615-21 ETNA CODE § 615-21
1:550
(a) Operations using machinery may begin at sunrise or 7:00 a.m.,
whichever is earlier, on weekdays and at 9:00 a.m. on Saturday
and Sunday. Operations using machinery must end at sunset or
9:00 p.m., whichever is later. Automatically functioning
equipment, such as sprinklers, are exempted from hours of
operation.
(b) The area of a market garden includes the area under
cultivation, the area covered by any structures associated with
the garden, the compost pile, any off-street parking, and any
other area associated with the activities of the garden.
(c) The area of a market garden shall not exceed 5,000 square feet
in all zoning districts other than the I District. There shall be no
maximum area for market gardens in the I District.
(d) Signage. Permitted signs, not to exceed nine square feet in
area per side and six feet in height, shall be limited to
identification (of gardens, individual plants, etc.), information,
and directional signs, including sponsorship information,
where such information is clearly secondary to other permitted
information on the sign.
(e) Off-site sales are subject to any existing Pennsylvania
regulations for the sale of produce.
(10) Farmers' markets shall be governed by the following regulations:
(a) The market shall not operate more than two days per week.
(b) Market hours shall not exceed eight hours in duration.
(c) At least half of the vendors shall sell produce from an
agricultural operation or food, live plants, or cut flowers.
(d) The market shall not obstruct a path that is part of a required
pedestrian circulation system.
§ 615-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-21
1:551

ARTICLE VI
Signage
§ 615-22. Purpose.
The sign regulations, controls and provisions set forth in this chapter are
made in accordance with an overall plan and program related to residential
and nonresidential uses. The regulations, controls and provisions are
intended to guide public safety, area development, preservation of lot values
and the general welfare of Etna Borough. To maintain the Borough's
established historic integrity, within all zoning districts all proposed
signage, whether associated with new development, infill, replacement or
redevelopment, shall seek to promote compatibility with existing
surrounding development and activity. The regulations, controls and
provisions are also intended to:
§ 615-23. Sign packages, permits and fees.
A. Aid in traffic control and traffic safety.
B. Lessen congestion of land and air space.
C. Establish reasonable standards for nonresidential and other advertising
through the use of signs in order to maintain and encourage business
activity and economic development.
D. Avoid uncontrolled proliferation of signs.
E. Recognize the rights of the public in roads, streets, highways and the
areas adjacent to those roads (sidewalks), streets, highways and
sidewalks.
F. Preserve the wholesome and attractive character of the Borough.
G. To recognize that the general welfare includes a community plan that
shall be attractive as well as healthy and safe, spacious, clean and well
balanced in its growth and development.
A. All persons who are proposing to perform any of the following actions to
a new sign and/or existing sign within the Borough shall prepare a
zoning permit application:
(1) Install.
(2) Erect.
(3) Exhibit.
(4) Alter.
(5) Relocate.
(6) Change.
§ 615-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-23
1:553
B. "Modify" shall mean a sign cabinet or sign face replacement because of
a change in the nature of the business or a change in the name and/or
ownership of a business, or a change to the size or replacement of
supporting structures.
C. Zoning permit application.
(1) The zoning permit application shall contain a detailed drawing
prepared to scale, including but not limited to all of the following
information regarding the sign:
(a) Type.
(b) Size.
(c) Site plan showing proposed location(s) on lot.
(d) Building elevations showing proposed location of sign.
(e) All sign dimensions.
(f) Height of sign.
(g) Grade level base of sign.
(h) Sign materials.
(i) Connections to ground plane (where applicable).
(j) Color.
(k) Sources of sign illumination and applicable details of the
fixture and screening.
(2) The Zoning Officer shall review all zoning permits for signs for
completeness. Applications deemed to be incomplete shall be
returned to the applicant with a description of missing and/or
incomplete items. The application for a permit shall be signed by
the landowner and/or developer of the lot. The tenant of the lot, if
not the landowner and/or developer, shall be permitted to sign the
permit application if the tenant presents notarized evidence that
the tenant has permission to act on the landowner's and/or
developer's behalf. This provision shall apply to:
(a) New construction after the effective date of this chapter.
(b) A change of tenant.
(c) The proposal of new or changes to material(s), structure,
lighting mechanisms of signs of an existing use.
(3) Permits for signs.
§ 615-23 ETNA CODE § 615-23
1:554
(a) Failure to conform to the conditions of a zoning permit for a
sign, including any conditions and/or stipulations attached
thereto, shall render such permit null and void.
(b) Any permit issued by the Zoning Officer for erection,
alteration, replacement or relocation of a sign shall expire
automatically within six months of the date of issuance if work
authorized by the permit has not been initiated and diligently
pursued.
(c) The Zoning Officer shall issue the required permits upon
submission of an application that complies with all applicable
provisions of this chapter and payment of the required fee.
(4) Fees. Fees for zoning permits for signs shall be required and
payable in such sums as the Borough Council may from time to time
establish by resolution.
(5) Other permits and applications required for signs. A building
permit shall be obtained for any and all commercial sign
installation or repair of any kind, including banners.
(6) Permits not required. No permit shall be required for the following
types of signs as described and defined in this chapter so long as
they are in accordance with the chapter:
(a) Signs erected by a governmental agency.
(b) Construction signs.
(c) Development signs.
(d) Legal and/or lot notice signs.
(e) Real estate signs.
(f) Political signs.
(g) Holiday decorations.
D. Nonconforming signs.
(1) Legally recognized signs.
(a) Any sign lawfully existing at the time of the passage of this
chapter that does not conform with the regulations of the
zoning district in which such sign is located shall be considered
nonconforming. Nonconforming signs shall not be enlarged,
added to or replaced by another nonconforming sign, except an
interchange of content or poster panels shall be permitted.
(b) Nonconforming signs may be repaired or reconstructed,
provided that structural alterations shall not be made which
increase the gross surface area of the sign; however,
§ 615-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-23
1:555
nonconforming signs which are damaged or destroyed to an
extent of more than 50% of their replacement cost at the time
of destruction shall not be reconstructed except in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter.
(c) Nonconforming signs may continue, subject to the following
provisions:
[1] Signs which are nonconforming by reason of their absolute
prohibition shall be removed within five years following
enactment of this chapter or from any other date of the
establishment of their nonconformity.
[2] Signs which are nonconforming by reason of dimensions
may continue in their present location until replacement or
rebuilding becomes necessary, at which time a zoning
permit will be required and the sign brought into
conformity with this chapter.
(2) Repair, maintenance, replacement or removal.
(a) Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the
strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any structure
or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged
with protecting public safety.
E. Procedure.
(1) Sign installation.
(a) All signs shall be installed in accordance with and shall meet
applicable Borough building codes, and it the responsibility of
the sign owner to so comply. Upon installation, the Zoning
Officer (and Building Code Inspector for commercial signs)
shall issue a certificate of occupancy.
(2) Sign placement.
(a) No sign shall be placed, erected or located so that:
[1] It is pasted, stapled or otherwise attached to public utility
poles, trees or official traffic control devices or it is painted
on, attached to, or supported by a tree, stone, cliff or other
natural object.
[2] It is on a public lot or public right-of-way, unless erected by
a governmental body or unless required and/or approved
to be so located by order of a governmental body.
[3] It is displayed on a vehicle parked and visible from a public
right-of-way unless the vehicle is used for the normal dayto-
day operation of a business on the premises. The intent
§ 615-23 ETNA CODE § 615-23
1:556
of this provision is to prohibit the use of a sign on a vehicle
to circumvent sign limits on the lot.
(b) Sign fonts and logos shall not be legible from the rear of the
sign.
(c) Building signs in nonresidential zoning districts shall be placed
on the front face of the building only, except in instances where
the entrance door to the business is on the side or the rear of
the building or the building is located on a corner lot.
(d) Sign location. Except for permitted billboards or off-premises
signs in conformance with this chapter, all signs shall be
located on the premises which they are intended to serve.
(3) Sign landscaping.
(a) Ground signs.
[1] For each visible sign face, the landowner and/or developer
shall provide landscaping equivalent to 1 1/2 square feet
for each square foot of sign area (both faces).
[2] Landscaping shall consist of a combination of deciduous
and evergreen trees, ornamental grasses, ground cover
and/or small shrubs.
[3] Turf grass shall not be considered as landscaping for
ground signs. The height of any decorative base or
architectural or landscape feature erected to support or
ornament the sign shall be measured at average grade
level of the ground to the top of the sign structure,
provided the grade level is not deliberately elevated to
increase the height of the sign.
(4) Sign size.
(a) The square footage of the sign shall refer to the graphics area
of the sign facing.
(b) Size of individually mounted letters or logos shall be measured
as the area enclosed by the smallest single rectangle or square
which will enclose all sign copy and logos.
(c) Ground signs mounted as individual letters and/or graphics
against a wall or fence incorporated in the landscaping of a
building shall be measured from the outermost length and
height dimensions of the sign.
(d) Ground signs installed perpendicular to a street may be double
faced with the allowable square footage on each face.
(e) Double-faced signs that are erected at an angle to each other
will be subject to the following as to whether they are intended
§ 615-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-23
1:557
as two signs or for all intents and purposes only constitute one
sign:
[1] For north/south, east/west orientation on the serving
street. If the interior angle formed by the two faces of the
double-faced sign is greater than 45°, then both sides of
such sign shall be considered in calculating the sign area.
(f) Wall signs shall not exceed the width of the front of the
building on which they are located and shall not protrude more
than 18 inches from the facade on which the sign is mounted.
(g) Gasoline service stations shall be allotted 10 additional square
feet to display price-per-gallon figures, divided as the sign
owner selects between logo and prices on the one ground sign
permitted on the lot.
(h) Automobile dealers are permitted one "used car" ground sign
not to exceed 12 feet in height and 10 square feet in area, or
the 10 additional square feet can be incorporated into the
existing sign to advertise used cars, divided as the sign owner
selects.
(i) Sign copy mounted or painted on an illuminated surface
(including awnings) or illuminated architectural element of a
building shall be measured as the entire illuminated surface or
architectural element which contains sign copy. A
nonilluminated sign placed on an awning shall be measured as
if it is placed on any other architectural element.
(5) Sign maintenance.
(a) Every permitted sign must be constructed of durable material,
kept in good condition and repair and otherwise comply with
the Borough Building Code and Property Maintenance Code. If
the durability and/or condition of said sign is not repaired or
improved within the time specified by the Zoning Officer, the
Borough may remove the sign at the expense of the owner or
person in possession of the lot on which the sign is located. The
Zoning Officer will notify the property owner and/or the
responsible party with a certified letter prior to any removal
action being taken by the Borough, unless the said sign poses
an imminent danger to persons or property.
(b) Any damaged sign shall be repaired within 60 days, unless
ordered by the Zoning Officer to be repaired or replaced and/or
an imminent danger exists.
(c) Any sign which has been damaged to such extent or installed in
a dangerous manner that it may pose an imminent danger to
the public, as determined by the Zoning Officer, shall be
§ 615-23 ETNA CODE § 615-23
1:558
repaired or removed immediately by the property owner and/
or other known responsible parties.
(d) Any internally illuminated sign cabinets or sign panels which
have been damaged shall remain nonilluminated until
repaired.
(e) Failure to comply with these sign maintenance requirements
shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
(6) Liability.
(a) The provisions of this section shall not be construed as
relieving or limiting in any way the responsibility or liability of
any person, firm or corporation erecting or owning any sign, or
resulting from the negligence or willful acts of such person,
firm or corporation or any agents, employees or workmen in
the construction, maintenance, repair or removal of any sign
erected in accordance with a zoning permit issued hereunder.
Nor shall issuance of such permit be construed as imposing on
the Borough or its offices or employees, any responsibility or
liability by reason of approval of any sign's structural integrity,
construction methods, materials, electrical or mechanical
devices or other components which shall be the sole
responsibility of the person, firm or corporation erecting,
owning, repairing or removing such sign.
F. General regulations.
(1) When applicable, a zoning permit (and building permit for
commercial signs) shall be required for all proposed signs or
modifications to existing signs.
(2) Signs shall be considered as structures for purposes of location on
a property, except that in a front yard between side lot lines they
may be placed no closer than 20 feet to an adjacent highway rightof-
way line.
(3) The construction of each sign shall comply with applicable
provisions of the Borough's Building Code.
(4) No sign shall be permitted to hang from or be placed over a second
sign, except that signs may be placed on, but not extended beyond,
any vertical face of a marquee or canopy. This does not exclude
separate placards from being independently attached to the same
supporting structure as long as the total area of all combined does
not exceed the area limitation.
G. Prohibited signs.
(1) Wheeled signs shall not be located on a property abutting any
street within the Borough.
§ 615-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-23
1:559
(2) Banners and pennants, other than temporary event or displays and/
or flags authorized by this chapter. Banners used as temporary
signs (signs which would be temporary until a permanent sign is
installed) are permitted as long as they are secured, not waving or
fluttering, comply with maximum size permitted and are erected
for no more than 20 consecutive days or removed immediately
upon the installation of a permanent sign and shall meet all
Borough building codes. National, state or municipal flags shall not
be considered a banner or pennant.
(3) Signs on trees, utility poles or official traffic control devices.
(4) Signs on/or affixed to vehicles and/or trailers which are parked on a
public right-of-way, public lot or private lot, other than temporarily
for overnight storage on the site of a business or for maintenance,
repair, loading, unloading or rendering a service at any location,
which are visible from the public right-of-way and where the
apparent purpose is to advertise a product or direct people to a
business or activity located on the same or nearby lot.
(5) Any sign that obstructs free ingress to or egress from doors, fire
escapes, operable windows or denies access to them; nor shall a
sign be attached to a fire escape.
(6) Signs that, by reason of size, location, coloring or manner of
illumination, obstruct the vision of drivers or obstruct or detract
from the visibility or effectiveness of any traffic sign or control
device on public streets and roads; signs that imitate traffic control
devices or signs that make use of words such as "stop," "look," "one
way," "danger," "yield," or any similar words, phrases, symbols,
lights or characters in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead,
or confuse motorists and/or pedestrians or obstruct sight distances
of traffic.
(7) For lots in the C1 District, ground signs shall not be permitted in
the front yard in between the front lot line and the front facade of
the principal building if said building is closer than 25 feet to the
right-of-way.
(8) Misleading information. No sign shall be created which states or
implies that a lot may be used for any purpose not permitted under
the provisions of the chapter.
H. Major types of permanent signs. Signs in all zoning districts shall be
categorized according to the types described below and shall comply
with the requirements for those types described in this section.
(1) Sign Types, Table A.
§ 615-23 ETNA CODE § 615-23
1:560
Residential
District
Nonresidential
District
C1 All Others
1 Ground • See
Subsection
G(7)
•
2 Wall • •
3 Projecting • •
4 Awning • •
5 Window • •
6 Door • •
7 Historic tablet • • •
8 Plaque/
cornerstone/
nameplate
• • •
• = Permitted sign type by district
(2) Sign Types, Table B.
§ 615-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-23
1:561
Square
Footage
Maximum
Height Clearance
Maximum
Quantity
Street Level
Maximum
Quantity
Upper Level
1 Ground 1 square feet
per 3 linear
feet of frontage
or a max of 12
square feet,
whichever is
smaller
12 feet max;
not to exceed
the height of
the lowest
roofline
Only one such
sign shall be
permitted on
each property,
with the
exception of
those
establishments
having walls
fronting on 2
or more
streets, in
which case the
sign area for
each street
may be
computed
separately
Not applicable
§ 615-23 ETNA CODE § 615-23
1:562
Square
Footage
Maximum
Height Clearance
Maximum
Quantity
Street Level
Maximum
Quantity
Upper Level
2 Wall 2 square feet
for each 1
linear foot of
front building
wall
1 square foot
max per linear
foot of front
building wall
length of the
front building
wall or length
of that portion
of such wall
devoted to
such
establishment
In no case
however, may
the total area
of sign exceed
15% of the
area of the wall
(including
windows and
door area) to
which they are
attached
1 wall and 1
projecting or 1
wall and 1
awning per
building wall
adjacent to a
right-of-way
Not applicable
§ 615-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-23
1:563
Square
Footage
Maximum
Height Clearance
Maximum
Quantity
Street Level
Maximum
Quantity
Upper Level
3 Projecting Shall not
exceed 8
square feet per
side
The sign may
not be less
than 10 feet
above the
sidewalk or
finished grade
The sign may
not project
from the
building more
than 5 feet
10 feet
clearance; 4
feet or 2/3
walk/width
projection
1 projecting or
1 awning
4 Awning 18 square feet 1 ground and 1
awning or 1
wall and 1
awning
5 Window Shall be
included in the
wall sign
computation, if
their combined
area exceeds
50% of the
area of the
window which
they occupy
2 2
6 Door 6 square feet 1 1
7 Historic tablet 1.5 square feet 1 per street
facade;
building
directory not
permitted
8 Plaque/
cornerstone/
nameplate
4 square feet 1 per building Not applicable
9 Roof
(3) Sign criteria.
§ 615-23 ETNA CODE § 615-23
1:564
(a) Illuminated window signs shall include lighted signs placed
inside a window facing the exterior of the building. A zoning
permit shall be required for illuminated window signs.
[1] Illuminated window signs shall not be placed above the
ground floor of the building and/or more than 10 feet
above grade level of the building.
[2] Illuminated window signs shall not exceed a size of 16
square feet. Anything exceeding this size shall be deemed
the building sign to which the business is entitled. Any
combination of illuminated window signs grouped in an
area not to exceed 16 square feet will be permitted.
[3] Public utility signs required in connection with the
identification, operation or protection of a public utility,
provided the area of one side of any such sign shall not
exceed eight square feet.
(b) Lots with multiple street frontage. In all zoning districts, lots
fronting on more than one street shall be permitted to have one
sign type as defined by this chapter for each street frontage.
I. Minor types of permanent signs.
(1) The following types of signs are considered minor and are
permitted for all land uses and within all zoning districts of the
Borough:
(a) Legal and/or lot notice signs.
[1] Signs bearing legal and/or lot notices, such as "no
trespassing," "private property," "no turnaround," "safety
zone," "no unauthorized hunting," and similar messages,
and signs posted by a governmental agency for traffic
control or the safety of the general public.
[2] The number, location and size of legal notification signs
erected by public agencies shall be in accordance with the
laws of the commonwealth. Legal notification signs posted
on a private lot by the landowner and/or developers such
as "no trespassing," "no hunting" and the like shall be
limited to a surface area not exceeding two square feet.
[3] Service signs, signs which are incidental to a use lawfully
occupying the property upon which the sign is located,
which sign is necessary to provide information to the
public such as direction to parking lots, location of
restrooms, or other such pertinent information.
[4] Legal and/or lot notice signs shall not apply to the
permitted signage allotment outlined in this chapter.
§ 615-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-23
1:565
(b) Memorial/historical plaques. Commemorative plaques placed
by a recognized agency of the Borough, county, state or federal
government.
(c) Governmental signs. Signs erected by a governmental agency,
including street signs and official traffic signs.
J. Minor types of portable signs.
(1) The following classes of minor type signs are permitted in
nonresidential districts:
(a) Portable advertising signs (used for commercial purposes).
(b) Flag signs.
(2) Provisions for use.
(a) Portable advertising sign.
[1] Portable advertising signs shall be permitted as an
accessory sign, provided that they are clearly accessory to
the nonresidential principal use.
[2] One portable advertising sign shall be permitted for each
storefront.
[3] Portable advertising signs shall not exceed 15 square feet
(including both sides).
[4] Portable advertising signs shall not exceed four feet in
height.
[5] Portable advertising signs shall be nonilluminated.
[6] Portable advertising signs shall be removed during
nonbusiness operating hours.
[7] Portable advertising signs shall not block required clear
space or areas needed for pedestrian and/or vehicular
circulation. There shall be five feet of sidewalk clear space
for pedestrian traffic.
[8] A portable advertising sign shall not block ingress or
egress from any door, operable window or fire escape or
deny access to them.
[9] Lots with front yards or parking lots between the building
and the street shall place the portable sign between the
building and sidewalk, not on the sidewalk, and meet all
other requirements of this chapter.
[10] Portable advertising signs shall not be placed in a way that
would be a distraction to vehicles or conflict with
requirements of the American with Disabilities Act (ADA).
§ 615-23 ETNA CODE § 615-23
1:566
[11] The placement of portable advertising signs shall meet all
Americans with Disabilities Act standards and
requirements.
(b) Flag signs.
[1] National, state or municipal flags of any size shall be
permitted in all zoning districts.
[2] Flag signs shall be permitted in all nonresidential zoning
districts as minor portable signs, in strict compliance with
the following requirements:
[a] Flag signs shall be permitted as an accessory sign,
provided they are clearly accessory to the
nonresidential principal use.
[b] Only one flag sign shall be displayed for each principal
nonresidential use on the tract. For the purposes of
this requirement, commercial enterprises under
separate ownership within the same building shall be
considered separate uses.
[c] Flag signs shall be inserted on a wall mount properly
affixed to the building within which such use is
conducted.
[d] The lowest portion of any flag sign projecting or
hanging no less than seven feet above the public
sidewalk or grade.
[e] Flag signs shall not extend more than six feet from the
facade of the structure or extend into a vehicular
roadway, whichever is less.
[f] All parts of flag signs, inclusive of flags, poles, staffs
and all wall mounts and hardware, shall be maintained
in a proper and safe condition so as not to constitute a
hazard to persons or property.
[g] Flag signs may be displayed only during business
hours.
(c) Liability.
[1] Any sign placed on a public right-of-way is the sole
responsibility of the person and/or entity who or which
caused it to be placed there and/or the owner of the
property where said sign is located.
K. Temporary signs. The following classes of temporary signs are
permitted for all land uses and within all zoning districts:
(1) Classes of temporary signs.
§ 615-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-23
1:567
(a) Real estate.
(b) Development.
(c) Construction.
(d) Temporary event/display, including banners and portable
temporary signs.
(e) Political.
(f) Holiday.
(2) Provisions for use of temporary signs.
(a) Real estate sign (no zoning permit needed).
[1] One nonilluminated temporary real estate sign shall be
permitted on each lot, provided that the real estate sign
shall not exceed a total of 12 square feet in surface area
calculated for all faces when located on a lot with any
residential use and shall not exceed 32 square feet
calculated for all faces on any other lot.
[a] Such sign shall be removed within 14 days of the sale
or rental of the lot on which it is located.
(b) Development sign (no zoning permit needed).
[1] One nonilluminated temporary development sign shall be
permitted on each lot, provided that the surface area of the
sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in surface area
calculated for all faces.
[a] The development sign shall not exceed six feet in
height when located on a lot with any residential use
and shall not exceed 10 feet in height on any other lot.
[b] Such development sign shall be removed within 14
days of the sale or rental of the last lot or completion
of the proposed construction in the development.
(c) Construction signs (no zoning permit needed).
[1] Two nonilluminated temporary construction signs
announcing the names of contractors, mechanics, artisans
and other associated supporting entities engaged in
performing work on the premises shall be permitted on a
lot, provided that:
[a] Each construction sign shall not exceed 32 square feet
in area calculated for all faces.
§ 615-23 ETNA CODE § 615-23
1:568
[b] The construction signs shall not be placed before work
commences and shall be removed within 14 days of
the completion of the work.
[c] The establishment wishing to display such
construction signs shall contact the Zoning Officer
prior to displaying to give notice of the intent and the
period during which the construction sign will be
displayed.
(d) Temporary event/display sign (zoning permit needed).
[1] One nonilluminated temporary event/display sign, as
defined by this chapter, shall be permitted, provided that:
[a] A nonilluminated temporary event/display sign may be
erected on the face of the lot's principal structure,
provided that the area of the signs shall not exceed 32
square feet.
[b] A nonilluminated temporary event/display sign if not
displayed for a period longer than 30 days and
removed no later than three days following the
completion of the event that it promotes.
[c] Landowners may place a nonilluminated temporary
event/display sign in the public right-of-way and/or the
front yard portion of their property, provided such
signs do not interfere with motorist or pedestrian
visibility or safety, and the sign is otherwise not of a
type restricted by this chapter.
[2] Portable signs shall be permitted as a temporary event/
display sign and shall meet all following requirements:
[a] One total portable sign shall be permitted for each lot.
[b] Portable signs shall not exceed 15 square feet
(including both sides).
[c] Portable signs shall be nonilluminated.
[d] Portable signs shall not block required clear space or
areas needed for pedestrian and/or vehicular
circulation.
[e] Signs placed on sidewalks shall not be placed within
five feet of a vehicular roadway.
[f] Signs shall be placed so there is a minimum of five feet
clearance of travel on sidewalks for pedestrian traffic.
§ 615-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-23
1:569
[g] Signs shall not block ingress or egress from any door,
operable window or fire escape or deny access to
them.
[h] Signs shall not exceed four feet in height.
[i] Any temporary event/display sign placed on public
property is prohibited without the consent of the
governing body.
[j] All temporary event/display signs must list the owner
or organization that is responsible for the signs. The
name, address and phone number shall be placed
legibly on the back of said sign.
[k] Any temporary event/display sign found to be in
violation where the sign is placed on public property
will become the property of the Borough and be
removed and disposed of at the expense of the person
or organization that placed the sign and/or the
property owner on which the sign is located.
[l] Organizations, businesses or landowners and/or
developers or any other persons found violating the
provisions set forth within this section will forfeit their
right to be issued a zoning permit for a temporary sign
for a period of one year, commencing from the date
said violation is found to have occurred.
(e) Political signs (no zoning permit needed).
[1] The area of any one side of such sign shall not exceed 16
square feet.
[2] Anyone placing such signs shall obtain permission of the
property owner where the sign is to be placed.
(f) Holiday decorations (no zoning permit needed). Holiday
decorations displayed for holidays shall be exempted from the
provisions of this chapter, except as where they may cause
glare, interfere with traffic safety or in any other way cause a
public safety hazard.
L. Additional sign provisions.
(1) Visibility. Signs in all zoning districts shall be located in such a
position that they will not cause a hazard by obstructing visibility or
distracting motorists, obscure a traffic signal or other traffic
control device, or be placed in such a manner as to cause a hazard
to pedestrians.
(2) Illumination.
§ 615-23 ETNA CODE § 615-23
1:570
(a) Illumination, when authorized by this chapter, shall be directed
upon the sign face and not towards adjoining lots or streets, so
that the source of illumination is not visible.
(b) Internal illumination of signs shall be permitted.
(c) Signage lighting which is placed on the front of any property
fronting a street inside the Borough shall be stationary and
constant in intensity and color at all times as not to cause
motorist or pedestrian distraction.
(d) Electronic variable message signs, meaning an electronically
activated sign whose message content, either in whole or in
part, may be changed by means of electronic programming,
shall not be permitted to be placed at the front or side of any
property fronting a street within the Borough, and when in
conformance with this chapter shall be the same image or
content without change for a period of 24 hours, with the
exception of time-and-temperature displays.
(e) The intensity of any source of illumination of any sign, whether
indirect or internal, shall be controlled so as to not create glare
and to be compatible with the intensity of ambient light and
illumination on surrounding lots from dusk to dawn.
(3) Removal of signs.
(a) Whenever any business, activity or product on a lot is
discontinued, vacated or no longer sold, all signs relating to
the discontinued or vacated business shall be removed within
30 days of the vacation or discontinuance of the business or
activity. The zoning permit shall become null and void when a
business, activity or product on a lot is discontinued, vacated
or no longer sold.
(b) If the landowner and/or developer fail to remove the sign at the
end of 30 days from the permit expiration date, the Borough
shall be permitted to remove the sign at the owner's and/or
developer's expense.
§ 615-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-23
1:571

ARTICLE VII
Nonconforming Uses, Structures and Lots
§ 615-24. Non-conformities.
The provisions of this article apply to buildings, structures, signs, lands
and uses which would not be permitted as the result of the application
of this chapter to their location or use in the Borough, or as a result
of the reclassification of the lot containing them, or of the adoption of
other amendments to this chapter after the initial passage. This article is
concerned with properties of inadequate area and/or frontage, uses of land
and/or structures for activities not permitted in the zone and structures
placed on a lot too close to lot boundary lines for compliance with standards
of the zone in which they are located.
A. Nonconforming lots of record.
(1) Existing lots of record. Any lot of record existing at the effective
date of this chapter and held in separate ownership different from
the ownership of adjoining lots may be used for the erection of a
structure conforming to the use regulations of the zone in which it
is located even though its dimensions are less than the minimum
requirements of this chapter. Where two or more adjacent lots of
record with less than the required area and width are held by one
owner on or before the date of enactment of this chapter, the
request for a permit will be referred to the Zoning Hearing Board,
which may require replatting to fewer lots which would comply
with the minimum requirements of this chapter.
(2) No provision of this chapter relating to side and rear yard
requirements will prevent the reasonable use of a nonconforming
lot of record. The Zoning Officer may grant a reduction in the
requirement for side yards and rear yards for lots of record which
lack required lot width or depth. However, such yard dimensions
may not be reduced by more than 40% of that required without the
approval of the Zoning Hearing Board.
B. Nonconforming uses of land and structures.
(1) Where at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
chapter, lawful use of land or land and the structure or structures
on it exists and is made no longer permissible under the
requirements of this chapter, as adopted or amended, such use may
be continued indefinitely so long as it remains otherwise lawful,
provided the following conditions are applied:
(a) No nonconforming use of land can be extended by acquisition
of additional land to occupy a greater land area than was
occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
chapter.
§ 615-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-24
1:573
(b) No structure containing a nonconforming use but capable of
being enlarged without violating setback or height
requirements in the zone where it is located may be increased
in volume more than 50% over the volume of such structure at
the time of adoption of this chapter or subsequent amendments
that made the use nonconforming. A nonconforming use which
occupies part of a structure may be extended throughout the
structure it occupied at the time of adoption of this chapter or
subsequent amendment that made the use nonconforming, but
the expansion under such circumstances may not be extended
to occupy land outside the original structure.
(2) If any such nonconforming use of land or use of land and structures
in combination ceases or is abandoned for any reason, including
destruction of buildings, for a period of at least one year, any
subsequent use of such land, or land and structures in combination,
must conform to the regulations for the zone where such land is
located, except that where a hardship to the operator of the
nonconforming use clearly exists as a result of financial, health or
other calamity, the Zoning Hearing Board may grant an extension
of the one-year limit consistent with the hardship, but not more
than one additional year.
(3) The nonconforming use of a structure or a lot may be changed only
to a conforming use, unless:
(a) The applicant demonstrates a hardship in converting the use to
a conforming use; or
(b) The new use will be in keeping with the character of the
neighborhood in which it is located and will have an equal or
lesser impact on the neighborhood than the existing
nonconforming use. However, this requirement does not
preclude an owner from selling a nonconforming use to a
succeeding owner to operate as it was operated prior to the
sale. Each succeeding owner of a nonconforming use must
secure a zoning certificate of compliance from the Zoning
Officer, who may ask the Zoning Hearing Board for a decision if
he has reason to doubt that the nonconforming use will be
continued in the same manner as formerly.
(4) The nonconforming use of a structure and/or land, or combination
of structure and land, may be superseded by a use permitted in the
zone where the lot is located, and the use of the premises must
conform to the regulations of the zone.
(5) Where a nonconforming use of structure and premises exists in
combination, removal of the structure and/or use in the structure
terminates the nonconforming use of the premises.
§ 615-24 ETNA CODE § 615-24
1:574
(6) The maintaining or strengthening to a safe condition of any
nonconforming structure may not be interpreted as being denied
by any portion of this article.
C. Nonconforming structures.
(1) A structure that exists on a lot at the effective date of this chapter
or any amendment to it and does not conform to the requirements
regarding height or minimum setbacks from adjacent streets or lot
lines, such structure may remain indefinitely, subject to the
following provisions.
(2) Any replacement of a nonconforming structure must be made in
compliance with the regulations governing development for the
zone in which the lot is located, except that if a hardship is alleged
by the owner, he may request a special exception of the Zoning
Hearing Board, which may approve replacement on the same
foundation that supported the structure to be replaced, but in no
case a location that was less conforming than the original location.
(3) If a nonconforming structure is moved, it must conform to
requirements of this chapter regarding location on the lot.
D. Record of nonconforming uses.
(1) The Zoning Officer must keep the data current by the addition of
nonconforming uses as amendments to this chapter are adopted
and by the deletion of nonconforming uses as they are eliminated.
(2) The record may be kept by map or written documentation.
§ 615-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-24
1:575

ARTICLE VIII
Rezoning
§ 615-25. Purpose of rezoning.
Rezoning can be initiated to protect the safety, capacity and efficiency of the
Borough's existing infrastructure systems; to maintain fiscal responsibility;
and to uphold the objectives of the Etna-Millvale-Sharpsburg Multi-
Municipal Comprehensive Plan. See also the Municipalities Planning Code
§ 609.92
§ 615-26. Rezoning application forms.
Rezoning applications are completed on the official forms provided by the
Zoning Officer. All applicants submitting rezoning applications are required
to prepare a series of plans, analyses and reports as enumerated in § 615-28
to demonstrate the compatibility of a rezoning proposal.
§ 615-27. Review of rezoning applications.
A. The Zoning Officer:
(1) Will perform a desk check review of the package to determine the
completeness of the application.
(2) Will return any incomplete or insufficient application to the
applicant or will forward a complete application package to the
Borough Planning Commission for review.
(3) Will provide the applicant a letter within seven business days,
stating that the application has been submitted with all required
information attached.
B. As part of the rezoning approval process, the Borough Planning
Commission and Borough Council consider the motivation and
implications of each plan, analysis and report.
C. The Borough Planning Commission:
(1) Will consider any projected beneficial and/or detrimental effects on
the Borough and may host a public hearing on the application if it
deems it applicable.
(2) Submit a written recommendation either in favor or not in favor of
the rezoning proposal, including a specific statement as to whether
or not the proposed rezoning is in accordance with the objectives of
the Etna-Millvale-Sharpsburg Multi-Municipal Comprehensive
Plan.
(3) Forward Borough Council a recommendation for the nature of
action regarding rezoning.
92.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10609.
§ 615-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-27
1:577
§ 615-28. Application criteria.
Application requirements. Plans and reports that a landowner and/or
developer submit include:
D. The Borough Council will host a public hearing on the application and
compose a brief summary explanation of its decision and forward the
decision and explanation to the applicant. Upon rezoning approval, the
Zoning Officer will update the Zoning Map accordingly.
A. Sketch plan.
B. Estimated infrastructure (sanitary sewer and potable water) demands
(gallons per day).
C. Off-street parking projections (number of parking spaces) available on
site.
D. A summary of anticipated impacts on adjoining lots, including but not
limited to noise, vibration, nighttime lighting, service area locations
and visibility, hours of operation.
E. Depending upon the location of lot access, infrastructure service/
demands and impacts identified in § 615-28D on adjoining lots, the
Borough Council may require a landowner and/or developer to prepare
other potential related studies. The Borough Planning Commission and
the Borough Council reserve the right to request additional information
as part of the rezoning review and approval process in order to evaluate
the applicability of the rezoning.
§ 615-27 ETNA CODE § 615-28
1:578
ARTICLE IX
Permits
§ 615-29. Zoning permit.
A. A zoning permit shall be required prior to:
(1) A change in use of land or structure.
(2) The placement, erection or construction of a structure, or portion
thereof, that has a fair market value exceeding $500, including but
not limited to fences, except that a permit shall be required prior to
the erection of a fence that is located within a floodplain,
regardless of its cost.
(3) The alteration or improvement of any existing structure, where
such improvement or portion thereof increases the amount of space
which the structure encloses.
(4) The alteration or development of any improved or unimproved real
estate.
(5) The erection or alteration of any signs specified in this chapter.
B. No zoning permit shall be required for repairs or maintenance of any
structure or land, provided such repairs do not change the use or the
exterior dimensions of the structure, or otherwise violate the provisions
of this chapter.
C. Application for zoning permits shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer.
D. Such zoning permits shall be granted or denied, in whole or in part,
within 30 business days of the filing date.
E. No zoning permit shall be issued except in conformity with:
(1) All applicable regulations of this chapter.
(2) Any conditions imposed upon the site by the Zoning Hearing Board
or the Borough Council.
(3) Any recorded subdivision or land development plan.
F. In all instances in which the Zoning Officer expresses a reasonable
doubt as to the ability of a proposed use or improvement to meet all of
the above-described requirements, it will be incumbent upon the
applicant to furnish adequate evidence in support of his application. If
such evidence is not presented, the zoning permit will be denied.
G. Application for a zoning permit shall be made by the owner or lessee of
any building or structure or the agent of either; provided, however, that
if the application is made by a person other than the owner or lessee it
shall be accompanied by a written authorization of the owner or the
qualified person making an application that the proposed work is
§ 615-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-29
1:579
authorized by the owner. The full names and addresses of the owner,
lessee, applicant and of the responsible officers, if the owner or lessee
is a corporate body, shall be stated in the application.
H. The Zoning Officer may call upon other Borough staff and/or Boroughappointed
consultants in the review of submitted materials for
applications.
I. The Zoning Officer may revoke a zoning permit or approval issued
under the provisions of this chapter in case of any false statement or
misrepresentation of fact in the application or on the plans on which the
zoning permit or approval was based or for any other cause set forth in
this chapter.
J. No permit shall be issued until the fee, in an amount as established
from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council, is paid to the
Borough. The payment of fees under this section shall not relieve the
applicant or holder of said permit from payment of other fees that may
be required by this chapter or by any other ordinances or law. Where a
permit is required by this chapter, but the work is commenced or the
use is commenced or changed prior to obtaining such zoning permit,
the fee set by resolution of the Board of Supervisors for such permit
shall be doubled. The doubling of the permit fee shall be required to
reflect the additional expense incurred by the Borough resulting from
the need to inspect the property, respond to any complaints, issue any
enforcement notices and/or process the application as soon as it is
received. The payment of such increased permit fee shall not relieve
any person from complying with all requirements of this chapter or any
other applicable Borough ordinances or from any penalties or
enforcement actions authorized by this chapter or the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.
K. Issuance of zoning permits. Upon receiving the application, the Zoning
Officer shall examine the same within a reasonable time after filing. If
the application or plans do not conform to the provisions of all pertinent
local laws, the Zoning Officer shall reject such application in writing
stating the reasons therefor and informing the applicant of his or her
right to appeal the Zoning Officer's decision to the Zoning Hearing
Board. If satisfied that the proposed work and/or use conforms to the
provisions of this chapter and all laws and ordinances applicable
thereto, and that the certificate of use and occupancy as required
herein has been applied for, the Zoning Officer shall grant or deny a
permit application, in whole or in part, within 30 business days of the
filing date.
L. Reconsideration of application. An applicant whose request for a permit
has been denied by the Zoning Officer may make a later application for
a zoning permit, provided all deficiencies which were the basis for the
prior denial of the permit have been eliminated. The Zoning Officer
shall not be required to conduct a new review of the application if this
condition is not met.
§ 615-29 ETNA CODE § 615-29
1:580
§ 615-30. Building permits.
M. Expiration of permit. The zoning permit shall expire after one year from
the date of issuance; provided, however, that the same may be extended
every six months for a period not to exceed an additional two years,
upon written request by the applicant which demonstrates good cause
to the Zoning Officer. When a zoning permit is issued in conjunction
with a building permit, the zoning permit shall remain valid so long as
the building permit is valid. A permit may be valid for no more than five
years from its issue date.
N. Compliance with this chapter. The zoning permit shall be a license to
proceed with the work and should not be construed as authority to
violate, cancel or set aside any of the provisions of this chapter, except
as stipulated by this chapter. The issuance of a zoning permit does not
indicate that a building permit can be issued nor is it to be considered a
license to begin work where a building permit is also required.
O. Compliance with zoning permit and plot plan. All improvements or uses
shall conform to the approved application and plans for which the
zoning permit has been issued as well as the approved plot plan.
P. Display of zoning permit. All approved zoning permits shall be
prominently displayed on the subject property during construction,
renovation, reconstruction, repair, remodeling or the conduct of other
site improvements. Such permit displays shall occur within five days of
permit issuance or prior to the commencement of actual work on the
site, whichever occurs first. Such permit display shall be continuous
until the site receives its certificate of use and occupancy.
Q. Application requirements associated with zoning permits are available
at the Etna Borough Municipal Building Administrative Office.
A. No building or structure can be erected, added to or structurally
altered until a permit has been issued by the Zoning Officer. No building
permit can be issued for any building where construction, addition or
alteration or use thereof would be in violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter, except after written order from the Zoning Hearing Board.
Any building permit issued in conflict with the provisions of this chapter
is null and void.
B. All applications for building permits are to be accompanied by plans in
duplicate as determined by the Zoning Officer, drawn to scale, showing
the actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon; the exact
sizes and locations on the lot of building already existing, if any; and the
location and dimensions of the proposed building or alteration. The
application includes such other information as the Zoning Officer
requires, including existing or proposed uses of the building and land;
the number of households or units the building is designed to
accommodate; conditions existing on the lot; and such other matters as
may be necessary to determine conformance with and provide for the
§ 615-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-30
1:581
enforcement of this chapter. One copy of the plans, denoted with
approval or disapproval, will be returned to the applicant, and one copy,
similarly marked, retained on Borough file.
C. A building permit for any building or use may be revoked and
withdrawn by the Zoning Officer if the holder of the building permit has
failed to comply with the requirements of this chapter or with any
conditions attached to the issuance of the permit, and the holder of the
building permit may be subject to penalties as provided by this chapter.
D. The Building Inspector has 30 days to review and act upon a building
permit application.
E. If the work described in any building permit has not begun within 90
days from the date of issuance, the building permit expires. The Zoning
Officer will notify the applicant of such expiration. If the work described
in any building has not been substantially completed within two years of
the date of issuance thereof, said permit and any other zoning relief
expires and will be canceled, with written notification, by the Zoning
Officer. An applicant has 10 days to apply for renewal of zoning relief
and issuance of a new building permit.
F. All buildings for which permits have been obtained and the construction
of which has begun, or for which a contract or contracts have been
issued pursuant to a permit granted prior to the date of adoption of this
chapter, may be completed and used in accordance with the plans on
which said permit was granted.
G. Unless otherwise required by another portion of the Borough's Code of
Ordinances, all public and private construction, demolition and grading
work and related activities performed pursuant to a building permit can
be performed between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday
through Saturday, and no such work can be performed at any time on
Sundays or federal holidays unless the permittee obtains written
consent from the Borough Manager, and/or his or her agent, to do the
work at an earlier or later hour or on said days.
H. In connection with the granting of any permit, the Zoning Officer and/or
the Borough Manager may, in his or her discretion, attach such
conditions thereto as may be necessary to prevent damage to public or
private property or to prevent the operation from being conducted in a
manner hazardous to life or property or in a manner likely to create a
nuisance, including, but not limited to, the following:
(1) Limitations on the period of the year in which the work may be
performed.
(2) Restrictions as to the size, weight and type of equipment.
(3) Designation of routes upon which materials may be transported.
§ 615-30 ETNA CODE § 615-30
1:582
§ 615-31. Occupancy permits.
(4) Designation of the place, manner and routes of disposal of
excavated material.
(5) Requirements for the storage of equipment and materials.
(6) Requirements as to the control of dust, the cleaning of streets, the
prevention of noise and all other conduct injurious to the
neighborhood, the general public or any portion thereof.
(7) Regulations as to the use of streets in the course of the work in the
Borough.
(8) Regulations as to the use of a mechanical device for the breaking of
pavement, such as a hydra-hammer or headache ball, which will be
permitted only with special written permission from the Zoning
Officer and/or the Borough Manager.
(9) Requirements that the building permitted area be completely
fenced in, with a designated point of ingress and egress, and with
such fencing to be of sufficient height and transparency so as to
protect public health, welfare and safety.
A. It is unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any
building or lot, in whole or in part, erected, connected or wholly or
partly altered or enlarged in its size or structure, until an occupancy
permit has been issued by the Zoning Officer.
B. No nonconforming use may be changed or extended until an occupancy
permit has been issued by the Zoning Officer.
C. Occupancy permits applied for coincident with an approvable building
permit application will be issued within five working days after the
erection or alteration has been completed and inspected by the Zoning
Officer.
D. Application for occupancy permits for a new or changed use of land
where no building permit is required can be made directly to the office
of the Zoning Officer. Occupancy permits to be issued, as well as
written notices stating why an occupancy permit cannot be issued, will
be given to the applicant no later than 10 days after the application has
been received by the Zoning Officer.
E. A temporary occupancy permit for owner-occupied development may
be issued by the Zoning Officer for a period not exceeding six months
during alterations as partial occupancy of a building pending its
completion, provided that such temporary permit may require such
conditions and safeguards as will protect the safety of the occupants
and the public.
F. Failure to obtain an occupancy permit is a violation of this chapter and
subject to enforcement remedies.
§ 615-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-31
1:583
§ 615-32. Temporary use permit.
G. The Zoning Officer maintains records of all occupancy permits; copies
will be furnished upon request to any person having a proprietary or
tenancy interest in the building or lot affected.
A. The purpose of a temporary use permit is to ensure compatibility of the
temporary use with surrounding lots.
B. A temporary use permit application is available from the Zoning Officer.
(1) Areas to be reviewed as part of the permit process may include but
not be limited to traffic circulation, parking, public conveniences,
signs and any other special operating characteristics.
§ 615-31 ETNA CODE § 615-32
1:584
ARTICLE X
Amendments
§ 615-33. Enactment of zoning ordinance amendments.
§ 615-34. Procedure for landowner curative amendments.
A. The Borough Council may amend, supplement or repeal any of the
regulations and provisions of this chapter as set forth in the MPC.
B. The Borough Council will conduct hearings and make decisions in
accordance with the MPC. Before voting on the enactment of an
amendment, the Borough Council will hold a public hearing pursuant to
public notice.
C. In the case of an amendment other than that prepared by the Borough
Planning Commission, the Borough Council will submit each such
amendment to the Borough Planning Commission to provide the
Borough Planning Commission an opportunity to submit
recommendations.
D. Prior to the public hearing on the amendment by the Borough Council,
the amendment shall be forwarded to Allegheny County and
surrounding municipalities for recommendations.
A. A landowner and/or developer who desires to challenge on substantive
grounds the validity of this chapter or the Zone Map or any provision
thereof which prohibits or restricts the use or development of land in
which he has an interest may submit a curative amendment to the
Borough Council with a written request that his challenge and proposed
amendment be heard and decided as provided in § 916.1 of the MPC, 53
P. S. § 10916.1. See also § 609, § 610 and § 916.1 of the MPC, 53 P. S.
§ 10609, 10610 and 10916.1.
B. The Borough Council will conduct hearings and make decisions in
accordance with the MPC.
C. The Borough Council, if it determines that a validity challenge has
merit, may adopt landowner's curative amendment, with or without
revision, or may adopt an alternative amendment which will cure the
challenged defects. The Borough Council will consider material
submitted by the landowner and also consider:
(1) The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water
supplies, school and other public service facilities.
(2) If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the proposal
upon regional housing needs and the effectiveness of the proposal
in providing housing units of a type actually available to and
affordable by classes of persons otherwise unlawfully excluded by
the challenged provisions of this chapter or the Zone Map.
§ 615-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-34
1:585
§ 615-35. Procedure for Borough curative amendments.
If the Borough determines that this chapter or any portion hereof is
substantially invalid, it can take the following actions:
§ 615-36. Content of public notice.
Public notices of proposed zoning ordinances and amendments include
either the full text thereof or a brief summary setting forth the principal
provisions in reasonable detail, and a reference to a place within the
Borough where copies of the proposed ordinance or amendment may be
examined, in addition to the time and place of hearing. If the proposed
amendment involves a Zone Map change, notice of said public hearing shall
comply with MPC § 609(2)(i).
(3) The suitability of the lot for the intensity of use proposed by the
lot's soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, aquifers,
natural resources and other natural features.
(4) The impact of the proposed use on the lot's soils, slopes,
woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, natural resources and natural
features, the degree to which these are protected or destroyed, the
tolerance of the resources to development and any adverse
environmental impacts.
A. The Borough can declare by formal action this chapter or portions
hereof substantially invalid and propose to prepare a curative
amendment to overcome such invalidity. Within 30 days of such
declaration and proposal the Borough Council will:
(1) By resolution make specific findings setting forth the declared
invalidity of this chapter, which may include:
(a) References to specific uses which are either not permitted or
not permitted in sufficient quantity;
(b) Reference to a class of use or uses which requires revision; or
(c) Reference to this entire ordinance which requires revisions.
(2) Begin to prepare and consider a curative amendment to this
chapter to correct the declared invalidity.
B. The Borough Council will conduct hearings and make decisions in
accordance with the Pennsylvania MPC.
§ 615-34 ETNA CODE § 615-36
1:586
ARTICLE XI
Administration and Enforcement
§ 615-37. Administration.
A. Borough Council. Under this chapter, the Borough Council has the duty
to:
(1) Consider and adopt or reject proposed amendments or the repeal
of this chapter as provided by law. Borough Council cannot hear
and decide questions of enforcement that may arise.
(2) Appoint and remove members of Borough Planning Commission,
Zoning Hearing Board and the Zoning Officer.
(3) Receive and consider Borough Planning Commission's ordinancerelated
recommendations.
(4) Ask for recommendations of the Borough Planning Commission on
the adoption or amendment of this chapter and for those matters
specified in § 303(a) of the MPC, as amended.
(5) Advertise and host a public hearing before adopting a zoning
ordinance or any of its amendments.
(6) Establish fees for the issuance of land development, building
occupancy and sign permits. In accordance with MPC § 617.3(e).
(7) Prescribe fees for processes outlined in MPC § 617.3(e)
(8) Has exclusive jurisdiction to hear and render final adjudications
for:
(a) All applications pursuant to § 508 of the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10508,
for approval of subdivisions or land development when a local
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance exists.
(b) Applications for conditional use under the express provisions
of this chapter.
(c) Applications for curative amendment to this chapter or
pursuant to §§ 609.1 and 916.1(a) of the MPC, 53 P. S.
§§ 10609.1 and 10916.1(a).
(d) All petitions for amendments to land use ordinances, pursuant
to the procedures set forth in § 609 of the MPC, 53 P. S.
§ 10609.
(e) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or the
Borough Engineer in the administration of any land use
ordinance or provisions with reference to sedimentation and
erosion control and stormwater management as enabled by the
MPC.
§ 615-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-37
1:587
(f) Based upon a subdivision or land development plan, as
reviewed and approved by Allegheny County, the Borough shall
be responsible for issuance of building permits and conducting
inspections.
B. Borough Planning Commission. Powers and duties of Borough Planning
Commission are those outlined in § 209.1 of the MPC, as amended.
C. Zoning Hearing Board. Powers and duties of the Zoning Hearing Board
are those outlined in Article IX of the MPC, as amended.
D. Zoning Officer. Duties generally involve:
(1) The day-to-day administrative procedures of this chapter.
(a) Receiving, reviewing, and issuing building and zoning permits
and certificates of occupancy, maintaining records of
applications and permits, performing inspections to determine
compliance with this chapter.
(b) Notify persons violating this chapter.
(c) Keeping this chapter and map up-to-date.
(d) Accepting applications for and presenting facts at hearings
before the Zoning Hearing Board.
(2) Borough Council may amend the duties of the Zoning Officer as
deemed necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the
residents.
(3) The Zoning Officer:
(a) Must administer this chapter by its literal terms.
(b) Does not have any discretionary power and can neither waive
nor tighten any requirement of the chapter.
(c) Is required to meet qualifications established by the Borough
and the MPC and must be able to demonstrate a working
knowledge of the municipal zoning.
(d) May also serve as the Building Inspector.
(e) Must be appointed in conformance with § 614 of the MPC.
E. Building Inspector.
(1) The Building Inspector enforces this chapter by issuing building
permits and occupancy permits for only such structures and uses
that comply with the provisions of this chapter. The Building
Inspector conducts all inspections necessary to determine
compliance with the chapter and maintains records thereof.
(2) The Building Inspector is responsible for:
§ 615-37 ETNA CODE § 615-37
1:588
§ 615-38. Enforcement remedies.
(a) Maintaining all of the records of this chapter, including but not
limited to all maps, amendments and variances,
nonconforming uses appeals and applications.
(b) Collecting fees that accompany applications for building and
occupancy permits and variances.
(c) Receiving, filing and forwarding to the Borough Council and
the Borough Planning Commission for action all applications
for amendments to this chapter.
(d) Receiving, filing and forwarding to the Zoning Hearing Board
all applications for variances and appeals.
(3) The Building Inspector may also serve as the Zoning Officer.
A. Enforcement notice.
(1) If it appears to the Borough that a violation of this chapter has
occurred, the Borough will initiate enforcement proceedings by
sending an enforcement notice as provided in this chapter.
(2) The enforcement notice must be sent to the owner of the lot on
which the violation has occurred, to any person who has filed a
written request to receive enforcement notices regarding that lot,
and to any other person requested in writing by the owner of
record.
(3) An enforcement notice states at least the following:
(a) The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the Borough intends to take action.
(b) The location of the lot in violation.
(c) The specific violation, with a description of the requirements
which have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable
provisions of this chapter.
(d) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
(e) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board within the time frame as defined by the
enforcement notice.
(f) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board,
constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly
described.
§ 615-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-38
1:589
B. Remedies.
(1) Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated
or permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter must,
upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Borough, pay a judgment of not more than $500
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees incurred
by the Borough as a result thereof. No judgment may commence or
be imposed, levied or be payable until the date of the determination
of a violation by the Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant
neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Borough may
enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil
procedure. Each day that a violation continues constitutes a
separate violation, unless the Magisterial District Judge
determining that there has been a violation further determines that
there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership or
corporation violating this chapter to have believed that there was
no such violation, in which event there can be deemed to have been
only one such violation until the fifth day following the date of the
determination of a violation by the Magisterial District Judge, and
thereafter each day that a violation continues will constitute a
separate violation. All judgments, costs and reasonable attorneys'
fees collected for the violation of this chapter must be paid over to
the Borough.
(2) The court of common pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of
stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
(3) Nothing contained in this section can be construed or interpreted
to grant to any person or entity other than the Borough the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
§ 615-38 ETNA CODE § 615-38
1:590
ARTICLE XII
Definitions
§ 615-39. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall be
construed throughout this chapter to have the meanings herein indicated.
The singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include the
singular. The word "used" shall include the words "arranged," "designed"
or "intended to be used." The present tense shall include the future tense.
The word "may" is permissive. The word "shall" is mandatory. All definitions
within the MPC, as applicable, are hereby referenced by this chapter.
ABUTTING — Having a common border with or being separated from such
common border by an alley or easement.
ACCESS — A means of approach or entry to or exit from a lot, a site or a
parcel.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — See "structure, accessory."
ACCESSORY USE — See "use, accessory."
ADJACENT — Within proximity to or sharing a common boundary.
ALL OTHER RESIDENTIAL USES — Any land use residential in nature
other than defined by this chapter or the zoning ordinances of the Boroughs
of Millvale and/or Sharpsburg.
ALLEY — A functional service way providing a secondary public means of
access to abutting properties.
ALTERATION — Any change in a structure that increases or diminishes
exterior dimensions or modifies openings in the exterior walls.
AMENDMENT — A refinement to this chapter which includes revisions to
the zoning text and/or the Zoning Map by resolution of the Borough Council.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL — A business establishment operated by a veterinary
medical doctor(s), certified in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, for the
medical or surgical treatment of domestic, agricultural or zoological
animals.
ANTENNA — Any system of wires, rods, discs, panels, flat panels, dishes,
whips or other similar devices used for the transmission or reception of
wireless signals. An antenna may include an omnidirectional antenna (rod),
directional antenna (panel), parabolic antenna (disc) or any other wireless
antenna. An antenna shall not include tower-based wireless
communications facilities, as defined below.
APARTMENT — A suite of rooms or a single room in a building containing
three or more dwelling units, each with its own cooking, food storage,
bathing and toilet facilities and with access directly or by a common hallway
to the outside. An apartment building is three or less stories.
APIARY — Any place where one or more colonies or nuclei of bees are kept.
§ 615-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-39
1:591
APIARY OPERATION — Includes all colonies owned by an individual and
located in any permanent location or locations within the commonwealth.
APPLICANT — A landowner and/or developer who has filed an application
for development, including his heirs, successors and assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application required to be
filed and approved prior to the start of construction or development,
including but not limited to an application for zoning approval. Every
application for development must include the form designated by the
Zoning Officer, the appropriate site plan and all other information required
by this chapter.
APPURTENANCE — The visible, functional or ornamental objects accessory
to and part of a structure.
ARRAY — Any number of electrically connected photovoltaic (PV) modules
providing a single electrical output.
ARTISAN WORKSPACE/SALES — An establishment, in conjunction with or
without a dwelling, designed for the preparation, instruction, display and/
or sale of individually crafted work related to artwork, jewelry, furniture,
sculpture, pottery, leathercraft, hand-woven articles, literature or
performance of fine arts, such as but not limited to drawing, dance, or vocal
or instrumental music.
AUTHORIZED USE — See "use, authorized."
AUTO SALES/SERVICE AND REPAIR — A business establishment used for
the display or sale of automobiles, noncommercial trucks, motorcycles,
motor homes, recreational vehicles and/or boats. Such use may also include
the servicing or repair of vehicles of the brand sold at the establishment.
BAKERY/CONFECTIONARY — A facility where baked goods are prepared
and baked, which may utilize an open flame.
BANKS AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS — A business establishment
where the principal business is the receipt, disbursement, or exchange of
funds and currencies, such as banks, savings, loans, credit unions or checkcashing
establishments.
BASEMENT — The space enclosed by the foundation or ground-floor walls
of a building partly or wholly below the average level of the adjacent
ground. A basement shall not be counted as a story for purpose of height
measurements unless 1/2 or more of its height is above the finished lot
grade level.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — A business establishment that occupies a singlefamily
dwelling and, if applicable, associated accessory structures, where
limited overnight lodging and breakfast is provided for compensation to
guests and where said use may or may not also host accommodations for
private events, such as weddings, parties, seminars and conferences.
BEE — Any stage of the common hive of honeybee (Apis mellifera) or any
other species of the genus Apis.
§ 615-39 ETNA CODE § 615-39
1:592
BERM — A bank of earth generally intended to screen activity on a lot from
activity on an adjacent lot(s), or vice versa, or a public way.
BLOCK — An area bounded by streets, right-of-ways, streams or other
similar natural features.
BLOCK FACE — The contiguous facades of buildings along one side of a
street between two intersecting streets. A corner lot shall have two block
faces.
BOARD — Any body granted jurisdiction under the MPC or a land use
ordinance which has the authority to render final adjudications.
BOROUGH — Borough of Etna, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The governing body of the Borough of Etna,
Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH MANAGER/BOROUGH SECRETARY — The duly appointed
Borough official designated to administer the regulations, programs and
services of the Borough of Etna.
BOUNDARY — A line which may or may not follow a visible feature that
defines the limits of a geographic entity, such as a census tract, a county, a
municipality, a lot, a district, a property or a place.
BREW PUB — A business establishment which provides on-site alcoholic
beverage sales for drinking on the premises, where food is served, where
live entertainment (not including adult entertainment) may also be
provided, and where minors are not admitted unless accompanied by a
parent or guardian.
BREWERY — A facility that brews ales, beers, meads, and/or similar
beverages on site.
BUFFER YARD — An area of land, together with trees, grass, ground cover,
shrubs, bushes, or other natural landscaping material, walls, berms or
fences thereon, located between different land uses to minimize potential
conflicts between them.
BUILDING COVERAGE — That percentage of the lot area covered by
buildings. In determining building coverage, cornices, eaves and gutters
shall be excluded.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front of the building to the
following points:
§ 615-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-39
1:593
BUILDING INSPECTOR — Qualified professional delegated by the Borough
to do building control and/or other duties as identified by the Borough Code.
BUILDING LENGTH — The longest dimension of a building, measured to
the outside walls at ground level.
BUILDING LINE — A line parallel to and a distance from the lot lines in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
BUILDING MATERIAL YARDS OR ESTABLISHMENTS — A place for shortor
long-term storage, collection and/or distribution of heavy equipment,
machinery or materials used in construction, farming or industrial
operations.
BUILDING PERMIT — A document issued by the Borough which allows
construction to proceed.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A detached, subordinate building, the use of
which is clearly incidental to the principal structure or use of the lot.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — The building housing the principal use of the lot
on which it is located.
BUILDING-INTEGRATED SYSTEM — A solar photovoltaic system that is
constructed as an integral part of a principal or accessory building or
structure and where the building-integrated system features maintain a
uniform profile or surface of vertical walls, window openings, and roofing.
Such a system is used in lieu of separate mechanical device, replacing or
BUILDING LINE, FRONT — A line parallel to the front lot line a
distance from the front lot line in accordance with the front yard or
setback requirements of this chapter.
A.
BUILDING LINE, REAR — A line parallel to the rear lot line at a
distance from the rear lot line in accordance with the rear yard or
setback requirements of this chapter.
B.
BUILDING LINE, SIDE — A line parallel to the side lot line in
accordance with the side yard or setback requirements of this chapter.
C.
§ 615-39 ETNA CODE § 615-39
1:594
substituting for an architectural or structural component of the building or
structure that appends or interrupts the uniform surfaces of walls, window
openings and roofing. A building-integrated system may occur within
vertical facades, replacing view glass, spandrel glass or other facade
material; into semitransparent skylight systems; into roofing systems,
replacing traditional roofing materials; or other building or structure
envelope system.
BUILDING-MOUNTED SYSTEM — A solar photovoltaic system attached to
any part or type of roof on a building or structure that has an occupancy
permit on file with the Borough and that is either the principal structure
or an accessory structure on a recorded lot. This system also includes any
solar-based architectural elements.
CARPORT — An accessory structure with no more than two walls
designated for the parking of motor vehicles, trailers and/or boats used by
the residents of the building or dwelling unit and in which no occupation,
business or service for profit or solely for the storage of other personal
property is carried on.
CATERING SERVICE — An establishment that prepares and provides food
and related services to off-premises locations.
CELL — The smallest basic solar electric device which generates electricity
when exposed to light.
CLINIC, SMALL-SCALE — A building or structure where two or more
licensed medical professionals provide diagnostic services, medical, dental
and/or psychiatric services and/or treatment diagnosis and treatment to
the general public without overnight accommodation and may include uses
such as reception areas, waiting areas, consultation rooms, x-ray and a
dispensary, providing that all such uses shall have access only from the
interior of the building or structure. The clinic generally operates on a firstcome,
first-serve basis and does not take appointments. It has relatively
high pedestrian or customer traffic throughout the year. Any facility for
methadone treatment or other narcotic treatment programs approved by
the Pennsylvania Department of Health shall not be considered a smallscale
clinic use.
CLUB/LODGE — A business establishment operated for social, recreational,
educational or fraternal purposes, some serving alcoholic beverages where
permitted, but open only to members and their guests.
CO-LOCATION — The mounting of one or more WCFs, including antennas,
on an existing tower-based WCF, or on any structure that already supports
at least one non-tower WCF.
COLONY — A hive and its equipment and appurtenances, including bees,
comb, honey, pollen, and brood.
COMMERCIAL GREENHOUSE — A facility associated with a business
establishment, whose roof and sides are made largely of glass or other
transparent or translucent material and in which the temperature and
§ 615-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-39
1:595
humidity can be regulated for the cultivation of delicate or out-of-season
plants.
COMMUNITY CENTER — A building where activity for the benefit of the
general public occurs, with meeting rooms and/or accessory fitness
facilities.
COMMUNITY GARDEN — A lot comprised of one or more tax parcels that
is used by a group of individuals in the community to grow and harvest
food or non-food crops primarily for personal or group use or donation.
A community garden may be divided into plots for cultivation by one or
more individuals and/or groups, or it may be cultivated by individuals and/
or groups collectively.
COMPOST — Relatively stable decomposed organic matter for use in
agricultural and other growing practices, usually consisting of materials
such as grass, leaves, yard waste, worms, perhaps including raw and
uncooked kitchen food waste. Commonly this process specifically excludes
bones, meat, fat, grease, oil, raw manure, and milk products, which are
difficult to break down and can cause odor and nuisance issues.
COMPOSTING — The process by which organic solid waste is biologically
decomposed under controlled anaerobic or aerobic conditions to yield a
humus-like product.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The official Comprehensive Plan of Etna
Borough, as amended from time to time, adopted pursuant to the provisions
of Article III of the MPC.
CONDITIONAL USE — See "use, conditional."
CONSTRUCTION — The construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair,
extension, expansion, structural alteration or relocation of a structure,
including the placement of mobile homes.
COOP — A structure, not necessarily attached to the ground, with a top and
sides, that is designed to provide shelter and protection for small animals
or birds.
COUNCIL — The Borough Council of the Borough of Etna.
COUNTY — Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
DECIBEL — A unit for measuring the relative intensity of sounds based on
an expressed ratio of two amounts of acoustic signal power equal to 10
times the common logarithm of this ratio.
DENSITY — The measurement of compactness of residential development
as to the number of dwelling units per one acre or 43,560 square feet.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with the
permission of such landowner, who proposes, makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or land development.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels;
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any buildings; any use or change in use of any
§ 615-39 ETNA CODE § 615-39
1:596
buildings or land; or extension of any use of land, for which permission may
be required pursuant to this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development, including a
planned development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants relating to use,
location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity of use or
density of development, streets, ways and parking facilities, common open
space and public facilities.
DISABLED — "Handicapped," as defined according to the Fair Housing Act
Amendments of 1988, 42 U.S.C. § 3602(h), and any amendments thereto.
DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEMS (DAS) — Network of spatially
separated antenna sites connected to a common source that provides
wireless service within a geographic area or structure.
DISTURBANCE — Grading, excavation, construction and similar activities
that have occurred or may occur on a lot.
DOCKS/PORTALS FOR WATER ACCESS — A constructed or altered
segment of the riverbank or shore used for the purpose of enabling a
recreational boat to be placed into the water from a trailer or other
apparatus used to transport or store the boat.
DOMESTIC FOWL — A gallinaceous bird kept chiefly for its eggs and flesh,
such as a domestic cock or hen, turkey, pheasant, and other similar animals.
DRIPLINE — The outermost edge of a roof, including eaves, overhangs and
gutters.
DRIVEWAY — A vehicular connection from a lot to the public right-of-way. A
driveway terminates at the right-of-way line and/or the access drive.
DUMPSTER ENCLOSURE — A vertical structure erected to surround
receptacles for trash and/or recycling.
EASEMENT — Authorization by a lot owner of the use by another and for a
specified purpose of any designated part of his lot.
EMERGENCY — A condition that: (1) constitutes a clear and immediate
danger to the health, welfare, or safety of the public; or (2) has caused or
is likely to cause facilities in the rights-of-way to be unusable and result in
loss of the services provided.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN, FINAL — A development plan which has been
submitted for final approval of a planned development to Council.
A.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN, PRELIMINARY — The written and graphic
material describing provisions for development of a planned
development, including a plan; the name of the planned development;
all covenants relating to use, location, size, height and bulk of buildings
and other structures; intensity of use or site density; parking areas;
location and size of common areas; and uses, submitted for tentative
approval.
B.
§ 615-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-39
1:597
EMERGENCY SERVICES — Any service to citizens for injury or lifethreatening
events, including but not limited to ambulance, paramedic or
fire and rescue services provided by a public or private agency. A building
structure and/or lot used for the maintenance, fueling, storage, dispatching
or parking of vehicles and/or equipment utilized to provide private rescue
or ambulatory services, fire and/or police services.
ENGINEER — An individual licensed and registered to engage in the
practice of engineering. A professional engineer may not practice land
surveying unless licensed as set forth in P.L. 534, No. 230; however, a
professional engineer may perform engineering land surveys.
ENGINEER, BOROUGH — A licensed and registered professional engineer
in Pennsylvania designated by the Borough to perform the duties of
engineer as herein specified.
ERECTED — Anything built, constructed, reconstructed or moved on or
upon any lot.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance by public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies
of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission,
disposal or distribution systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains,
sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic
signals, hydrants, street signs, off-street parking spaces and other similar
equipment and accessories in connection therewith reasonably necessary
for the furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or municipal
or other governmental agencies or for the public health, safety or general
welfare, but not including buildings.
FACADE — The exterior walls of a building that can be seen by the public.
FARM ANIMAL — Any domestic species of animal that is kept and raised for
use as food or in the production of food or in the operation of a farm and
that is not an exotic animal or a house pet.
FARM STAND — A structure, often temporary, for the display and sale
of permitted products, such as vegetables, produce, flowers, orchard
products, and similar nonanimal agricultural products grown or produced
on the general property of the community garden or market garden upon
which the stand is located.
FARMERS' MARKET — A predesignated area, with or without temporary
structures, where vendors and individuals who have raised vegetables or
produce (or have taken the same on consignment for retail sale) sell
vegetables, produce, flowers, orchard products, locally produced packaged
food products, and/or animal agricultural products.
FCC — Federal Communications Commission.
FENCE — An artificially constructed barrier of specified material or
combination of materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land or
portions of buildings or structures.
§ 615-39 ETNA CODE § 615-39
1:598
FILL — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material
is placed, pushed, dumped, transported or moved to a new location above
the natural surface of the ground or on top of the stripped surface and
shall include the conditions resulting therefrom. Fill also can refer to the
difference in elevation between a point on the original ground and a
designated point of higher elevation on the final grade.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all of the
floors of a building and its accessory buildings on the same lot, excluding
cellar and basement floor areas, but including the area of roofed porches
and roofed terraces. All dimensions shall be measured between exterior
faces of walls.
FLYWAY BARRIER — A barrier composed of a fence, vegetation, hedge, or
combination thereof, which directs bees quickly into the sky.
FOOTCANDLE — Unit used to measure the amount of light falling on a
surface at a point on a surface which is one foot from, and perpendicular to,
a source of illumination that produces one uniform candela.
FORESTRY — The management of forests and timberlands when practiced
in accordance with accepted silvicultural principles, through developing,
cultivating, harvesting, transporting and selling trees for commercial
purposes, which does not involve any land development.
FRONTAGE — The portion of a lot between the facade and the lot line that
fronts the thoroughfare or a civic open space or the privately held portion
between the facade of a building and the lot line.
FUEL/ENERGY RECHARGE STATION — A business establishment
supplying fuel, recharging energy, tires, accessories and services for
vehicles directly to the populace, including minor repairs and the sale of
groceries, but not including such major repairs as spray painting, body,
fender, axle, frame, major engine overhaul or recapping/retreading of tires.
FUNERAL HOME — A building licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania that contains a suitable storage room for the deceased and
may include embalming facilities and rooms for the display of burial
ceremonies of the deceased, but excludes crematories.
GARAGE — A building or structure or part thereof used or intended to be
used for the parking and storage of motor vehicles.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A fully enclosed accessory use which is attached
to or detached from a residential building or dwelling unit or an
accessory structure used for the storage of motor vehicles and other
personal property owned and used by the residents of the residential
building or dwelling unit and in which no occupation, business or
service for profit is carried on. A private garage may be used for the
storage of not more than one commercial vehicle owned or used by the
owner or tenant of the residential building or dwelling unit and for the
storage of not more than three private noncommercial vehicles owned
or used by persons other than the owner or tenant of the residential
building or dwelling unit.
A.
§ 615-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-39
1:599
GOVERNING BODY — The Borough Council of Etna Borough, Allegheny
County, Pennsylvania.
GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS — Includes post office, emergency services,
municipal buildings.
GRADE, ESTABLISHED — The elevation of the center line of the streets, as
officially established by the Borough.
GRADE, FINISHED — The proposed or completed elevations of the land
surface, including the surfaces of lawns, walks and roads brought to grades
as shown on official plans or designs relating thereto.
GREENHOUSE, COMMERCIAL — See "commercial greenhouse."
GREENHOUSE, NONCOMMERCIAL — See "noncommercial greenhouse."
GROCERY STORE/BUTCHER SHOP/GREEN GROCER — A business
establishment that sells produce, dry goods, meats, baked goods, dairy
items, frozen foods and the like. This includes supermarkets, food stores,
dairies, delicatessens, but does not include convenience stores.
GROUND FLOOR — The floor of a building nearest in elevation to the
exterior grade at the front of the building.
GROUND-MOUNTED SYSTEM — A solar photovoltaic system mounted on
a structure, pole or series of poles constructed specifically to support the
photovoltaic system and not attached to any other structure.
HABITABLE SPACE — The area of a building for living, sleeping, eating or
cooking and comfort facilities.
HEALTH/FITNESS CLUB — Any establishment having a source of income or
compensation derived from offering a service to the public, involving health,
healing or fitness-related activities and providing or offering to provide
physiological or psychological healing or therapy. This includes but is not
limited to a health club, martial arts or yoga studio, massage establishment
and public spa or public hot tub. This term shall not include any business
or establishment operated for the practice of a profession which is licensed
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, such as physicians, dentists, nurses,
podiatrists, chiropractors, physical therapists and similar occupations.
Massage facilities shall constitute no more than 5% of the floor area of the
building.
HEIGHT OF A TOWER-BASED WCF — The vertical distance measured
from the ground level, including any base pad, to the highest point on a
tower-based WCF, including antennas mounted on the tower and any other
appurtenances.
HI-RISE RESIDENTIAL — A building of no less than four stories with a suite
of rooms or a single room in the building containing four or more dwelling
GARAGE, PUBLIC — Any building used for temporary parking of motor
vehicles for an established fee or reservation and where said garage is
not associated with other automotive retail uses.
B.
§ 615-39 ETNA CODE § 615-39
1:600
units, each with its own cooking, food storage, bathing and toilet facilities
and with access, directly or by a common hallway, to the outside.
HIVE — Any frame hive, box hive, box, barrel, log, gum, skep, or other
receptacle or container, natural or artificial, or any part thereof, which may
be used or employed as a domicile for bees.
HOME-BASED BUSINESS, NO-IMPACT — A business administered or
conducted clearly secondary to the use as a residential dwelling and which
involves no customer, client or patient traffic, whether vehicular or
pedestrian, pickup, delivery or removal functions to or from the premises in
excess of those normally associated with residential use. The business must
satisfy the following requirements:
HOME OCCUPATION — A business conducted within a dwelling whereas
said business is not classified as a "home-based business, no-impact."
HOTEL — A business establishment inclusive of a building or portion
thereof designed or used for transient rental for sleeping purposes. All room
access is through interior hallways or courtyards. No cooking facilities,
other than a microwave or toaster oven, may be permitted in any sleeping
room. Accessory shops, restaurants, swimming pool, fitness center, spa,
services and conference centers catering to the general public can be
provided where conference rooms and banquet halls may also be available
The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of the
property and surrounding residential uses.
A.
The business shall employ no employees other than members residing
in the dwelling.
B.
There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling or
inventory of a substantial nature.
C.
There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including, but
not limited to parking signs or lights.
D.
No on-site parking of commercially identified vehicles shall be
permitted.
E.
The business activity may not use any equipment or process which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or electronic
interference, including interference with radio or television reception,
which is detectable in the neighborhood.
F.
The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage
discharge, in volumes or type, which is not normally associated with
residential use in the neighborhood.
G.
The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling and
may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area.
H.
I. The business may not involve any illegal activity.
§ 615-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-39
1:601
for rent. Supervision is provided in shifts 24 hours a day by an on-site
manager.
HVAC — Equipment used to heat, cool or ventilate a structure.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface area that prevents or retards the
infiltration of water into the soil and/or a hard-surface area that causes
water to run off the surface of the ground in greater quantities or at
an increased rate of flow from the conditions prior to development,
construction, building or installation.
IMPROVEMENTS FOR DEVELOPMENT (IMPROVEMENTS) — Those
physical additions, installations and changes required to render land
suitable for the use intended, including but not limited to grading, swales,
detention/retention basins, paving, curbing, street lights and signs, fire
hydrants, water mains, electric service, gas service, sanitary sewers, storm
drains, sidewalks, crosswalks, driveways, culverts, and street shade trees.
INFILL — Development of vacant or remnant lands within an existing
neighborhood.
INSTITUTIONAL USES — Places of worship, places of assembly, schools,
and other similar institutions of an educational, religious, charitable or
philanthropic nature.
INTERCONNECTION — The technical and practical link between the solar
generator and the grid providing electricity to the greater community.
KILOWATT (KW) — A unit of electrical power equal to 1,000 watts, which
constitutes the basic unit of electrical demand. A watt is a metric
measurement of power (not energy) and is the rate (not the duration) at
which electricity is used. 1,000 kW is equal to 1 megawatt (MW).
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any conditions), a lessee (if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner), or other persons having
a proprietary interest in the lot.
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT — An individual licensed and registered under
the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to engage in the practice of
landscape architecture.
LAUNDROMAT — A facility where patrons wash, dry or clean clothing or
other fabrics in machines operated by the patrons.
LIBRARY — A public or institutional facility for the use, but not sale, of
literary, musical, artistic or reference materials.
LIGHT MANUFACTURING — The processing and fabrication of certain
materials and products where no process involved will produce noises,
vibration, water pollution, fire hazard or noxious emissions which will
disturb or endanger neighboring properties. Light manufacturing includes,
but is not limited to, the production of the following goods: home
appliances, electrical instruments, office machines, precision instruments,
electronic devices, timepieces, jewelry, optical goods, musical instruments,
§ 615-39 ETNA CODE § 615-39
1:602
novelties, wood products, printed material, lithographic plates, type
composition, machine tools, dies and gauges, ceramics, apparel, lightweight
nonferrous metal castings, film processing, light sheet metal products,
plastic goods, pharmaceutical goods, food products, not including animal
slaughtering, curing or rendering of fats, and similar activities.
LIVERY — A stable or yard where horses are kept, generally where horse
owners pay a fee to keep their horses.
LOADING BERTH/SPACE — An on- or off-street area for the temporary
parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or
materials.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law, not including any part of a public right-ofway,
and to be used, developed or built upon as a unit. A site or parcel may
include more than one lot, but a lot cannot include more than one site.
LOT AREA — The total area of a lot measured on a horizontal plane
bounded by the front, side and rear lot lines of the lot.
A.
LOT, BUILDABLE AREA OF — That lot area in which the principal
structure may be located and which is bounded by the front, rear and
side building lines of the lot.
B.
LOT, CORNER — A lot situated at and abutting the intersection of two
or more streets where said lot has a minimum of two front lots and one
side lot but no rear lot.
C.
LOT COVERAGE — The percentage of the total area of a lot or lots
occupied by buildings/structures but not including any permanently
uncovered paved areas, porches, patios or steps.
D.
LOT DEPTH — The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line
and the rear lot line measured within the lot boundaries.
E.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot with only one frontage
on a street.
F.
G. LOT LINE — A line that bounds a lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT — That lot line which extends along a private or
public street.
H.
LOT LINE, REAR — That lot line which is most distant from and is most
nearly parallel to the front lot line, except for corner lots and threesided
lots, which have no rear lot line.
I.
LOT LINE, SIDE — The lot line which is not a front lot line or rear lot
line.
J.
LOT, THROUGH — A double frontage lot, the front lot line and rear lot
lines of which abut streets, alleys or ways.
K.
§ 615-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-39
1:603
LOT, NONCONFORMING — A lot consisting entirely of a tract of land that:
MAILED NOTICE — Notice given by a municipality by First Class Mail of the
time and place of a public hearing and the particular nature of the matter
to be considered at the hearing.
MANUFACTURING, PROCESSING, PRODUCING OR FABRICATING
OPERATION — The mechanical or chemical transformation of raw materials
or substances into new products or other raw materials, including the
assembling of component parts, the manufacturing of products and the
blending of materials into finished or institutional-finished products not
otherwise defined as light manufacturing.
MARINA — A business establishment for secure mooring of recreational
boats, including facilities for storage and repair of boats and sale of boating
supplies and fuel, for use by the owner or resident of the lot, and those other
than the owner or resident of the lot, upon which the facility is located. A
marina may include a restaurant and/or boat and motor sales store.
MARKET GARDEN — A garden or orchard where food is grown primarily to
be sold for profitable or nonprofitable charitable purposes and may be sold
directly to consumers, restaurants or stores.
MEDICAL OFFICE — A building or structure where one or more licensed
medical professionals provide diagnostic services, medical, dental and/or
psychiatric services and/or treatment diagnosis and treatment to the
general public without overnight accommodation and may include uses
such as reception areas, waiting areas, consultation rooms, x-ray and a
dispensary, providing that all such uses shall have access only from the
interior of the building or structure. The clinic generally operates on an
appointment basis and does not take walk-in patients. It has relatively
low pedestrian or customer traffic throughout the year Any facility for
methadone treatment or other narcotic treatment programs approved by
the Pennsylvania Department of Health shall not be considered a medical
office use.
MIXED NONRESIDENTIAL/RESIDENTIAL — A lot or building on or in
which various land uses are combined as an integrated development. A
"single site" may include contiguous but unconsolidated lots.
LOT WIDTH — The distance between the side lot lines measured along
the front building line of the lot.
L.
Has less than the prescribed minimum lot size, width, depth or any
combination thereof, for the district in which it is located.
A.
Is shown by a recorded plat or deed to have been owned separately and
individually from adjoining tracts of land at a time when the creation
of a lot of such size, width, depth, or any combination thereof, at such
location would not have been prohibited by any zoning ordinance.
B.
Has remained in separate and individual ownership from adjoining
tracts of land continuously during the entire time that the creation of
such lot has been prohibited by the applicable zoning ordinance.
C.
§ 615-39 ETNA CODE § 615-39
1:604
MODULE — A module is the smallest protected assembly of interconnected
PV cells.
MONOPOLE — A WCF or site which consists of a single pole structure,
designed and erected on the ground or on top of a structure, to support
communications antennas and connecting appurtenances.
MOTEL — A business establishment inclusive of a building or group of
buildings, whether detached or in connected units, used as individual
sleeping units with separate exterior entrances, open year-round and
designed for temporary occupancy, primarily for transient automobile
travelers. Structures shall provide for accessory off-street parking areas.
Supervision is provided in shifts by 24 hours on-site management.
MUNICIPAL BUILDING — Any building, structure or lot used by the
Borough, a municipal-related use or a municipal authority/commission
created by the Borough. These uses shall include administrative facilities
and public works facilities.
NET METERING AGREEMENT — An agreement with a local electric utility
that allows customers to receive a credit for surplus electricity generated
by certain renewable energy systems.
NONCOMMERCIAL GREENHOUSE — A facility, not associated with a
business establishment, whose roof and sides are made largely of glass or
other transparent or translucent material and in which the temperature and
humidity can be regulated for the cultivation of delicate or out-of-season
plants.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or part of a structure
manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable use or extent of
use provisions of this chapter of Etna Borough or amendment heretofore
or hereafter enacted, where such structure lawfully existed prior to the
enactment of such ordinance or amendment or prior to the application of
such ordinance or amendment to its location by reason of annexation. Such
nonconforming structures include, but are not limited to, nonconforming
signs.
NONCONFORMING USE — See "use, nonconforming."
NON-TOWER WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (NON-TOWER
WCF) — All non-tower wireless communications facilities, including but
not limited to antennas and related equipment. Non-tower WCF shall not
include support structures for antennas or any related equipment that is
mounted to the ground or at ground level.
NUCLEUS COLONY — A smaller hive, sometimes in a smaller box,
consisting of bees in all stages of development, as well as food, a laying
queen, and enough workers to cover three to five combs.
OBSCENE MATERIALS — Any literature, book, magazine, pamphlet,
newspaper, story paper, paper, comic book, writing, drawing, photograph,
figure, image, motion picture, sound recording, article, instrument, or any
other written, visual media or printed matter which depicts or describes
in a patently offensive manner sexual conduct, sexual excitement or
§ 615-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-39
1:605
sadomasochistic abuse or (in the case of articles or instruments) is designed
or intended for use in achieving artificial sexual stimulation; and which,
taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest; and taken as a whole,
does not have serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value.
OBSTRUCTION — Any structure, growth or other object, including a mobile
object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth by this chapter.
OCCUPANCY — The physical possession upon, on or within any lot or
structure for a use.
OCCUPANCY PERMIT — The written authorization issued by the Borough
of Etna's Zoning Officer for use of land or buildings.
OUTDOOR ADVERTISING — Any sign, billboard, statuary or poster that
directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment not
exclusively related to the premises where such sign is located or to which it
is affixed.
OWNER — The person or persons having the right of legal title to, beneficial
interest in or a contractual right to purchase a lot or parcel.
PARCEL — Any designated piece or tract of land located in the Borough
established by a plat or otherwise as permitted by law.
PARKING LOT OR FACILITY, PUBLIC — A public garage or a paved, open
off-street area other than a driveway or street with adequate means of
access and used exclusively for the parking of vehicles of occupants or
visitors of the lot; however, a driveway serving a single-family dwelling or
which is for the exclusive use of an individual dwelling unit in a residential
building may be used as parking area.
PARKING LOT, PRIVATE — A privately owned lot specifically used for the
parking of vehicles associated with an institutional use.
PARKING SPACE — An area of land reserved within a dedicated street rightof-
way, public garage or a parking lot for the parking or storage of one
motorized vehicle.
PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET — An area wholly outside any public rightof-
way, constructed to accommodate the storage of a vehicle as required by
this chapter and which is connected to a public street by a driveway.
PARKING SPACE, ON-STREET — An area wholly within a public street
right-of-way constructed to accommodate the storage of a vehicle as
required by this chapter.
PEDESTRIAN-ORIENTED — Development which is designed with a primary
emphasis on the street sidewalk and on pedestrian access to the site and
building, rather than on vehicle access and parking areas.
PENNSYLVANIA MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE (MPC) — The
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended, which is
an Act that empowers municipalities to plan their growth and development
as well as to govern the same by zoning, subdivision and land development
§ 615-39 ETNA CODE § 615-39
1:606
ordinances, by official maps, to promote conservation of energy; to establish
planning commissions, planning departments and zoning hearing boards.
PERFORMANCE SECURITY — A financial guaranty to ensure that all
improvements, facilities or work requested by this chapter will be
completed in compliance with the ordinance and the approved plans and
specifications of a development, including but not limited to a performance
bond, line of credit or escrow account in the amount of 110% of the cost of
the facilities or improvements.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD — A criterion established to control noise,
odor, smoke, toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards,
glare, heat or solid waste generated by or inherent in uses of land or
buildings.
PERMITTED USE — See "use, permitted by right."
PERSON — An individual(s), partnership(s), copartnership(s),
association(s), corporation(s), limited liability company(ies), limited liability
partnership(s), and any and all other entities.
PERSONAL SERVICES — A business enterprise conducted for gain which
primarily offers services to the general public, such as shoe repair, valet
service, watch repairing, barbershop, beauty parlors and related activities.
A business establishment that generally operates on a first-come, first-serve
basis and has relatively high pedestrian or customer traffic throughout
the year, including utility payment centers, advertising agencies,
manufacturing representatives, personnel agencies, travel and ticket
agencies and the like.
PHARMACY — A retail store which primarily sells prescription drugs,
patent medicines and surgical and sickroom supplies. A pharmacy may be
within a retail establishment.
PHOTOVOLTAIC (PV) — A semiconductor-based device that converts light
directly into electricity.
PLACE OF ASSEMBLY — A building and/or lot that is designed for the
assembly or collection of persons, for civic, political, educational or social
purposes, and where recreation, amusement or dining may occur as
accessory activities. A place of assembly does not include a private club.
PLACE OF WORSHIP — A building use and/or lot where people regularly
observe, practice or participate in religious or spiritual services, meetings
and/or activities.
PLAN — A survey of a lot upon which is shown the location of existing and/
or proposed structures; existing contours and proposed grading; location
and dimensions of yards; proposals for the disposition of sanitary waste
and stormwater; indications of zoning compliance; name of applicant and
landowner; area location map; dates of preparation and revisions; and
evidence of preparation by a registered architect, landscape architect or
engineer.
§ 615-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-39
1:607
PLANNED MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT — An area of land, controlled by
a landowner, to be developed as a single entity for a combination of
residential and nonresidential uses, the development plan for which does
not correspond in lot size, bulk, type of dwelling, or use, density or intensity,
lot coverage and required open space to the regulations established in any
one district created, from time to time, under the provisions of a municipal
zoning ordinance.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of land, controlled by
a landowner, to be developed as a single entity for a number of dwelling
units, or combination of residential uses with or without supporting
nonresidential uses, the development plan for which does not correspond
in lot size, bulk, type of dwelling, or use, density or intensity, lot coverage
and required open space to the regulations established in any one district
created, from time to time, under the provisions of a municipal zoning
ordinance.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the Borough of
Etna.
PLAT — The map or plan of a subdivision or land development, whether
preliminary or final.
PLAT, FINAL — The final map of the land development or subdivision that is
submitted for community approval and which, if approved, is filed with the
County Recorder of Deeds.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY — A preliminary map of the proposed land
development or subdivision that is submitted for Borough consideration.
PORCH — A covered entrance to a building or structure which may or may
not be enclosed and which projects out from the main wall of such building
or structure and has a separate roof or an integral roof with the principal
building or structure to which it is attached.
PREDATORY BIRD — An owl, hawk, falcon, eagle, or similar bird that feeds
principally by catching living prey.
PRINCIPAL USE — See "use, principal."
PRIVATE — Belonging to or concerning an individual person, company or
interest independent from federal, state or local government agency.
PROFESSIONAL OR BUSINESS OFFICES — A business establishment that
serves clients and operates on an appointment basis, with relatively low
pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including offices of recognized professionals
such as lawyers, architects, engineers, real estate brokers, insurance
agents and others who, through training, are qualified to perform services
of a professional nature and other offices used primarily for accounting,
corresponding, research, editing or other administrative functions, but not
including banks or other financial institutions; or an office of a
governmental agency, social service organization, notary, public or private
utility, political organization or the like, not including a municipal facility.
§ 615-39 ETNA CODE § 615-39
1:608
PUBLIC — Owned, operated or controlled by a government agency, federal,
state or local.
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by
Council, the Planning Commission or the Zoning Hearing Board intended to
inform and obtain public comment prior to taking action in accordance with
this chapter.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS — All streets, walkways, gutters, curbs, sewers,
waterlines and other utilities or related facilities to be dedicated to or
maintained by the public.
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of July
3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84), known as the "Sunshine Act."93
PUBLIC NOTICE — A notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. Such notice
shall state the time and place of the public hearing and the particular nature
of the matter to be considered at the public hearing. The first publication
shall be not more than 30 days and the second not less than seven days from
the date of the public hearing.
PUBLIC PARK, RECREATION AREA, PLAYGROUND — Swimming pools,
skating rinks, recreational centers and other recreational areas and
facilities (excluding golf courses) owned and/or operated by the Borough
or other public-sector entity. This also includes areas of such land suitable
for passive stormwater areas and/or the development of specific active
recreation facilities or leisure-time activities, that may or may not be of a
formal nature and performed with others, requiring equipment and taking
place at prescribed places, sites or fields, including but not limited to
baseball fields, soccer fields, football fields, tennis, basketball and other
court games, hockey facilities, multipurpose fields and community
swimming pools and attendant facilities.
PUBLIC UTILITY BUILDING — A building, structure or portion of a lot,
which under public franchise or other lawful relationship provides the
public with transmission and communications services, electric distribution
or other similar facilities or services.
REDEVELOPMENT — The act of improving by renewing and restoring
the act or process of rehabilitating or rejuvenating a blighted area or
accommodating new development within the context of existing streets and
buildings.
RELATED EQUIPMENT — Any piece of equipment related to, incidental to
or necessary for, the operation of a tower-based WCF or non-tower WCF. By
way of illustration, not limitation, "related equipment" includes generators
and base stations.
REPLACEMENT — The act of removing an existing building/structure and
constructing a new building/structure.
93.Editor's Note: See the Sunshine Act, 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq.
§ 615-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-39
1:609
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT ESTABLISHMENT — A building or group
of buildings, including incubator facilities, but not medical laboratories,
used primarily for applied and developmental research, where product
testing may be an integral part of the operation and goods or products
may be manufactured solely when necessary for testing, evaluation, and
test marketing. This usage excludes the use of toxic, biological, corrosive,
flammable, carcinogenic, or explosive materials, chemicals, liquids, gases
or solids.
RESTAURANT, SIT-DOWN — A business establishment whose principal
business is the sale of food and/or beverages to customers in a ready-toconsume
state and whose principal method of operation includes one or
both of the following characteristics: customers, normally provided with
an individual menu, are served their foods and beverages by a restaurant
employee at the same table or counter at which food and beverages are
consumed; or a cafeteria-type operation where food and beverages
generally are consumed within the restaurant building.
RESTAURANT, TAKE-OUT — A business establishment that offers quick
food service for consumption on or off the premises which is accomplished
through a limited menu of items already prepared and held for service or
prepared, fired or grilled quickly or heated in a device such as a microwave
oven. Orders are not generally taken at the customer's table, and food is
generally served in disposable wrapping or containers.
RETAIL, LARGE-SCALE — Any business establishment not otherwise
specifically defined in this article that sells or rents commodities and/
or services on the premises directly to the general public, available for
immediate purchase and removal, but not including the manufacturing or
processing of any products with a gross floor area of 5,000 square feet
or greater but less than 12,000 square feet. This use may not include
wholesaling, manufacturing or processing of goods.
RETAIL, SMALL-SCALE — Any business establishment not otherwise
specifically defined in this article that sells or rents commodities and/
or services on the premises directly to the general public, available for
immediate purchase and removal, but not including the manufacturing or
processing of any products with a gross floor area less than 5,000 square
feet. This use may not include wholesaling, manufacturing or processing of
goods.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The surface of and space above and below any real
property in the Borough in which the Borough has a regulatory interest or
interest as a trustee for the public, as such interests now or hereafter exist,
including but not limited to all streets, highways, avenues, roads, alleys,
sidewalks, tunnels, viaducts, bridges, skyways, or any other public place,
area or property under the control of the Borough, and any unrestricted
public or utility easements established, dedicated, platted, improved or
devoted for utility purposes, but excluding lands other than streets that
are owned by the Borough. The phrase "in the right(s)-of-way" means in,
on, over, along, above and/or under the right(s)-of-way. For the purpose
of this chapter, ROW shall include streets and roads owned by Allegheny
§ 615-39 ETNA CODE § 615-39
1:610
County, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and any other Pennsylvania
state agencies.
RIVERBOAT GAMBLING — A boat, ferry, barge or similar structure licensed
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania on which gambling games are
allowed. This includes land-based facilities or uses which are required for
access to riverboat gambling.
ROOFLINE — The top ridge of the roof or the top of the parapet, whichever
forms the top line of the building silhouette.
SCHOOL, ACADEMIC — A place of instruction operated by a public, private,
nonprofit or religious organization, having regular sessions, with regularly
employed instructors and meeting all of the requirements of the
Pennsylvania Department of Education for providing primary, secondary,
post-secondary, undergraduate and/or graduate collegiate education. This
definition shall not include privately operated, for-profit trade, vocation,
avocation or business schools.
SCHOOL, COMMERCIAL/OTHER — A specialized instructional
establishment that provides on-site training of business, commercial,
medical and/or trade skills, such as accounting, data processing, computer
repair, vocational trades and/or equipment usage.
SETBACK — The minimum distance from a lot line required by the chapter
where a building or structure may be built.
SETBACK (LINE), FRONT — The line extending the full width of the lot and
situated at the minimum dimension defined from a front lot line.
SETBACK (LINE), REAR — The line extending the full width of the lot and
situated at the minimum dimension defined from a rear lot line.
SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS — An establishment, club, tap room,
restaurant, theater or hall which features products for sale or
entertainment that is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
sexual conduct or sexually explicit nudity such as an adult book and video
store or adult entertainment nightclub.
SIDE YARD — The line extending the full width of the lot and situated at the
minimum dimension defined from a side lot line.
SIDEWALK CAFE — An extension of the services of an existing
establishment, including but not limited to serving food and beverages
for consumption within an existing building, to the extent that food and
beverages are permitted to be served and consumed at tables placed on the
public sidewalk adjacent to and within the confines of the frontage of that
portion of the building in which the establishment is situated. A sidewalk
cafe contains readily removable tables and chairs, is enclosed by rope and
stanchion unless some other barrier system is approved by the Borough as
an architectural design element, and shall be otherwise open to the air.
SIGN — Any letter, word, model, banner, flag, device, structure,
representation or device for visual communication that is used for the
§ 615-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-39
1:611
purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of the public,
including the following types:
SIMILAR ANIMAL — Any farm animal that is similar to other animals
listed in a particular category of permitted animals with respect to impacts
on nearby properties, including noise, odors, safety hazards, and other
nuisances.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A dwelling unit and lot designed and
intended to be occupied by one family that is not attached to another
dwelling unit.
SITE — A parcel of land located in the Borough, established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law, which is the subject of an application for
development. A site may include more than one lot.
ADA SIGNS — Any sign needed for a facility or building to achieve
compliance with the requirements of the American with Disabilities Act.
A.
BULLETIN BOARD — A nonelectronic structure constructed with flat
face(s), used for posting notices.
B.
CANOPY — Any rigid structure, made of cloth, metal or other materials,
with the frame attached to a building and generally supported by the
ground, extending over areas intended for pedestrian traffic, and the
structure is primarily for purposes of shelter rather than advertising.
C.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — A sign directing traffic but bearing no
advertising matter.
D.
FLAG — A piece of cloth or bunting varying in size, color and design,
used as a symbol, sign, signal, emblem or advertisement.
E.
GROUND (MONUMENT) SIGN — Any sign supported by uprights or
braces placed upon the ground and not attached to any building or the
structure, having no more than two faces.
F.
HOME OCCUPATION SIGN — A sign permitted in association with an
occupation conducted on the premises within a dwelling unit occupied
by the operator of the business.
G.
ILLUMINATED SIGN — Any sign which has characters, letters, figures,
designs or outlines illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes as a
part of the sign proper.
H.
MARQUEE — Any permanent roof-like structure extending from the
wall of a building but not supported by the ground, constructed of
durable material such as metal or glass, extending over areas intended
for pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic, and the structure is primarily for
purposes of shelter rather than advertising.
I.
POLE/PYLON SIGN — A freestanding sign erected on a lot on a pole or
pylon, the bottom edge of which is high enough to provide visibility for
motorists and allow for safe pedestrian circulation underneath it.
J.
§ 615-39 ETNA CODE § 615-39
1:612
SITE AREA — The total area of the lot or lots comprising a site.
SITE PLAN — A plan prepared by a registered surveyor, engineer, landscape
architect or architect for a use authorized by right which contains the
following unless otherwise defined by Allegheny County:
SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC (PV) RELATED EQUIPMENT — Items including a
solar photovoltaic cell, panel or array, lines, mounting brackets, framing and
foundations used for or intended to be used for collection of solar energy.
SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC (PV) SYSTEM — A solar collection system
consisting of one or more building- and/or ground-mounted systems, solar
A. Name of applicant and landowner;
B. Name of development, if any;
Evidence of preparation by a licensed architect, landscape architect or
engineer;
C.
D. Graphic and written scale;
E. North arrow;
F. Dates of preparation and revision of site plan;
G. A site location map;
A site plan drawn to no greater than one-hundred-foot scale, upon
which is delineated and clearly identified the location, extent and area
in acres, if applicable, of the following:
(1) Property lines for the site and adjacent parcels;
(2) Site area;
(3) Proposed buffer yards;
Location and dimensions of existing and proposed public and
private roads, streets, driveways, walks and paths;
(4)
Existing and proposed structures with proposed site density and
approximate height of structures indicated for each proposed type
of structure and use;
(5)
(6) Proposed location and dimensions of all yards and open spaces;
(7) Existing contours and proposed grading plan;
(8) General proposals for the disposition of stormwater runoff;
Proposals for the disposition of sanitary wastes and the provision
of water supplies;
(9)
All applicable areas or uses regulated or mandated by this chapter,
including but not limited to off-street parking exterior lighting,
signs and outdoor storage.
(10)
H.
§ 615-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-39
1:613
photovoltaic cells, panels or arrays and solar-related equipment that rely
upon solar radiation as an energy source for collection, inversion, storage
and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation. A solar PV system
is a generation system with a nameplate capacity of not greater than
50 kilowatts if installed at a residential service or not larger than 3,000
kilowatts at other customer service locations and does not produce excess
on-site energy greater than currently permitted by Pennsylvania Public
Utility Commission guidelines.
SOLAR-BASED ARCHITECTURAL ELEMENT — Structural/architectural
element that provides protection from weather that includes awnings,
canopies, porches or sunshades and that is constructed with the primary
covering consisting of solar PV modules and may or may not include
additional solar PV related equipment.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — See "use by special exception."
STEALTH TECHNOLOGY — Camouflaging methods applied to wireless
communications towers, antennas and other facilities which render them
more visually appealing or blend the proposed facility into the existing
structure or visual backdrop in such a manner as to render it minimally
visible to the casual observer. Such methods include, but are not limited
to, architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, building-mounted
antennas painted to match the existing structure and facilities constructed
to resemble trees, shrubs and light poles.
STORAGE BUILDING FOR RETAIL ON PREMISES — A structure for the
storage of goods directly related to a retail use of the lot.
STORAGE FIRM — A building or group of buildings in a controlled access
and fenced compound that contains various sizes of individual,
compartmentalized and controlled access stalls and/or lockers leased to the
general public for a specified period of time for the dead storage of personal
property. No sales, service or repair activities other than the rental of dead
storage units are permitted on the premises.
STREET — A street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, parkway,
lane, alley, viaduct and any other ways, whether public or private, used or
intended to be used by vehicular traffic or pedestrians.
STREET GRADE — The officially established grade of the street upon which
a lot fronts or, in its absence, the established grade of the other streets upon
which the lot abuts, at the midpoint of the frontage of the lot thereon. If
there is no officially established grade, the existing grade of the street at
such midpoint shall be taken as the street grade.
STREET LINE — The right-of-way line of a street.
STREET WALL — A general reference as to how and where the parts of
buildings that face the street line up to define the perceived boundaries of
public and private space.
STREET WIDTH — The distance between street lines measured at right
angles to the center line of the street.
§ 615-39 ETNA CODE § 615-39
1:614
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water.
STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY — A subordinate structure whereas the use and
scale of which is incidental to that of the principal (commonly referred to as
the "main") structure of the subject lot.
SUBSTANTIALLY CHANGE — (1) Any increase in the height of a wireless
support structure by more than 10% or by the height of one additional
antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to
exceed 20 feet, whichever is greater, except that the mounting of the
proposed wireless communications facility may exceed the size limits set
forth in the Etna Borough Zoning Code or the WBCA if necessary to avoid
interference with existing antennas; or (2) any further increase in the height
of a wireless support structure which has already been extended by more
than 10% of its originally approved height or by the height of one additional
antenna array.
TAP ROOM — A business establishment which provides on-site alcoholic
beverage sales for drinking on the premises, without kitchen facilities,
where live entertainment (non-sexually-oriented business or establishment)
may also be provided, and where minors are not admitted unless
accompanied by a parent or guardian.
TATTOO SHOP — A business establishment that includes placing of designs
or other marks upon or under the skin of any person, using ink or other
substances that result in the permanent coloration or scarification of the
skin by means of the use of needles or other instrument designed to contact
or puncture the skin; and/or the creation of an opening in the body of a
person for the purpose of inserting jewelry or other decoration.
TEMPORARY USE — See "use, temporary."
TERMINAL FACILITY — A parcel used for a centralized storage of trucks
or where trucks are congregated at a warehouse or other loading facility to
load and unload products.
THEATER — A business establishment, other than an adult movie theater
or adult movie house, inside a completely enclosed building devoted to
showing pictures and/or live dramatic or musical performances on a paid
admission basis. A theater usually contains an auditorium in addition to
other performance-related facilities. This term shall not refer to a place of
assembly.
TOWER, NONCOMMUNICATIONS — Any ground-mounted pole, spire,
structure, or combination thereof, including supporting lines, cables, wires,
braces or masts, not intended for the primary purpose of mounting a
communications antenna or similar apparatus above ground.
TOWER-BASED WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (TOWERBASED
WCF) — Any structure that is used for the purpose of supporting
one or more antennas, including but not limited to self-supporting lattice
towers, guy towers and monopoles, utility poles and light poles. DAS hub
facilities are considered to be tower-based WCFs.
§ 615-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-39
1:615
TOWNHOUSE — A building which contains at least three but no more than
eight dwelling units, each of which are separated from the adjoining unit
or units by a continuous, common wall extending from the basement to the
roof, each unit having independent access directly to the outside and having
no other units above or below.
TRACKING SYSTEM — A number of photovoltaic modules mounted such
that they track the movement of the sun across the sky to maximize energy
production, either with a single-axis or dual-axis mechanism.
TRANSPARENCY — The degree to which something is transparent.
TRANSPARENT — The condition/state of being clear, unobstructed by
signage, interior graphic elements, reflective coating, translucent or
textured finish, racking or any type of fixed furniture, that can be seen
through from both the interior and exterior of the structure.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — A residential building that is subdivided along
the common vertical walls of each dwelling unit, designed exclusively for
occupancy by two families living independently of each other, whereas each
dwelling unit has with a separate entrance directly to the outside.
UNDEVELOPED LAND — Any lot or portion of a lot which has not been
graded, improved or prepared for the construction of a building structure
or improvement.
UNREGULATED YARD AREA — Area not within a building and not in a
defined setback or yard area.
URBAN AGRICULTURE — The activities that include the growing,
processing marketing distribution, and consumption of food and other
products through growing plants and raising animals in and around an
urban area. Such activities can be public, private or commercial, and can
exist in a variety of forms, including community gardens, market gardens,
and backyard animal keeping. When done successfully, these activities also
produce environmental, health, social, and economic effects that can
positively impact a community and increase its resilience.
USE — An activity, business or purpose for which any lot or structure is
utilized.
USE, ACCESSORY — A use on the same lot with and of a nature
customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use.
A.
USE, AUTHORIZED — Any principal use or accessory use allowed by
this chapter as a permitted use by right, conditional use, use by planned
development, or use by special exception.
B.
USE BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION — An authorized use which may be
granted only by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with express
standards and criteria and pursuant to the provisions associated with
special exceptions in Articles VI and IX of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. §§ 10601 et seq. and 10901 et seq.
C.
§ 615-39 ETNA CODE § 615-39
1:616
VALUE-ADDED PRODUCT — A product created by a change in the physical
state or form of a primary product that enhances its value as demonstrated
through a business plan, or the physical segregation of an agricultural
commodity or product in a manner that results in the enhancement of the
value of the commodity or product.
VARIANCE — Relief granted pursuant to the provisions of Articles VI and IX
of the MPC.
WAREHOUSE — A building or structure used for the storage and handling
of goods, materials, freight, or merchandise awaiting sale on another lot
or location, but not including the maintenance or fueling of commercial
vehicles. Warehousing which is incidental to retail sales and which does not
constitute in excess of 30% of the total floor area of the retail establishment
shall be excluded from this definition. Incidental sales may occur on the lot.
WBCA — Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act (53 P.S.
§ 11702.1 et seq.).
WHOLESALE BUSINESS — A business establishment primarily engaged in
selling merchandise, dry goods, and food stuffs to retailers, institutional,
commercial or professional business customers or other wholesalers not to
the general public. The activities may include the merchandise warehousing
and distribution.
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS) — A device which converts
wind energy to mechanical or electrical energy.
WIND ROTOR — The blades, plus hub to which the blades are attached, that
are used to capture wind for purpose of energy conversion. The wind rotor
USE, CONDITIONAL — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
by the Borough Council upon satisfaction of all criteria enumerated in
Part III of this chapter and pursuant to the provisions associated with
conditional use in Article VI of the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10601 et seq.
D.
USE, NONCONFORMING — A use, whether of land or of structure,
which does not comply with the applicable use provisions in this
chapter or an amendment hereafter enacted, where such use was
lawfully in existence prior to the enactment of this chapter or
amendment.
E.
USE PERMITTED BY RIGHT — Any use that does not require a
conditional use approved by Council or special exception approved by
the Zoning Hearing Board before a zoning permit is granted by the
Zoning Officer.
F.
USE, PRINCIPAL — The main purpose or activity for which a lot is used
or for which a structure or part of a structure or lot is used.
G.
USE, TEMPORARY — A use requiring utilities, established for more
than seven but less than 100 consecutive days, with the intent to
discontinue upon the expiration of a specified time period.
H.
§ 615-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-39
1:617
is used generally on a pole or tower and along with other generating and
electrical storage equipment forms a wind energy conversion system.
WIRELESS — Transmissions through the airwaves, including, but not
limited to, infrared line of sight, cellular, PCS, microwave, satellite or radio
signals.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (WCF) — The antennas, nodes,
control boxes, towers, poles, conduits, ducts, pedestals, electronics and
other equipment used for the purpose of transmitting, receiving,
distributing, providing or accommodating wireless communications
services.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY APPLICANT (WCF APPLICANT)
— Any person that applies for a wireless communications facility building
permit, zoning approval and/or permission to use the public right-of-way
(ROW) or other Borough-owned land or property.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A freestanding structure, such as
a tower-based wireless communications facility or any other support
structure that could support the placement or installation of a wireless
communications facility if approved by the Borough.
YARD — A required open space unoccupied and unobstructed by any
principal structure or portion of a principal structure; however, accessory
structures, parking areas and driveways are permitted in yards in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
ZONE — A geographical area with boundaries that includes surface areas
as indicated on the Zoning Map.
ZONING APPROVAL — Approval under the provisions of this chapter,
certifying that an application for development or application for occupancy
permit has fulfilled the requirements of this chapter.
FRONT YARD — A yard extending across the full lot width and abutting
the front lot line. The required minimum depth measurement of the
front yard shall be the horizontal distance between the front lot line and
a line parallel thereto at a distance from the front lot line in accordance
with the yard requirements set forth in each district in this chapter.
A.
REAR YARD — A yard extending between the side yards of the lot and
abutting the rear lot line. The required minimum depth measurement
of the rear yard shall be the horizontal distance between the rear lot
line and a line parallel thereto at a distance from the rear lot line in
accordance with the yard requirements set forth for each district in this
chapter.
B.
SIDE YARD — A yard abutting a side lot line, extending between the
rear line of the front yard and the rear lot line. The required minimum
width measurement of the side yard shall be the horizontal distance
between the side lot line and a line parallel thereto at a distance from
the side lot line in accordance with the yard requirements set forth for
each district in this chapter.
C.
§ 615-39 ETNA CODE § 615-39
1:618
ZONING HEARING BOARD — A board appointed by Council to examine
appeals for relief from strict conformance to application of this chapter,
to consider uses by special exceptions and to hear testimony regarding
the validity of any regulations upon development in the Borough, and to
perform those other functions which this chapter directs it to perform.
ZONING MAP OFFICIAL — The official map of the Borough that indicates
the districts and other relevant information thereon and shall be a part of
this chapter by reference.
ZONING OFFICER — The administrative officer appointed by Council who
shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter in accordance
with its literal terms. The Zoning Officer shall have all the powers and be
subject to all the provisions set forth in the MPC with respect to zoning
officers.
§ 615-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-39
1:619

ARTICLE XIII
Definitions for Land Uses in Other Municipalities
§ 615-40. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALL OTHER NONRESIDENTIAL USES — Any land use nonresidential in
nature other than defined by this chapter or the Zoning Ordinances of the
Boroughs of Millvale and/or Etna.
AMUSEMENT ARCADE — Any business establishment where amusement
devices are located.
AUTO WRECKING/VEHICLE SALVAGE YARD — A lot used for the storage of
any scrap material or junk, including without limitation appliances, fixtures,
nonworking automobiles, automobile parts, machines or machinery parts,
equipment, containers and building materials.
BOARDINGHOUSE — A building arranged or used for overnight lodging
by three or more persons, but not exceeding 10 persons, with or without
meals, for compensation by transient residents arriving upon their own
accord and not for the purposes as a sexually oriented business. Overnight
loading occurs in individual sleeping rooms with no cooking facilities. A
boardinghouse may include common areas, restroom facilities, and a
common kitchen available for use by residents.
CLINIC, LARGE-SCALE — An establishment, whether public or private,
principally engaged in providing services for health maintenance, diagnosis
or treatment of human diseases, pain, injury, or physical condition that
include diagnostic treatment center, rehabilitation center, extended care
center, nursing home, inter-mediate care facility, life care facility, outpatient
laboratory, or central services facility serving one or more such institutions.
Establishment includes tuberculosis facilities, psychiatric facilities,
rehabilitation facilities, skilled nursing facilities, kidney disease treatment
centers, intermediate care facilities, ambulatory surgical facilities and any
facility for methadone treatment, other narcotic or similar treatment
programs approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Health and may be
both for profit and nonprofit, and including those operated by an agency of
the state or local government.
GROUP CARE FACILITY — A premises providing shelter, counseling, and
other rehabilitative services in a family-like environment for more than nine
but fewer than 15 residents, plus such minimum supervisory personnel as
may be required to meet standards of the licensing agency. A group care
facility may provide common areas and a common kitchen. Residents may
not be legally related to the facility operators or supervisors and, by reason
of mental or physical disability, chemical or alcohol dependency, family or
school adjustment problems, or past correctional offenses require a minimal
level of supervision but do not require medical or nursing care or general
supervision. A group care facility must be licensed and/or approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Human Services.
§ 615-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 615-40
1:621
HOSPITAL — Building(s) used for the short-term care of patients suffering
from physical or mental illnesses, but not including narcotics addiction or
those found to be criminally insane, and which may or may not be publicly
or privately operated.
LAUNDRY AND/OR DRY-CLEANING PLANT — A business establishment for
receiving, pickup and pressing of garments and where cleaning or drying
operations are conducted.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel of land under single ownership containing
two or more mobile home lots improved with the necessary facilities and
services for the placement of mobile homes for nontransient use.
PERSONAL CARE BOARDINGHOME — Any premises in which food, shelter
and personal assistance or home supervision are provided for a period
exceeding 24 hours for four or more adults who are not relatives of the
operator, who do not require the services in or of a licensed long-term care
facility but who do require assistance or supervision in such matters as
dressing, bathing, diet, financial management, evacuation of a residence in
the event of an emergency or medication prescribed for self-administration.
A personal care boardinghome may include common area, a common
kitchen with common dining area available for use by residents.
PLANNED MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT — An area of land, controlled by
a landowner, to be developed as a single entity for a combination of
residential and nonresidential uses, the development plan for which does
not correspond in lot size, bulk, type of dwelling, or use, density or intensity,
lot coverage and required open space to the regulations established in any
one district created, from time to time, under the provisions of a municipal
zoning ordinance.
PRINTING, PUBLICATIONS AND ENGRAVING PLANTS — A business
establishment that provides duplicating services using blueprinting,
engraving or offset printing processes on paper, fabric or other materials
and includes the collating and binding of books, booklets, reports and
pamphlets, but does not provide self-serve facilities or accommodate walk-in
trade. Duplicating services provided by photocopying or like technological
processes are not included and are considered personal and professional
services.
SCRAPYARD — A lot used for the storage of any scrap material or junk,
including without limitation appliances, fixtures, nonworking automobiles,
automobile parts, machines or machinery parts, equipment, containers and
building materials.
SEWAGE TREATMENT FACILITY — Any designed for the collection,
removal, treatment and disposal of waterborne sewerage generated within
a given service area.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — An establishment, club, tap room,
restaurant, theater or hall which features products for sale or
entertainment that is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
sexual conduct or sexually explicit nudity such as an adult book and video
store or adult entertainment nightclub.
§ 615-40 ETNA CODE § 615-40
1:622
Appendix
Chapter A620
ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
§ A620-1. Franchise to the Duquesne Light Company.
Consent be and the same is hereby granted to the Duquesne Light Company,
its successors and assigns, hereinafter referred to as "Company," to enter
upon and to construct, erect, maintain, repair, replace, use and operate
poles, wires, cables, conduits, ducts, crossarms, manholes, and all devices
and appurtenances thereto belonging, hereinafter referred to as "facilities,"
whether underground or overhead, along, on, upon, over, under and
through the streets, roads, highways, lanes and alleys of the present or
future limits of the Borough of Etna, hereinafter sometimes referred to as
"Borough," from time to time, for the purpose of conducting electricity in
and through the said Borough, and for the purpose of furnishing light, heat
and power, or any of them, by means of electricity, to individuals, firms,
partnerships and corporations in said Borough; and to use the facilities of
other companies, and to permit other companies that possess authority to
operate within the said Borough to use its facilities, located in such streets,
roads, highways, lanes and alleys upon such arrangements as the Company
and such other companies may agree.94
§ A620-2. Restrictions on construction and erection of facilities;
location of poles.
In constructing and erecting the said facilities along, on, upon, over, under
and through said streets, roads, highways, lanes and alleys, within said
Borough, only such portion of said streets, roads, highways, lanes and alleys
shall be occupied as will not interfere with the necessary, customary and
ordinary use of the same. All poles shall be located at such point or points as
shall be designated and approved by the Borough Council of said Borough
or its designated representative.
§ A620-3. Nonliability of Borough.
The said Company shall at all times indemnify and save harmless the
Borough of Etna of and from all claims and demands, and from any suits
94.Editor's Note: Section 5 of this ordinance required that the Company file its acceptance of
the conditions in this ordinance, within 90 days after approval of the ordinance by the
Burgess, and provided that the ordinance not go into effect until written acceptance was
so received by the Borough Secretary. Section 6 required that the Company pay the
expense of publishing the ordinance, submit the ordinance to the Pennsylvania Public
Utility Commission for approval, and prepare all papers and bear all expenses in
connection therewith. Section 7 repealed all conflicting ordinances and parts of
ordinances insofar as they affected this ordinance. Section 8 provided that the ordinance
become effective upon approval by the Public Utility Commission of the sale by the
Borough to the Company of electric facilities in the Borough pursuant to articles of
agreement executed by the Borough pursuant to this ordinance.
§ 615-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A620-3
1:623
or damage to persons or property that might arise from the construction,
maintenance or operation of the facilities of said Company.
§ A620-4. Company to notify Borough of claims for damages;
company to defend suit.
In case any claim for damages shall be made against the Borough for which
the said Company may be liable, the Borough shall promptly notify the
said Company of such claim or claims, and in case any suit for damages
shall be brought against the Borough for which the Company may be liable,
the Borough shall notify the Company of said suit within 10 days from
the service of summons thereof upon the Borough, and the Company shall
defend such claim or suit.
Chapter A621
GAS FRANCHISE
§ A620-3 ETNA CODE § A620-4
1:624
ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ A621-1. Permit by ordinance required to maintain gas lines.
All individuals, copartnerships and corporations desiring to supply natural
gas to the public in the Borough of Etna shall first make application to
The Burgess and Town Council95 for permission to enter the said Borough
and, if said permission is granted by ordinance, may enter upon and open
the streets, roads, lanes, and alleys of the said Borough and lay down
pipes thereon with the necessary street boxes, valves, escape pipes and
connections subject to the provisions of this ordinance96 and any other
reasonable rules, regulations, ordinances or by-laws which by the said
Burgess and Town Council of the said Borough of Etna may hereafter from
time to time be adopted or passed.97
§ A621-2. Location of high-pressure lines; maximum pressure for
mains of various diameters.
High-pressure lines shall be laid on the front of the Allegheny River or along
Pine Creek. The mains shall not be of less diameter than six inches and the
pressure of gas service mains of six inches and eight inches diameter shall
not exceed 50 pounds to the square inch; in mains having a diameter of 12
inches the pressure shall not exceed 40 pounds to the square inch; in mains
having a diameter of 20 inches the pressure shall not exceed 30 pounds to
the square inch; and for any larger diameter the pressure of gas shall be
regulated in accordance with the proportions hereinbefore named. In mains
for house supply the pressure shall not exceed three pounds to the square
inch.
§ A621-3. Test of pipes for gas mains required.
The pipes for said mains in said Borough shall be thoroughly tested by
the manufacturer thereof. When practicable the Borough engineer or the
inspector hereinafter mentioned98 shall be notified of the making of said test
by the manufacturer, and if he sees fit he shall be present thereat.
If the said engineer or inspector shall not have been present at such test,
or if such test, made in his presence, shall not be satisfactory to him, said
pipe lines shall be further tested, if required by said Borough inspector
or engineer, under an atmospheric air pressure of at least three times the
95.Editor's Note: When this ordinance was passed, in 1886, the Burgess was a member of
Council and the governing body of the Borough was known as "The Burgess and Town
Council." The Act of 1893 P.L. 113 No. 67 provided that after the beginning of 1894, the
Burgess was no longer to be a member of Council, but was to be an independent
executive, possessing the veto power instead. The intent of this section is probably to give
the governing body of the Borough (the Council alone) the authority herein vested in "The
Burgess and Town Council."
96.Editor's Note: Sections 31 to 43 of this chapter.
97.Editor's Note: Section 13 of this ordinance was repealed by Ordinance 88; Sections 15 and
16, by Ordinance 87.
98.Editor's Note: See especially Section 37 of this chapter.
§ A621-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A621-3
1:625
maximum pressure proposed to be carried therein and shall be made air
tight under said pressure after being laid and before being covered.
§ A621-4. Manner of construction and operation of facilities.
Said mains as to quality of pipe, the laying of the same, the devices for
securing safety and uniformity of pressure and for carrying off escaping gas
and in all other respects shall be constructed and operated in accordance
with the most improved methods and in the manner best calculated to
insure safety in the transportation, supply and use of said gas.
§ A621-5. Location, depth and grade of pipes and other facilities.
The Street Committee and the Borough engineer or inspector shall be
charged with the duty of determining the portions of said streets, roads,
lanes, and alleys to be occupied for said purposes by said pipes, etc., and
the depth and grade at which they shall be placed and the distance of
excavation at any one time and any subsequent excavations or openings
made for repairs or other purposes.
§ A621-6. Conformity to street grades as established and
subsequently altered.
The persons, firms and corporations enjoying rights and privileges under
this ordinance99 shall, in the laying of pipes and excavating of trenches,
conform to the grades of the streets, roads, lanes and alleys as established
by the said The Burgess and Town Council of the Borough of Etna,100 and to
any alteration or change which may hereafter be made in the same. In case
of such alteration the said persons, firms and companies shall, on notice
from the Street Committee, rearrange its pipes, etc., so as to conform to
said alterations or changes. In case they refuse or neglect to do so, the said
Street Committee shall have power to make such rearrangement at the cost
of said company.
§ A621-7. Compensation of engineer or inspector and street
committee member.
So that the said Street Committee may faithfully and successfully carry out
their duties they are hereby authorized and empowered, for the purpose of
passing upon all questions pertaining to the same, to secure an engineer or
inspector; and the services of at least one member of said Street Committee
and of said engineer or inspector must be provided for by the persons or
company enjoying rights and privileges under this ordinance101 and the
compensation or remuneration of such engineer and also of said member
of the Street Committee and for all services rendered by such officer and
said inspector or engineer and each of them in carrying out said duties shall
99.Editor's Note: Sections 31 to 43 of this chapter.
100. Editor's Note: See Note 3 of this chapter.
101. Editor's Note: Sections 31 to 43 of this chapter.
§ A621-3 ETNA CODE § A621-7
1:626
be borne and paid by the parties enjoying the rights and privileges herein
granted.
§ A621-8. Manner of laying pipes and other facilities.
When any individual, firm or copartnership shall receive the right to open
any street, road, lane, or alley under this ordinance,102 they shall at once
proceed with diligence to lay its pipes, etc., in strict accordance with the
requirements of the general regulations and ordinances of said Borough,
and under the supervision of said Street Committee, engineer or inspector.
In case the work of the laying of pipes be, in the opinion of the said
Street Committee, unnecessarily delayed, or such individuals, firms, or
corporations, their agents, contractors or servants or any of them is or
are wilfully violating any of the provisions of this or any other ordinance
relative to opening the highways and laying pipes, which is now and may
hereafter be passed, the said Street Committee shall have power to cause
all work in the laying of pipes by said individuals, firms or corporations, to
be discontinued, if careless, incompetent, and unskillful men are employed
in said work, or if careless or unskilled work be done; and in case of
such discontinuance of the work by said Street Committee, they shall have
power to take charge of the work so discontinued and prosecute the same
to completion, first making estimates of the amount of money required
to lay the pipe not exceeding two squares, which said individuals, firms,
or corporations to advance the amount of said estimate, the whole work
will remain suspended, and in case the individuals, firms, or corporations
persistently refuse or neglect to prosecute the work with reasonable
diligence, or to employ competent, careful, and skillful persons to do the
same for a period of 20 days, the privilege to enter upon the said streets,
lanes, or alleys, shall be and become forfeited and shall cease to exist.
§ A621-9. Appeals.
In all cases where any individuals, firms or corporations shall feel aggrieved
by or at the action of the said Street Committee or engineer, they shall
have the right to appeal to The Burgess and Town Council.103 The said
appeal shall be presented to the said Burgess and Town Council at their
next regular meeting, or at a special meeting to be called for that purpose,
and said Burgess and Town Council shall hear and determine the same.
§ A621-10. Precautions against danger to pipes from injurious
material in streets.
In all cases where the streets, roads, lanes or alleys or parts thereof,
upon or under which said pipes shall be laid, contain cinders or material
destructive or injurious to such pipes, suitable precaution shall be taken to
guard against such injury and danger in such reasonable manner as may be
ordered and directed by the said Street Committee.
102. Editor's Note: Sections 31 to 43 of this chapter.
103. Editor's Note: See Note 3 of this chapter.
§ A621-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A621-11
1:627
§ A621-11. Restoration of streets following laying or repairing of
pipes or other facilities.
All streets, roads, lanes, and alleys opened for the purpose of laying or
repairing said pipes, etc., shall upon the completion of the work be placed
in as good condition as they were when begun, any paved street, lane, road,
or alley, opened for said purposes or either of them, shall be immediately
stamped and repaved and kept in repair for two months thereafter. The
repaving and repairing to be done under the supervision, direction and
control of the Street Committee, and in case the same be not done to
their satisfaction, they shall have power to do the same at the cost of the
respective firms or corporations making repaving and repairing necessary.
§ A621-12. Resolution of conflict between those locating or laying
pipes.
In the event of any interference or conflict as to location between the
persons, firms, or corporations engaged at the same time in the location or
laying of their pipes in said Borough under this ordinance,104 The Burgess
and Town Council105 shall designate the position to be occupied by the
pipes, etc., of each, and the point of crossing, and their decision thereon
shall be final and conclusive both in law and equity.
§ A621-13. Pipes not to be laid in streets certain months.
No street, road, lane, or alley shall be opened and worked upon for the
purpose of laying pipe for carrying natural gas, between the 15th day of
November of any year and the 1st day of April of the year following.
104. Editor's Note: Sections 31 to 43 of this chapter.
105. Editor's Note: See Note 3 of this chapter.
§ A621-11 ETNA CODE § A621-13
1:628
ARTICLE II
Franchises to Specific Companies
[Added 5-28-1887 by Ord. No. 84 (Ch. IX, Part 2B, of the 1974 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ A621-14. Franchise to the Philadelphia Company.106
The right and privilege be and is hereby granted The Philadelphia Company,
a corporation, and its assigns, to open any street, lane or alley, within
the limits of the Borough of Etna, and of laying pipes for the purpose
of conducting and distributing natural gas, with necessary street boxes
and valves, and with the privilege of making necessary house connections
subject, however, to the provisions, restrictions, requirements and
regulations of a general gas ordinance of said Borough, entitled "An
Ordinance regulating the laying of pipes through, over and under the
streets, lanes and alleys of the Borough of Etna, to be used in carrying,
transporting and supplying natural gas, ordained and enacted into a law,
the seventh day of June, A.D. 1886."
§ A621-15. Franchise to the Peoples Natural Gas Company.
The consent of the Borough of Etna be and the same is hereby granted to
The Peoples Natural Gas Company, a corporation, having its principal office
in the City of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, its successors and assigns, to enter
upon, over, under and across the hereinafter named streets belonging to the
Borough, and to construct, maintain, operate and repair therein a ten-inch
gas pipe line, in the location shown upon a sketch prepared by The Peoples
Natural Gas Company, under date of August 2, 1948, and identified as F. B.
No. 1127, pp. 78-102, a copy of which has been furnished to the Borough by
The Peoples Natural Gas Company, and is on file in the Borough Office.
Said gas pipe line shall begin at the northerly end of Griesmer Street in
said Borough, at Station 66 plus 62, as shown on said plan. Said gas line
shall extend from said point of beginning along said Griesmer Street, South
9° 31' West, to Station 67 plus 50, and shall continue along said street;
thence South 18° 59' West, to Station 68 plus 50; thence South 37° 39'
West, to Station 72 plus 00; thence South 40° 04' West, to Station 73 plus
24; and thence across private property to Catherine Street; beginning again
on said Catherine Street at Station 75 plus 30; thence extending along
Catherine Street, South 59° 41' East, to Station 76 plus 36; thence still
along said Catherine Street, North 89° 49' East, to Station 79 plus 00,
at the intersection of said Catherine Street and Kittanning Road; thence
extending along Kittanning Road (a State highway) from said Station 79
plus 00 to Station 81 plus 86; thence beginning again at Station 81 plus
86, at the intersection of Kittanning Road, Higgins Street and Spruce Alley
(also known as Spang Alley), and extending South 30° 42' East, along said
106. Editor's Note: The Equitable Gas Company succeeded to the rights granted to the
Philadelphia Company by this ordinance, by assignment made under date of July 23, 1948.
§ A621-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A621-15
1:629
Spruce Alley, to Station 84 plus 74; thence South 24° 25' West, to Station 84
plus 77, on the westerly boundary of Spruce Alley.107
§ A621-16. The Peoples Natural Gas Company to move lines on
notice from borough under certain conditions.
The Peoples Natural Gas Company shall at its own expense within 30 days
after written notice from the proper Borough officials, move the location of
its line in any of the above street locations, if same should prove a hindrance
or an obstacle to the Borough in the improvement of any of the Borough
highways in which said line is located, or to the location of any sanitary or
storm water sewer in said Borough highways.
§ A621-17. Liability of the Peoples Natural Gas Company.
The Peoples Natural Gas Company shall at all times indemnify and save
harmless the Borough of Etna from all costs, claims and demands, and
from all suits for damage to persons or property that may or might arise
by reason of the construction, maintenance, use or operation of said
Company's facilities within the said Borough.
107. Editor's Note: Section 4 of this ordinance provided that the Company, within 60 days after
approval of the ordinance, file with the Borough Secretary its written acceptance of the
conditions therein set forth, and that the ordinance not go into force and effect until that
written acceptance was so received. Section 5 provided that the Company pay the expense
of printing and publishing the ordinance. Section 6 repealed conflicting ordinances and
parts of ordinances insofar as the same affected this ordinance or the rights and
privileges therein granted.
§ A621-15 ETNA CODE § A621-17
1:630
Chapter A622
TELEPHONE FRANCHISE
§ A621-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A621-17
1:631

ARTICLE I
Aerial Facilities
§ A622-1. Franchise to the Central District and Printing Telegraph
Company.108
The Central District and Printing Telegraph Company, subject to all the
provisions under and limitations and regulations of "An Ordinance
regulating the erection of telegraph and telephone poles and the running
of wires thereon within the Borough of Etna," ordained and enacted into
a law November 5th, 1888,109 is hereby granted the privilege to erect and
maintain such poles in and upon the several streets of the Borough of
Etna as may be necessary for the places of business, works, manufacturing
establishments, offices and houses of subscribers within the Borough limits
for telegraph and telephone purposes.110
§ A622-2. Supervision over erection of poles.
The poles to be erected under this ordinance shall be located under the
direction of the Street Committee of the Borough of Etna and shall be
painted in a manner satisfactory to said Street Committee.
§ A622-3. Borough fire alarm wires permitted on poles.
It is hereby expressly understood and agreed between the Borough of
Etna and The Central District and Printing Telegraph Company that the
privileges here granted by the former are given in consideration of the
latter agreeing for itself, its successors and assigns that the said The
Central District and Printing Telegraph Company shall permit the Borough
of Etna to run the five alarm wires of its fire alarm telegraph upon the poles
of the said Company without charge within the limits of the Borough of Etna
aforesaid.
§ A622-4. Company to furnish telephones for borough use.
And it is further expressly understood and agreed that The Central District
and Printing Telegraph Company shall furnish for use of the Borough of
Etna without charge four sets of telephone instruments to be located as
follows: one set in the waterworks, one set in the residence of the
Superintendent of the Waterworks, one set in the residence of the Chief of
the Fire Department, and one set in the office of the Borough Treasurer,
all of which locations are within the limits of the Borough of Etna, and
108. Editor's Note: This franchise is now vested in The Bell Telephone Company of
Pennsylvania.
109. Editor's Note: This ordinance (Ordinance 102) was repealed by Ordinance 1055.
110. Editor's Note: Section 6 of this ordinance required that the Company pay all expenses
incurred in the passage, printing, promulgating and posting of the ordinance. Section 7
provided that the ordinance go into effect after the Company had filed with the Borough
Secretary its written acceptance of the ordinance and of the terms and conditions therein
contained. Section 8 repealed all conflicting ordinances and parts of ordinances so far as
the same affected this ordinance.
§ A622-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A622-4
1:633
shall be changed and relocated from time to time hereafter as the site of
the Waterworks or the residence of the Superintendent or the residence of
the Chief of the Fire Department or the office of the Borough Treasurer
may be changed, and these four sets of instruments shall be connected on
one and the same line with the Sharpsburg branch office of The Central
District and Printing Telegraph Company and shall be used with the same
rights and privileges as the other subscribers' instruments, connected with
said Sharpsburg branch office and the said Central District and Printing
Telegraph Company, its successors and assigns, shall so continue to furnish
for use of the Borough of Etna without charge the said four sets of telephone
instruments located as aforesaid at all future time until the Borough of Etna
shall impose a tax or license upon said Company when said service without
charge shall cease.
§ A622-5. Removal of abandoned poles unless borough exercises
right of ownership.
All poles heretofore erected or owned and which are to be abandoned
for the running of wires by The Central District and Printing Telegraph
Company saving and excepting such poles as the Street Committee of the
Borough of Etna may in their discretion designate all such poles designated
and selected by the Street Committee shall become without any charge the
property of the Borough of Etna.
§ A622-4 ETNA CODE § A622-5
1:634
ARTICLE II
Underground Facilities
[Added 5-27-1922 by Ord. No. 505 (Ch. IX, Part 4B, of the 1974
Code of Ordinances)]
§ A622-6. Franchise to the Bell Telephone Company of
Pennsylvania.
Permission be and is hereby granted to The Bell Telephone Company of
Pennsylvania, its successors and assigns, to construct, maintain and operate
its conduits, ducts, mains, pipes, cables, wires, manholes, terminal and
distributing poles and all other necessary underground appliances, on, in,
under, and through the streets, alleys and highways within the limits of the
Borough of Etna, in the County of Allegheny and State of Pennsylvania; and
to use the property of other companies, and to permit other companies that
possess authority to operate within the said Borough, to use its property
upon such arrangements as the two companies may agree to.111
§ A622-7. Location of facilities.
All terminal and distributing poles erected by said Company shall extend not
less than 20 feet above the surface of the ground, and shall be so located as
in no way to interfere with the safety or convenience of persons travelling
on or over the said streets, alleys and highways; and in the installation and
maintenance of its underground system, said Company shall not open or
encumber more of any street, alley or highway than will be necessary to
enable it to perform the work with proper economy and efficiency.
§ A622-8. Supervision over work; restoration of streets and
sidewalks following work.
The erection of terminal and distributing poles and construction of conduits
under the provisions of this ordinance shall be subject to the supervision
of the Street Committee, and said Company shall replace and properly
relay that portion of any sidewalk or street pavement which may have been
displaced or damaged by it in the construction and maintenance of its
system.
§ A622-9. Borough fire alarm and police wires permitted on poles
and in conduits.
Space on the terminal and distributing poles erected and in the conduits
constructed under the provisions of this ordinance may be used, free of
charge, for the purpose of carrying wires of any fire alarm or police
telegraph system, owned and maintained by said Borough, provided the said
111. Editor's Note: Section 5 of this ordinance provided that unless the Company, within 60
days from the date of the final enactment of the ordinance, signified in writing its
acceptance of all the terms, conditions, regulations and restrictions contained in this
ordinance, the ordinance was to become null and void and of no effect. Section 7 provided
that the Company pay all legal advertising and printing fees incurred by the Borough in
connection with the passage of the ordinance.
§ A622-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A622-9
1:635
wires are placed and maintained in such a manner as may be prescribed
by the said Company and that no use shall be made of such space by the
said Borough which will result in interfering with or impairing the operation
or use of said Company's property or service, or endanger its property or
employes.
§ A622-10. Maintenance of facilities by company; nonliability of
borough.
The said Company shall maintain all terminal and distributing poles, cables,
wires, conduits, ducts, mains, pipes, manholes, and all other apparatus
erected or constructed under the provisions of this ordinance, in good and
safe order and condition, and shall at all times fully indemnify, protect,
and save harmless the said Borough from and against all actions, claims,
suits, damages and charges, and against all loss and necessary expenditures
arising from the erection, construction and maintenance of its system, or
from its neglect or failures to maintain the said apparatus in good and safe
order and condition.
§ A622-11. No effect upon authority of Public Utility Commission.
It is hereby understood and agreed that neither the purpose nor intent nor
the obligation of this ordinance, if and when approved by the Public Service
Commission112 of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, is such as to impair
or in anywise affect the exercise by said Commission of any of the powers
vested in it by the Public Service Company Law, approved July 26, 1913.
112. Editor's Note: The Public Service Commission has been supplanted by the Public Utility
Commission (1937 P. L. 160) and the Public Service Company Law by the Public Utility
Law (1937 P. L. 1053).
§ A622-9 ETNA CODE § A622-11
1:636
Chapter A623
TELEVISION FRANCHISE
§ A623-1. Franchise to video link of Allegheny County, Inc.
An exclusive franchise, or consent to erect, maintain and operate
transmission and distribution facilities in, under, over, along, across, and
upon the streets, lanes, alleys, avenues, bridges, highways, and other public
places for the purpose of transmission by cable and distribution of television
impulses and energy for the sale to the inhabitants of the Borough of
Etna, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, is hereby granted to Video Link of
Allegheny County, Inc., a Pennsylvania corporation.113
§ A623-2. Agreement authorized.
The proper officers are hereby authorized and directed to execute and
deliver an agreement between the Borough of Etna and Video Link of
Allegheny County, Inc., in substantially the form of an agreement presented
at this meeting, the terms of which are incorporated herein by
references.114
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
[In order to assist Code users in the transition to the new Code's
organization, the Derivation Table indicates where chapters and articles of
the 1974 Code have been included in the 2020 Code, or the reason for
exclusion.]
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 1974 Code to 2020 Code.
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent
in nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. I.
113. Editor's Note: The preamble to this ordinance stated that Video Link of Allegheny County,
Inc., had made application to the Borough for an agreement authorizing it to erect,
maintain and operate transmission and distribution facilities in the Borough; and that the
Borough was willing to grant the license or franchise under the terms and conditions set
forth in an agreement between the Borough and the licensee. Section 3 of this ordinance
repealed all conflicting ordinances and parts of ordinances insofar as the same affected
this ordinance.
114. Editor's Note: Ordinance 1107 (December 29, 1977) directed the Borough Solicitor to redraft
Section 17 of the agreement, fixing subscriber service and maintenance charges
from January 1, 1978 to June 30, 1978, and from July 1, 1978 to December 31, 1980;
providing for 10% discounts for persons over 65 years of age; and stating that no
additional channels or services were to be added by the Company without prior approval
by Borough Council. It further directed the proper Borough officials, after adoption and
execution of the amendment by the Company, to execute the agreement.
§ A622-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:637
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Chapter/Title from 1974 Code Location in 2020 Code
Ch. I, Administration and Government
Part 1, Elected Officers REP
Part 2, Appointed Officers REP
Part 3, Boards and Commissions Ch. 91
Part 4, Police Department Ch. 96, Art. I
Part 5, Firemen's Relief Ch. 44
Part 6, Pensions, Retirement and
Social Security
A. Municipal Employees'
Retirement System
Ch. 85, Art. I175
B. Police Pensions and Retirement Superseded by Ord. No. 1231; see
now Ch. 85, Art. II
C. Social Security for Officers and
Employees
Ch. 118
Part 7, Educational Service Agency Ch. 26
Part 8, Records Retention Ch. 103, Art. I
Part 9, Fiscal Affairs Ch. 112, Art. I
Ch. II, Air Pollution (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. III, Animals
Part 1, Dogs Ch. 160, Art. II
Part 2, Livestock Ch. 160, Art. III
Part 3, Swine Ch. 160, Art. I
Ch. IV, Bicycles (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. V, Buildings
Part 1, Building Construction Superseded by Ord. No. 1303; see
now Ch. 232
Part 2, Dangerous Buildings Superseded by Ord. No. 1289; see
now Ch. 445, Art. I
Part 3, Numbering of Buildings Superseded by Ord. No. 1289; see
now Ch. 445, Art. I
Part 4, Construction and Development
in Flood-Prone Areas
Ch. VI, Code Enforcement
§ DT-1 ETNA CODE § DT-1
1:638
Chapter/Title from 1974 Code Location in 2020 Code
Part 1, Tampering with Certain
Property
Ch. 451
Part 2, Alcoholic Beverages Ch. 147
Part 3, Smoking Restrictions Ch. 493
Part 4, Disorderly Conduct and
Disturbance of the Peace
Ch. 418, Art. I
Part 5, Conduct in Certain Public
Places
Ch. 418, Art. II
Ch. VII, Curfew Ch. 238
Ch. VIII, Fire Prevention and Fire
Protection
Part 1, Fire Prevention Ch. 293
Part 2, Fire Protection REP
Ch. IX, Franchises
Part 1, Electric Ch. A620
Part 2, Gas Ch. A621
Part 3, Railroad Sidings Omitted
Part 4, Telephone Ch. A622
Part 5, Television Ch. A623
Part 6, Water Lines Omitted
Ch. X, Garbage and Refuse
Part 1, Collection Service Available to
Residents Only
Ch. 510, Art. I
Part 2, Care and Removal of Garbage
and Other Refuse
Superseded by Ord. No. 1219; see
now Ch. 510, Art. III
Ch. XI, Health and Sanitation
Part 1, Health Administration Ch. 52
Part 2, Grass, Weeds and Other
Vegetation
Superseded by Ord. No. 1289; see
now Ch. 445, Art. I
Ch. XII, Housing Ch. 334, Art. I
Ch. XIII, (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. XIV, Licenses, Permits and
General Business Regulations
Part 1, Distribution and Posting of
Advertising Matter and Other
Material
Ch. 134
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:639
Chapter/Title from 1974 Code Location in 2020 Code
Part 2, Amusements and Amusement
Devices
Ch. 153
Part 3, Loudspeakers and Other
Sound Devices
Ch. 390, Art. I
Part 4, Prohibited Businesses and
Industries
Ch. 197
Part 5, Solicitation and Transient
Business
Ch. 426, Art. I
Ch. XV, Mobile Homes and Mobile
Home Parks (Reserved)
Omitted
Ch. XVI, Motor Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 560
Ch. XVII,
Part 1, Identification of Certain
Nuisances
Ch. 396, Art. I
Part 2, Obscene, Pornographic and
Lewd Activities and Materials
Ch. 396, Art. II
Ch. XVIII, Parks and Recreation
Part 1, Rules and Regulations Ch. 412
Part 2, Clarence S. Fugh Memorial
Park
Omitted
Ch. XIX, Plumbing (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. XX, Sewers and Sewage Disposal
Part 1, Sewer Construction and
Connection
Ch. 470, Art. I, Art. II, Art. III
Part 2, Sewer Uses
A. Basic Regulations Ch. 470, Art. IV
B. Supplemental Regulations Superseded; see now Ch. 470, Art.
VII
Part 3, Sewer Rates and Charges Ch. 470, Art. V
Ch. XXI, Stormwater Management Superseded by Ord. No. 1378; see
now Ch. 518
Ch. XXII, Streets and Sidewalks
Part 1, Streets
A. Datum Plane; Plan of Streets Omitted
B. Street Naming Omitted
C. Street Openings and
Excavations
Ch. 524, Art. IV
§ DT-1 ETNA CODE § DT-1
1:640
Chapter/Title from 1974 Code Location in 2020 Code
Part 2, Sidewalks and Curbs
A. Sidewalks Ch. 524, Art. II
B. Curbs Ch. 524, Art. III
Part 3, Streets and Sidewalks
§§ 101 through 103
§ 105
Ch. 524, Art. I
Ch. 524, Art. V
Ch. XXIII, Subdivision and Land
Development (Reserved)
Omitted
Ch. XXIV, Swimming Pools (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. XXV, Taxation; Special
Part 1, Deed Transfer Omitted
Part 2, Earned Income, §§ 31 through
33
Ch. 535, Art. I
Part 3, Mercantile License and
Business Transaction
Ch. 535, Art. II
Part 4, Occupational Privilege Ch. 535, Art. III
Part 5, Realty Transfer Ch. 535, Art. IV
Ch. XXVII, Water
Part 1, Pine Creek Ch. 596, Art. I
Part 2, Little Pine Creek Ch. 596, Art. II
Ch. XXVIII, Water Use and Rates Ch. 587, Art. I
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:641
§ DL-1. Disposition List for Borough of Etna, PA. The following is a
chronological listing of legislation of the Borough of Etna reviewed
for the 2020 codification, indicating for each its inclusion in the
Code or the reason for exclusion. The last legislation reviewed for
the 2020 publication of the Code was Ord. No. 1380, adopted
December 18, 2018.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1091
8-11-1975 Occupancy Permits Ch. 403
Ord. No.
1198
12-29-1987 Water: Water Use and Rates
Amendment
Ch. 587,
Art I
Ord. No.
1204
12-20-1988 Water: Water Use and Rates
Amendment
Ch. 587,
Art. I
Ord. No.
1209
12-28-1989 Tax Rate for 1990 NCM
Ord. No.
1210
12-18-1990 Water: Water Use and Rates
Amendment
Ch. 587,
Art. I
Ord. No.
1211
12-18-1990 Sewers and Sewage Disposal:
Sewer Rates and Charges
Amendment
Superseded
by Ord. No.
1297
Ord. No.
1212
12-27-1990 Tax Rate for 1991 NCM
Ord. No.
1213
12-27-1990 Indebtedness NCM
Ord. No.
1215
2-19-1991 Watercourses: Dangerous
Obstructions
Ch. 596,
Art. III
Ord. No.
1216
7-16-1991 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 560
Ord. No.
1217
9-10-1991 Increasing Indebtedness NCM
Ord. No.
1218
10-15-1991 Solid Waste: Collection Fees Ch. 510,
Art. II
Ord. No.
1219
12-19-1991 Solid Waste: Garbage and
Refuse Collection
Ch. 510,
Art. III
Ord. No.
1220
12-19-1991 Tax Rate for 1992 NCM
Ord. No.
1221
3-17-1992 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 560
Ord. No.
1222
6-16-1992 Floodplain Management
Amendment
Superseded
by Ord. No.
1353
§ DL-1 ETNA CODE § DL-1
1:642
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1223
9-15-1992 Floodplain Management
Amendment
Superseded
by Ord. No.
1353
Ord. No.
1224
10-20-1992 Peddling and Soliciting:
Soliciting and Transient
Merchants Amendment
Ch. 426,
Art. I
Ord. No.
1225
12-15-1992 Insurance: Fire Loss Claims Repealed
by Ord. No.
1257
Ord. No.
1226
12-29-1992 Tax Rate for 1993 NCM
Ord. No.
1227
6-15-1993 Water: Backflow and Cross-
Connections
Ch. 587,
Art. II
Ord. No.
1228
7-20-1993 Hazardous Materials:
Reimbursement for Cleanup
Costs
Ch. 325,
Art. I
Ord. No.
1229
12-28-1993 Tax Rate for 1994 NCM
Ord. No.
1230
5-17-1994 Rental Property: Rental Unit
and Tenant Reports
Ch. 457,
Art. I
Ord. No.
1231
8-16-1994 Pensions: Police Pension Plan Ch. 85, Art.
II
Ord. No.
1232
9-20-1994 Establishing Budgetary Reserve
Account
NCM
Ord. No.
1233
12-27-1994 Tax Rate for 1995 NCM
Ord. No.
1234
12-27-1994 Taxation: Senior Citizens Tax
Relief
Repealed
by Ord. No.
1282
Ord. No.
1235
5-23-1995 Street Name Change NCM
Ord. No.
1236
6-20-1995 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 560
Ord. No.
1237
7-18-1995 Intergovernmental Cooperation:
Emergency Dispatch and
Communication Services
NCM
Ord. No.
1238
9-19-1995 Floodplain Management
Amendment
Superseded
by Ord. No.
1353
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:643
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1239
12-19-1995 Emergency Medical Services:
Minimum Standards of
Prehospital Emergency Care
Repealed
by Ord. No.
1368
Ord. No.
1240
12-27-1995 Tax Rate for 1996 NCM
Ord. No.
1241
2-21-1996 Mutual Aid Agreement for Fire
Department and Emergency
Service Aid and Assistance
NCM
Ord. No.
1242
4-30-1996 General Obligation Notes NCM
Ord. No.
1244
11-19-1996 Joint Municipal Contract for
Residential Solid Waste
Collection and Disposal
NCM
Ord. No.
1245
5-21-1997 Moratorium on Communication
Facilities, Towers and Antennas
NCM
Ord. No.
1246
5-21-1997 Moratorium on Personal Care
Homes
NCM
Ord. No.
1247
10-21-1997 Retirement Benefits Change NCM
Ord. No.
1248
11-18-1997 Zoning Superseded
by Ord. No.
1361
Ord. No.
1249
12-23-1997 Tax Rate for 1998 NCM
Ord. No.
1250
1-5-1998 Sewers and Sewage Disposal:
Sewer Rates and Charges
Amendment
Superseded
by Ord. No.
1297
Ord. No.
1251
4-21-1998 Police Department: Workers'
Compensation for Police
Officers
Ch. 96, Art.
II
Ord. No.
1252
6-16-1998 Sewers and Sewage Disposal:
Grease Traps and Separators
Ch. 470,
Art. VI
Ord. No.
1253
7-21-1998 Zoning Amendment Superseded
by Ord. No.
1361
Ord. No.
1254
7-21-1998 Amusement Devices
Amendment
Ch. 153
Ord. No.
1255
9-15-1998 Sewers and Sewage Disposal:
Prohibited Discharges
Ch. 470,
Art. VII
§ DL-1 ETNA CODE § DL-1
1:644
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1256
10-20-1998 Insurance: Fire Loss Claims Superseded
by Ord. No.
1256
Ord. No.
1257
10-20-1998 Insurance: Fire Loss Claims Ch. 347,
Art. I
Ord. No.
1258
10-20-1998 Street Vacation NCM
Ord. No.
1259
11-17-1998 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 560
Ord. No.
1260
12-15-1998 Taxation: Taxpayers Bill of
Rights
Ch. 535,
Art. VI
Ord. No.
1261
12-15-1998 Penalties for Late Payment
Amendment
Unknown
Ord. No.
1262
12-15-1998 Sewers and Sewage Disposal:
Sewer Rates and Charges
Amendment
Superseded
by Ord. No.
1297
Ord. No.
1263
12-29-1998 Tax Rate for 1999 NCM
Ord. No.
1264
3-16-1999 Street Name Change: Peach
Street to VFW Way
NCM
Ord. No.
1265
4-20-1999 Solid Waste: Garbage and
Refuse Collection Amendment
Ch. 510,
Art. III
Ord. No.
1266
4-20-1999 Streets and Sidewalks:
Sidewalk Construction,
Maintenance, and Snow
Removal Amendment
Ch. 524,
Art. II
Ord. No.
1267
7-20-1999 Acquisition of Property for
Emergency Medical Services
Building
NCM
Ord. No.
1268
9-21-1999 Zoning Amendment Superseded
by Ord. No.
1361
Ord. No.
1269
11-17-1999 Zoning Amendment Superseded
by Ord. No.
1361
Ord. No.
1270
12-21-1999 Tax Rate for 2000 NCM
Ord. No.
1271
12-21-1999 Property Maintenance Repealed
by Ord. No.
1289
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:645
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1272
12-21-1999 Rental Property: Rental Unit
and Tenant Reports Amendment
Ch. 457,
Art. I
Ord. No.
1273
2-15-2000 Taxation: Taxpayers Bill of
Rights Amendment
Ch. 535,
Art. VI
Ord. No.
1274
8-15-2000 Construction Codes, Uniform Superseded
by Ord. No.
1303
(adopted
6-15-2004)
Ord. No.
1275
12-19-2000 Tax Rate for 2001: 4 NCM
Ord. No.
1276
12-19-2000 Sewers and Sewage Disposal:
Sewer Rates and Charges
Amendment
Superseded
by Ord. No.
1297
Ord. No.
1277
12-19-2000 Taxation: Attorneys' Costs for
Collection
Ch. 535,
Art. VII
Ord. No.
1278
12-19-2000 Taxation: Delinquent Accounts Ch. 535,
Art. VIII
Ord. No.
1279
12-19-2000 Taxation: Taxpayers Bill of
Rights Amendment
Ch. 535,
Art. VI
Ord. No.
1280
1-16-2001 Participation in Risk
Management Pooled Trust
NCM
Ord. No.
1281
3-20-2001 Streets and Sidewalks:
Telecommunications Systems
Right-Of-Way Permits
Ch. 524,
Art. VI
Ord. No.
1282
4-17-2001 Taxation: Senior Citizens Tax
Relief
Ch. 535,
Art. V
Ord. No.
1283
4-17-2001 Wellhead Protection Ch. 601
Ord. No.
1284
11-20-2001 Incurring Nonelectoral Debt NCM
Ord. No.
1285
Number
not used
Ord. No.
1286
12-18-2001 Street Vacation NCM
Ord. No.
1287
12-18-2001 Tax Rate for 2002 NCM
Ord. No.
1288
6-18-2002 Numbering of Buildings Ch. 186
§ DL-1 ETNA CODE § DL-1
1:646
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1289
7-16-2002 Property Maintenance:
Adoption of Standards
Ch. 448,
Art. I
Ord. No.
1290
7-16-2002 Water: Water Use and Rates
Amendment
Ch. 587,
Art. I
Ord. No.
1291
12-17-2002 Sewers and Sewage Disposal:
Sewer Rates and Charges
Amendment
Superseded
by Ord. No.
1297
Ord. No.
1292
12-17-2002 Solid Waste: Collection Fees
Amendment
Ch. 510,
Art. II
Ord. No.
1293
12-17-2002 Tax Rate for 2003 NCM
Ord. No.
1294
12-17-2002 Pensions: Police Pension Plan
Amendment
Ch. 85, Art.
II
Ord. No.
1295
1-21-2003 Street Vacation NCM
Ord. No.
1296
3-18-2003 Taxation: Earned Income Tax
Amendment
Ch. 535,
Art. I
Ord. No.
1297
12-16-2003 Sewers and Sewage Disposal:
Sewer Rates and Charges
Amendment
Ch. 470,
Art. V
Ord. No.
1298
1-20-2004 Nuisances: General Nuisances
Amendment
Ch. 396,
Art. I
Ord. No.
1299
2-1-2004 Taxation: Local Services Tax Superseded
by Ord. No.
1313
Ord. No.
1300
3-16-2004 Abandoned and Junked Vehicles Ch. 569
Ord. No.
1301
5-18-2004 Zoning Amendment Superseded
by Ord. No.
1361
Ord. No.
1302
5-18-2004 Zoning Amendment Superseded
by Ord. No.
1361
Ord. No.
1303
12-21-2004 Taxation: Local Tax Enabling
Act
Superseded
by Ord. No.
1313
Ord. No.
1303
6-15-2004 Construction Codes, Uniform Ch. 232
Ord. No.
1304
12-21-2004 Tax Rate for 2005 NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:647
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1306
8-16-2005 Pensions: Police Pension Plan
Amendment
Ch. 85, Art.
II
Ord. No.
1307
12-20-2005 Tax Rate for 2006 NCM
Ord. No.
1307-A1
11-21-2006 Dumpsters and Portable
Storage Units
Ch. 259
Ord. No.
1308
12-28-2006 Tax Rate for 2007 NCM
Ord. No.
1309
2-20-2007 Acquisition of Real Property NCM
Ord. No.
1310
5-16-2007 General Obligation Note NCM
Ord. No.
1311
7-17-2007 Nuisances: Nuisance Properties Ch. 396,
Art. IV
Ord. No.
1312
11-20-2007 Franchise Agreement: Verizon
Pennsylvania, Inc.
NCM
(Incomplete)
Ord. No.
1313
11-20-2007 Taxation: Local Services Tax
Amendment
Ch. 535,
Art. III
Ord. No.
1314
12-18-2007 Tax Rate for 2008 NCM
Ord. No.
1315
12-18-2007 Sewers and Sewage Disposal:
Sewer Rates and Charges
Amendment
Ch. 470,
Art. V
Ord. No.
1316
12-18-2007 Solid Waste: Collection Fees
Amendment
Ch. 510,
Art. II
Ord. No.
1317
1-1-2008 No Copy;
no
information
Ord. No.
1318
2-1-2008 No Copy;
no
information
Ord. No.
1319
3-1-2008 No Copy;
no
information
Ord. No.
1320
9-16-2008 Stormwater Management Repealed
by Ord. No.
1366
Ord. No.
1321
12-22-2008 Tax Rate for 2009 NCM
§ DL-1 ETNA CODE § DL-1
1:648
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1322
1-20-2009 Amusement Devices
Amendment
Ch. 153
Ord. No.
1323
2-1-2009 No Copy;
no
information
Ord. No.
1324
3-1-2009 No Copy;
no
information
Ord. No.
1325
9-15-2009 Franchise Agreement: Comcast
of California / Pennsylvania /
Utah / Washington, Inc.
NCM
Ord. No.
1326?
12-17-2009 Tax Rate for 2010 NCM
Ord. No.
1327
2-1-2010 No Copy;
no
information
Ord. No.
1328
3-1-2010 No Copy;
no
information
Ord. No.
1329
12-21-2010 Tax Rate for 2011 NCM; No
Copy
Ord. No.
1330
1-1-2011 No Copy;
no
information
Ord. No.
1331
3-15-2011 Adopting Municipal Drug Task
Force Agreement
NCM
Ord. No.
1332
4-19-2011 Pensions: Police Pension Plan
Amendment
Ch. 85, Art.
II
Ord. No.
1333
6-21-2011 Zoning Amendment Superseded
by Ord. No.
1361
Ord. No.
1334
6-21-2011 Sidewalk Cafes Superseded
by Ord. No.
1379
Ord. No.
1335
6-21-2011 Alcoholic Beverages
Amendment
Ch. 147
Ord. No.
1336
12-20-2011 Tax Rate for 2012 NCM
Ord. No.
1337
1-17-2012 Taxation: Collection of
Delinquent Taxes from Tenants
Ch. 535,
Art. IX
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:649
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1338
1-17-2012 Pensions: Police Pension Plan
Amendment
Ch. 85, Art.
II
Ord. No.
1339
4-17-2012 Increasing Indebtedness NCM
Ord. No.
1341
11-20-2012 Sewers and Sewage Disposal:
Residential Downspout
Disconnection
Ch. 470,
Art. VIII
Ord. No.
1342
12-18-2012 Vacant Buildings Repealed
by Ord. No.
1348
Ord. No.
1343
12-18-2012 Tax Rate for 2013 NCM
Ord. No.
1344
1-15-2013 Tax Rate for 2013 NCM
Ord. No.
1345
2-19-2013 Zoning Amendment Superseded
by Ord. No.
1361
Ord. No.
1346
3-19-2013 Water: Water Use and Rates
Amendment
Ch. 587,
Art. I
Ord. No.
1347
6-5-2013 Incurring Nonelectoral Debt NCM
Ord. No.
1348
6-18-2013 Vacant Buildings Repealer Repealer
only
Ord. No.
1349
6-18-2013 Vacant Buildings Repealed
by Ord. No.
1371
Ord. No.
1349
12-17-2013 Tax Rate for 2014 NCM
Ord. No.
1350
12-17-2013 Rental Property: Rental Unit
and Tenant Reports Amendment
Ch. 457,
Art. I
Ord. No.
1351
2-18-2014 Intergovernmental Cooperation
Agreement: Multi-Municipal
Shade Tree Commission
NCM
Ord. No.
1352
6-16-2014 Pensions: Police Pension Plan
Amendment
Ch. 85, Art.
II
Ord. No.
1353
7-15-2014 Floodplain Management Ch. 300
Ord. No.
1354
12-16-2014 Tax Rate for 2015 NCM
§ DL-1 ETNA CODE § DL-1
1:650
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1355
2-17-2015 Zoning Amendment Superseded
by Ord. No.
1361
Ord. No.
1356
2-17-2015 Zoning Amendment Superseded
by Ord. No.
1361
Ord. No.
1357
6-15-2015 No Copy;
no
information
Ord. No.
1358
9-15-2015 Nuisances: Neighborhood
Blight
Ch. 396,
Art. III
Ord. No.
1359
10-20-2015 Intergovernmental Cooperation
Agreement: Tri-Cog Land Bank
NCM
Ord. No.
1360
11-17-2015 Pilot Residential Permit Parking
Program
Repealed
by Ord. No.
1364
Ord. No.
1361
12-15-2015 Zoning Repealed
by Ord. No.
1379
Ord. No.
1362
12-15-2015 Tax Rate for 2016 NCM
Ord. No.
1363
7-19-2016 Zoning Amendment Repealed
by Ord. No.
1379
Ord. No.
1364
9-30-2016 Vehicles and Traffic: Residential
Permit Parking Program
Ch. 560,
Art. XI
Ord. No.
1365
10-18-2016 Officers and Employees:
Auditor
Ch. 77, Art.
III
Ord. No.
1366
10-18-2016 Stormwater Management Ch. 518
Ord. No.
1367
12-20-2016 Tax Rate for 2017 NCM
Ord. No.
1368
1-17-2017 Emergency Medical Services:
Minimum Standards of
Prehospital Emergency Care
Ch. 33, Art.
I
Ord. No.
1369
4-18-2017 Street Opening and Dedication NCM
Ord. No.
1370
5-17-2017 Vehicles and Traffic: Residential
Permit Parking Program
Amendment
Ch. 560
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:651
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1371
6-20-2017 Vacant Buildings Ch. 552
Ord. No.
1372
11-21-2017 Taxation: Volunteer Service
Credit
Ch. 535,
Art. X
Ord. No.
1373
Number
not used
Ord. No.
1374
12-19-2017 Street Vacation NCM
Ord. No.
1375
12-19-2017 Tax Rate for 2018 NCM
Ord. No.
1376
1-16-2018 Vehicles and Traffic: Residential
Permit Parking Program
Amendment
Ch. 560,
Art. XI
Ord. No.
1377
5-16-2018 Sewers and Sewage Disposal:
Tapping Fees and Lateral
Inspections
Ch. 470,
Art. IX
Ord. No.
1378
11-20-2018 Stormwater Management
Amendment
Ch. 518
Ord. No.
1379
2-5-2019 Zoning Ch. 615
Ord. No.
1380
12-18-2018 Tax Rate for 2019 NCM
Ord. No.
1381
Not yet
codified
Ord. No.
1382
Not yet
codified
Ord. No.
1383
5-17-2020 General Provisions: Adoption of
Code
Ch. 1, Art. I
§ DL-1 ETNA CODE § DL-1
1:652