Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 4-5-1976 by Ord. No. 4-76]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1008(b) of the Borough Code [53 P.S. § 46008(b)],
the codification of a complete body of ordinances for the Borough of East
Greenville, County of Montgomery, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as
revised, codified and consolidated into titles, chapters and sections by
General Code Publishers Corporation and consisting of Chapters 1 through
95, is hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as a single
ordinance of the Borough of East Greenville which shall be known and
is hereby designated as the "Code of the Borough of East Greenville,"
hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of this
ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and not as
new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from
the date of adoption of the prior ordinances. All such provisions are hereby
continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their
adoption by the Council of the Borough of East Greenville, and it is the
intention of said Council that each such provision contained within the Code
is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such
provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and only
new or changed provisions shall be deemed to be enacted from the effective
date of this Code, as provided in § 1-6 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of ordinances not contained in Code.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature,
adopted by the Borough of East Greenville and in force on the date of the
adoption of this Code, and not contained in the Code, are hereby repealed
as of the effective date given in § 1-6 below, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-4. Ordinances saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to November 3, 1973 (Ord. No.
13-75).
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the borough prior to the effective date of this
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
Code or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such
right or liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
Code in violation of any legislative provision of the borough, or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending,
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this Code,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the borough.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the borough.
F. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for the laying out,
opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing
grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any
right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other
public place or property, or designating various streets as public
highways.
G. Any ordinance requiring the construction or reconstruction of
sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
H. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond of the borough, or other instruments
or evidence of the borough's indebtedness.
I. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
J. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property, or any lawful contract, obligation or agreement.
K. Any ordinance annexing land to the borough.
L. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof, or providing for a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
M. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the borough.
N. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
O. The dedication of property.
P. Any ordinance making any changes or revisions on the Zoning Map.
Q. An ordinance adopted July 7, 1930, regulating excavations in streets.
§ 1-4 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 1-5
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature, adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance, are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such legislation shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
In compiling and preparing the ordinances of the borough for adoption and
revision as part of the Code, certain grammatical changes and other minor
nonsubstantive changes were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is
the intention of the Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the
Code as if the ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended
to read as such. No changes and revisions of a substantive nature were
made to ordinances included in the Code during the process of codification.
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held
to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of
the Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any
statute, other ordinance or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance or regulation
impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of such statute,
other ordinance or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-9. Copies of Code on file.
Three copies of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
ordinance book in the office of the Borough Secretary and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copies
shall be certified to by the Borough Secretary, as provided by law, and such
certified copies shall remain on file in the office of the Borough Secretary,
available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while the
said Code is in effect.
A. Chapter and Article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
diversions in the Code, or in supplements made to the Code, are
inserted in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code
for the convenience of persons using the Code, and are not part of the
ordinances.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code, and not part of the ordinances.
§ 1-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-10
1:5
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such
Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to
include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or
supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed
and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the post-bound book containing the
said Code, as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Secretary, or someone authorized and
directed by him or her, to keep up-to-date the certified copies of the book
containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the Borough
Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all
ordinances adopted by the Council subsequent to the effective date of this
codification which the Council shall adopt specifically as part of the Code
shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such
changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code book,
at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Sale of Code book; supplements provided.
Copies of the book containing the Code may be purchased from the Borough
Secretary upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Council,
which may also arrange for procedures for the periodic supplementation
thereof.
§ 1-13. Publication; filing.
The Borough Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction and of the adoption of the
Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the borough. Sufficient copies
of the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Borough Secretary
for inspection by the public at all times during regular office hours. The
enactment and application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication
of the notices of introduction and adoption, as required by law, and the
availability of copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be
deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-14. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or part thereof to
be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed to
affect the validity of constitutionality of any other section or part thereof.
§ 1-10 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 1-15
1:6
§ 1-15. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code, or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the borough
to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not more than $300
and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine and costs,
to imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
§ 1-16. Effective date.
All provisions of the Code shall be in force and effect on and after April 6,
1976.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:7
Chapter 3
AUDITOR, INDEPENDENT
§ 3-1. Office established; compensation.
There is hereby established the appointed borough office of Independent
Auditor, said Auditor to be appointed by resolution of Borough Council
annually, prior to the close of the fiscal year, to be paid for his services an
amount established by Borough Council in said resolution.
§ 3-2. Qualifications.
The Independent Auditor shall be a certified public accountant, registered
in Pennsylvania, a firm of certified public accountants so registered, a
competent public accountant or a competent firm of public accountants.
§ 3-3. Examination of records.
The Independent Auditor shall make an independent examination of the
accounting records of the borough for the fiscal year of his appointment in
accordance with generally accepted auditing standards and procedures and
shall prepare a report which shall set forth the scope of his examination and
his opinion of the fairness of the presentation of the financial statement of
the borough which shows a complete statement of the financial condition of
the borough, giving in detail the actual indebtedness, the amount of funded
debt, the amount of floating debt, the valuation of taxable property therein,
the assets of the borough with the character and value thereof and the
maturity date of the respective forms of funded debt.
§ 3-4. Powers and duties.
A. The Independent Auditor shall have the duty to:
(1) File a copy of the report as provided for above with the Borough
Secretary of the Borough of East Greenville, the Clerk of the Court
of Common Pleas of Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, and the
Department of Community Affairs of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania on or before the 90th day following the close of the
fiscal year for which said report was prepared; and
(2) Publish, within 10 days after such filing, in a newspaper of general
circulation in the borough, a statement setting forth the balance in
the borough treasury at the beginning of the fiscal year, revenues
received during the year by major classification, expenditures
made during the year by major functions, the resources and
liabilities of the borough at the close of the fiscal year, the gross
liability and net debt of the borough, the assessed valuation of the
borough, the assets of the borough with the character and value
thereof and the date of the last maturity of the respective forms of
funded debt and the assets in each sinking fund.
§ 1-16 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 3-4
3:8
§ 3-5. State surcharge and penalty provisions to prevail.
The surcharge and penalty provisions of Section 1196(c) and 1196(d) of the
Borough Code1 are included herein by reference as though fully set forth
herein.
§ 3-6. Abolishment of Elected Auditor.
The office of Elected Borough Auditor is hereby abolished within the
Borough of East Greenville. The Elected Auditors now in office shall retain
that office for the balance of the terms for which they were elected but shall
not, during the balance of said term, audit, settle or adjust the accounts of
the Borough of East Greenville. At the expiration of the terms of the Elected
Auditors now holding office, no one shall be elected to fill the vacancy in
that office.
Chapter 6
DRUG AND ALCOHOL POLICY
§ 6-1. Policy.
East Greenville Borough has a commitment to provide a safe and healthful
workplace for its employees and to ensure efficient production and services
to the taxpayers. We also recognize that in order to accomplish our mission,
we must implement programs that will enable us to achieve our objectives
in a cost effective manner while respecting the rights of our workers.
§ 6-2. Objectives.
The objectives of this policy are:
§ 6-3. Substances included in the testing policy.
The testing program will cover at least the following substances present
in the body: alcohol, cocaine, phencyclidine (PCP), marijuana, opiates
(including heroin) and amphetamines.
B. The Independent Auditor shall make his report on the uniform form
issued by the Department of Community Affairs.
A. To establish effective means to detect and deal with drug and alcohol
abuse while respecting the rights of the workers. The rights of workers
include the right to privacy, as defined by applicable law, to fair and
evenhanded treatment and to whatever rights may exist by reason of a
contract, including a labor contract, governing employment.
B. To comply with applicable state and federal law.
1. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 46196(d) and (e).
§ 3-4 DRUG AND ALCOHOL POLICY § 6-4
6:9
§ 6-4. Department of Transportation regulations concerning testing
of drivers.
The Department of Transportation (DOT) has established mandatory drug
and alcohol testing regulations that affect certain of the Borough of East
Greenville's drivers and driver-applicants. The Borough of East Greenville
is committed to complying with these federal regulations. Accordingly, the
following DOT requirements will apply to all employees with CDL's and
applicants for CDL positions:
A. Preemployment testing. All applicants for positions requiring a CDL will
be tested for alcohol and drugs prior to commencing employment with
the Borough of East Greenville. A driver-applicant testing positive for
alcohol or drugs will not be considered for employment.
B. Random testing. Each year, the Borough of East Greenville will use a
random process to select at least 50% of its CDL drivers, who will be
tested for the use of controlled substances. Additionally, at least 25% of
its CDL drivers will be randomly tested for alcohol use in the first year
of this policy. Drivers selected on a random basis for testing will be
required to supply a urine sample for the drug test. The alcohol test will
be done by a breathalyzer machine.
C. Reasonable cause testing. Testing will be required by the Borough of
East Greenville upon reasonable cause. The conduct necessitating
testing, if at all feasible, shall have been witnessed by at least two
supervisors. However, if only one supervisor is available, only that
supervisor need witness the conduct. Each witness must have received
training in the detection by observing a person's behavior of probable
drug and alcohol use.
D. Mandatory post-accident testing.
(1) Drivers will provide urine specimens for drug testing as soon as
possible after a commercial vehicle accident, but in no case later
than 32 hours after the accident. Drivers must be tested for alcohol
as soon as possible after a motor vehicle accident. A driver may not
consume alcohol until he has been tested.
(2) An "accident" is defined as involving:
(a) A fatality.
(b) The driver receiving a citation under state or local law for a
moving violation arising from the accident.
(3) If, as a consequence of an accident, a driver is seriously injured and
cannot provide a specimen at the time of the accident, he must
provide the necessary authorization for obtaining hospital records
and other documents that will indicate whether there were any
controlled substances or alcohol in his system at the time of the
accident.
§ 6-4 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 6-4
6:10
E. Return-of-duty testing. If the Borough of East Greenville offers a driver
reemployment after the driver has been referred to an alcohol and
substance abuse professional and the driver has undergone all
recommended treatment, the driver will be tested for alcohol and drugs
prior to returning to duty.
F. Follow-up testing. Any driver who has returned to duty after a positive
alcohol or drug test will be subject to unannounced follow-up tests for a
period up to 60 months. There will be at least 6 follow-up tests for
alcohol and 3 follow-up tests for drugs given during the first 12 months.
All follow-up tests will be paid for by the borough.
G. Employee Assistance Program (EAP).
(1) The Borough of East Greenville will establish an Employee
Assistance Program, which will include the following:
(a) An educational and training component for drivers, addressing
alcohol and controlled substances.
(b) An education and training component for supervisory
personnel, addressing alcohol and controlled substances.
(c) A written statement on file and available for inspection,
outlining the Borough of East Greenville's EAP.
(2) The EAP training program for all drivers and supervisory personnel
will consist of at least 60 minutes of training. The training program
will also include the following elements:
(a) The effects and consequences of alcohol and/or controlled
substance use on personal health, safety and the work
environment.
(b) The manifestations and behavioral causes that may indicate
alcohol and/or controlled substance use or abuse.
(c) Documentation of training given to drivers and supervisory
personnel.
H. Notification of test results. The Borough of East Greenville will notify its
drivers and driver-applicants of the results of tests conducted pursuant
to the DOT regulation. Drivers who test positive will also be advised
specifically what drug or the amount of alcohol that was discovered.
I. Recordkeeping.
(1) All of the records relating to the administration and results of the
borough's alcohol and drug testing program for its drivers will be
maintained for a minimum period of five years, except that
individual negative test results will be maintained for a minimum of
12 months.
§ 6-4 DRUG AND ALCOHOL POLICY § 6-4
6:11
§ 6-5. Use, possession and sale of alcohol or illegal drugs on
borough property.
(2) There shall be a Medical Review Officer who is a licensed doctor of
medicine or osteopathy with knowledge of drug abuse disorders
and who is employed by the Borough of East Greenville to review
alcohol and drug testing results in accordance with the DOT
regulations. The Medical Review Officer for each subsidiary and/or
division shall be the sole custodian of individual test results for that
division. The Medical Review Officer shall retain the reports of
individual test results for a minimum of five years.
(3) The Borough of East Greenville shall retain in the driver's
personnel medical file information indicating only the following:
(a) The employee submitted to a drug and/or alcohol test.
(b) The date of such test.
(c) The location of such test.
(d) The identity of the person or entity performing the test.
(e) Whether the test finding was "positive" or "sub-negative."
(4) The Borough of East Greenville will also maintain an annual
(calendar) year summary of the records related to the
administration and results of the testing program for its drivers
under the DOT regulations.
J. Access to test results and findings. No person may obtain the individual
test results retained by the Medical Review Officer, and no Medical
Review Officer shall release the individual test results of any employee
to any person, without first obtaining written authorization from the
tested individual, unless otherwise required by law.
A. Employees shall not use, sell, possess or receive alcohol and illegal
drugs or distribute or sell prescription drugs while on duty. Violation of
these rules will subject the employee to discipline up to and including
termination, subject to any applicable provisions and procedures of a
collective bargaining agreement. "Illicit drugs" includes prescription
drugs for which the employee does not have a valid prescription.
B. The Borough of East Greenville reserves the right, upon reasonable
suspicion, to ask for consent to search the vehicle or personal property
of any employee during working hours or while on the Borough of East
Greenville's property or designated workplace.
C. Any employee refusing to consent to or cooperate with a reasonable
search or investigation will be relieved of duty and removed from the
workplace resulting in appropriate disciplinary action, up to and
including possible termination, for insubordination.
§ 6-4 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 6-5
6:12
§ 6-6. Reservation of rights.
§ 6-7. Limitations; severability.
This policy will be limited by any applicable federal or state law or municipal
ordinance, and by any applicable collective bargaining agreements. Any
portion of this policy which directly conflicts with such a collective
bargaining agreement will not be implemented for that bargaining unit, but
shall be severable and shall not affect the validity and enforcement of the
remainder of the policy.
§ 6-8. Noncontractual arrangement.
§ 6-9. Job applicant's test consent.
Every applicant for a position with the Borough of East Greenville that will
require his maintenance of a commercial driver's license will be required,
D. Prescription drugs must be kept in their original container identifying
the drug, dosage, date of prescription and physician. Employees are
required to notify their supervisor if taking a prescription drug that
could impair their working ability or alertness.
E. Third party or contractor employees while on the Borough of East
Greenville's property will also be subjected to this policy with violations
resulting in removal from the premises.
A. The Borough of East Greenville reserves the right to add to, change or
modify this policy, in its sole discretion, and to terminate any employee
at any time, except as those rights are restricted by law or by any
applicable collective bargaining obligation or agreement. The Borough
of East Greenville accepts no liability in the event of an alleged breach
of any of the policies or procedures set forth in this policy.
B. The Borough of East Greenville encourages every employee and
prospective employee voluntarily to comply with this policy not only for
his or her own safety, but for the safety of others. Because of its
importance, the Borough of East Greenville will take all necessary steps
to ensure implementation of and compliance with this policy.
A. This policy and this document (or any accompanying document
executed or delivered pursuant to or in connection with the policy) are
not intended to confer any contractual or other rights or claims in favor
of the Borough of East Greenville's employees.
B. Any failure to implement the policy or any part thereof or any variation,
addition or omission to the procedures set forth in the policy shall not
confer any contractual or other rights or claims in favor of the employee
not otherwise conferred by law. (Note: The employee remains employed
at will.)
§ 6-5 DRUG AND ALCOHOL POLICY § 6-9
6:13
as a condition of his employment, to execute a drug and alcohol test consent
which shall be in essentially the following form:
JOB APPLICANT/DRUG/ALCOHOL TEST CONSENT
I, ________________________________, understand that the Borough of East
Greenville's policy on drug/alcohol abuse requires that all job applicants
or new employees for positions requiring a CDL will be tested, and that
management may request a test randomly and for cause for the presence
of alcohol/drugs in my body. I acknowledge that a confirmed positive test
may cause me to be not hired or to be removed from the payroll and
subject to discipline up to and including discharge or with a
recommendation to attend a drug/alcohol rehabilitation program. I fully
understand that if I should refuse to take the test, I will not be hired or
could be suspended from my job without pay or terminated for
insubordination. I also understand that the test results will be kept in
confidence and handled by authorized management personnel.
I hereby consent () or refuse () to take the drug/alcohol test.
I acknowledge that this document (or any accompanying document
executed or delivered pursuant to or in connection with the policy) is not
intended to confer any contractual or other rights or claims in my favor
(and that I remain employed at will).
DATE ____________________________ SIGNED _____________________
Applicant
DATE ____________________________ SIGNED _____________________
Witness
Chapter 7
FRAUD INVESTIGATION AND REPORTING POLICY
§ 7-1. Policy statement; purpose; applicability.
A. This fraud policy is established to facilitate the development of controls
that will support the detection and prevention of fraud against the
Borough of East Greenville. It is the intent of the Borough to promote
appropriate and consistent behaviors by providing guidelines and
assigning responsibility for the development of controls and performing
investigations as necessary.
B. This policy is set forth to design the requirements for reporting and
investigating any fraudulent activities or related misconduct in the
operations of the Borough of East Greenville. Activities may include
fraud; violations of laws, policies or procedures; or violations of rules
that involve the processing of financial records, handling of documents
or Borough equipment or property, and reporting of financial results.
C. The scope of this policy applies to the Borough of East Greenville and all
operating funds and departments within the responsibility of the
§ 6-9 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 7-1
6:14
§ 7-2. Scope; Audit Committee; complaints.
§ 7-3. Authority of Committee.
§ 7-4. Reporting form.
Borough. This policy applies to any known or suspected financial and
ethical irregularities involving employees and elected officials, as well
as consultants, vendors, contractors or subcontractors doing business
on behalf of the Borough.
A. To report fraudulent activities and other related issues, a fraud
reporting investigation policy and form is issued and shall be followed
precisely.2
B. The President of the Borough Council is named as Chairman of the
Audit Committee and is responsible for implementing the policy to
maintain the integrity of the financial reporting of the Borough, the
system of internal controls, the audit process and monitoring
compliance of financial reporting. The Audit Committee shall also
include the Chair of the Finance Committee and the Chair of the
Personnel Committee. If the President of the Council and the Chair of
the Audit Committee is compromised in this process, the responsibility
of the Chair passes to the Chair of the Finance Committee. The integrity
of the activities of personnel and the integrity of the financial
information of the Borough is of paramount importance to the Audit
Committee.
C. All employees are encouraged to submit any good faith concern or
complaint in respect to the maintenance of goods or property of the
Borough, the accuracy and integrity of the Borough's accounting,
auditing and financial reporting, without fear of retaliation. Employees
are expected to report any concern regarding information which is
questionable, incorrect, misleading or fraudulent without regard to the
position of the person or persons responsible for the information.
A. The Audit Committee has the authority to initiate any investigation it
considers appropriate and shall have direct access to the external
auditor of the Borough, as well as to elected officials and employees of
the Borough, as needed to thoroughly complete an investigation.
B. For special fraud investigations, as deemed necessary, the Committee
shall have the authority to retain, at the Borough's expense, special
legal, accounting or other advisors or consultants considered necessary
in the performance of their duties.
A. All potential fraud situations shall be reported using the approved form3
or by sending a letter to the Chairman of the Audit Committee, or
2. Editor's Note: The fraud reporting form is on file in the Borough offices.
3. Editor's Note: The fraud reporting form is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 7-1 DRUG AND ALCOHOL POLICY § 7-4
6:15
§ 7-5. Confidentiality.
All information obtained as part of the investigation of the complaint will be
kept confidential and may not be discussed with personnel who do not have
a compelling reason to participate in the gathering of evidence regarding
the complaint. The Audit Committee shall use extreme care in conducting
the investigation to protect the confidentiality of all parties involved in the
process.
§ 7-6. Retention of records.
The Audit Committee must retain all complaints for a period of no less than
10 years. The Audit Committee must retain written documentation of all
reports and inquiries. Quarterly reports must be provided to the Borough
Council on any ongoing investigations, including actions taken to address
the complaint. Records related to any formal legal proceedings must be kept
permanently.
§ 7-7. Employee protection.
All employees are assured that no retaliation will be permitted against
them for complaints or concerns made in good faith. No employee will be
disciplined for refusal to carry out a directive that constitutes fraud or
violation of any federal or state laws.
§ 7-8. Policy questions.
All questions should be directed to the Chairman of the Audit Committee or
the Chairman of the Finance Committee.
§ 7-9. Incident types.
Chairman of the Finance Committee, c/o East Greenville Borough, 206
Main Street, East Greenville, PA 18041, clearly marked confidential on
the outside of the envelope or package. Contents of any accordingly
marked packages shall remain intact until delivered directly to the
Audit Committee Chairman. Complete name and address information is
necessary to provide the claimant with an acknowledgement of receipt.
B. Complaints shall be sufficiently described to allow the Audit Committee
to thoroughly review and investigate the issue. If the reporter wishes to
discuss the complaint with the Audit Committee, a telephone number
must be included.
A. Accounting/audit irregularities: acts related to the misstatement and/or
destruction of Borough audit work papers or accounting documents.
Acts that fraudulently influence, neglect, manipulate or mislead any
parties (including independent auditors, certified accountants or the
East Greenville Borough Council) engaged in performing an audit.
§ 7-4 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 7-9
6:16
Chapter 8
LOCAL GOVERNMENT INVESTMENT TRUST
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pensions — See Ch. 13A.
§ 8-1. Participation in Trust.
This governmental unit shall join with other local governmental units in
accordance with the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act4 and other similar
acts by becoming a settlor of the Pennsylvania Local Government
Investment Trust (the Trust) and entering into the Declaration of Trust,
which is adopted by reference with the same effect as if it had been set out
verbatim in this section and a copy of which shall be filed with the minutes
of the meeting at which this chapter was adopted.
B. Falsification of Borough records: any act or omission which alters a
record from its original record or failure to provide documents to the
Council or Manager.
C. Fraud/embezzlement: deliberate attempts to deceive in order to gain,
such as a fraudulent refund, transaction or any other personal gain
achieved by deception. Any attempt to obtain Borough funds or goods
or services via the creation of counterfeit checks, unauthorized
purchases or checks and forged alterations of checks, including forged
signatures or endorsements. Includes unauthorized personal use of
Borough credit. Any wrongful appropriation of money, property or
services by a person to whom it has been entrusted.
D. Insurance fraud: any claim or acceptance of claims paid or insurance
benefits received based on false information.
E. Kickbacks: the solicitation or acceptance of gifts, favors or cash in
exchange for a duty or function which is required to be performed by
the employee as part of their regular duties.
F. Theft: the taking of money or instruments of money or goods or services
from the offices, equipment or any site owned and operated by the
Borough without the permission of the appropriate authority. This
includes theft of time or any act which causes an employee to be paid
for time not worked for the benefit of the Borough.
G. Unauthorized discounts or relief of payment: this includes the offering
or giving of a discount or releasing a party from debt without the
permission of the appropriate authority.
4. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 7-9 DRUG AND ALCOHOL POLICY § 8-2
6:17
§ 8-2. Authorization to purchase shares.
This governmental unit is authorized to purchase shares in the Trust from
time to time with available funds, and to redeem some or all of those
shares from time to time, as funds are needed for other purposes, subject
to the terms and restrictions of the Declaration of Trust referred to in § 8-1.
These actions are to be taken by the officers designated for this purpose,
pursuant to general or specific instructions by the governing body of this
governmental unit.
§ 8-3. Custody of funds.
The trustees of the Trust are designated as having official custody of this
governmental unit's funds which are invested by the purchase of shares in
the Trust.
§ 8-4. Findings and determinations.
As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act,5 the following
matters are specifically found and determined:
A. The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the Declaration of
Trust referred to in § 8-1;
B. This governmental unit's participation in the Trust shall be terminable
at any time by ordinance/resolution, subject to the terms and
restrictions of the Declaration of Trust referred to in § 8-1;
C. The Declaration of Trust and the purchase of its shares are for the
purpose of investing this governmental unit's funds in obligations which
are otherwise legal investments, as part of a pooled arrangement with
other local governmental units, thereby achieving economic and other
advantages of pooled investments, and the powers and scope of
authority delegated are set forth in the Declaration of Trust referred to
in § 8-1;
D. It is not necessary to finance the agreement authorized herein from
funds of this governmental unit except through the purchase of shares
in the Trust;
E. The Trust shall be managed by a board of trustees as set forth in the
Declaration of Trust and the bylaws provided for therein;
F. Shares may be repurchased and redeemed from time to time as this
governmental unit may determine to be necessary or appropriate to
meet its cash investment requirements in accordance with the terms
and restrictions of the Declaration of Trust referred to in § 8-1; and
5. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 8-2 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 8-4
6:18
Chapter 9
CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
§ 9-1. Civil Service Commission established.
The Borough of East Greenville ("Borough") hereby establishes a Civil
Service Commission ("Commission") in compliance with the Pennsylvania
Borough Code,6 as amended.
§ 9-2. Commission membership.
The Commission shall consist of three commissioners who shall be qualified
electors of the Borough and shall be appointed by the Borough Council
initially to serve for the terms of two, four and six years. As terms expire, the
members of the Commission shall each be appointed for terms of six years.
When a vacancy occurs on the Commission for any reason, said vacancy
shall be filled by the Borough Council for the unexpired term within the
period of 30 days after the vacancy occurs.
§ 9-3. Alternates.
Borough Council may appoint up to three alternate members in addition to
the three regular members of the Commission. Each alternate member shall
be a qualified elector of the Borough and shall serve a term of six years.
Alternate members may participate in all proceedings and discussions of
the Commission to the same and full extent as provided by law for
Commission members, but may only cast a vote if designated as a voting
alternate member pursuant to Section 11747 of the Borough Code.
§ 9-4. Oaths and affirmations.
Each member of the Commission, before entering upon the discharge of the
duties of office, must take an oath or affirmation of office pursuant to the
Section 11418 of the Borough Code.
§ 9-5. Incompatible offices.
No regular or alternate member of the Commission may hold an elective or
appointed office under the federal government, this commonwealth or any
political subdivision of the commonwealth, except that one member of the
G. The Trust shall be empowered to enter into contracts for policies of
group insurance and employee benefits, including social security, for its
employees.
6. Editor's Note: See 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
7. Editor's Note: See 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 1174.
8. Editor's Note: See 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 1141.
§ 8-4 DRUG AND ALCOHOL POLICY § 9-5
6:19
Commission may be a member of the Borough Council and one member may
be a member of the teaching profession.
§ 9-6. Compensation.
No member of the Commission may receive any compensation for their
duties on the Commission.
§ 9-7. Organization of Commission; quorum.
The Commission first appointed shall organize within 10 days of its
appointment and shall elect one of its members as the Chairman and
one member as the Secretary. The Commission shall, thereafter, meet and
organize on the first Monday of each even-numbered year. The Secretary
of the Commission shall give each Commission member 24 hours' notice
in writing of each and every meeting of the Commission. Two members of
the Commission shall constitute a quorum, and no action of the Commission
shall be valid unless it shall have the concurrence of at least two members.
All Commission meetings, aside from reorganization meetings, shall be held
on an as-needed basis and shall be scheduled by the Chairman of the
Commission.
§ 9-8. Rules and regulations of the Commission.
The Commission shall have the authority pursuant to Section 1176 of the
Borough Code to prescribe, amend and enforce rules and regulations for
its function. Said rules and regulations and modifications shall be made
available by the Borough for public distribution or inspection. The rules
and regulations or any amendments must be approved by Borough Council
before their effective date. No rule or regulation may be annulled, amended
or supplemented to without prior approval of Borough Council.
§ 9-9. Minutes, recordkeeping, and annual report.
The Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings and records of
examinations and other official actions. The Commission shall create an
annual report to Council briefly summarizing its work during the year,
which report shall be available for public inspection.
§ 9-10. Appointments and promotions; suspension, removal or
reduction in rank for police officers.
A. Each and every appointment to and promotion in the police force of the
Borough shall be made only according to qualifications and fitness, to
be determined by competitive examinations which shall be under the
control of the Civil Service Commission.
B. No person shall be suspended, removed or reduced in rank as a paid
employee on the police force of the Borough except in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter and applicable state law.
§ 9-5 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 9-11
6:20
§ 9-11. Borough obligations to the Civil Service Commission.
§ 9-12. Investigations.
§ 9-13. Examinations.
A. To ensure the reasonable and proper function of the Commission, the
Borough shall provide to the Commission the following:
(1) Clerical assistance that is necessary for the work of the
Commission.
(2) Suitable and convenient room for the use of the Commission.
(3) Stationery, postage, printing, and supplies.
(4) The services of a solicitor for the Commission to be appointed by
the Commission and paid by the Borough.
B. Prior approval by Borough Council is required for an expenditure of
funds in connection with the Commission.
A. The Commission shall have the sole authority to conduct investigations
concerning all matters in connection with the administration and
enforcement of the civil service provisions of this chapter and rules and
regulations adopted thereunder and of the civil service provisions of the
Borough Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The Chairman of
the Commission shall have the authority to administer oaths and
affirmations in connection with such investigations.
B. The Commission shall have the authority to issue subpoenas over the
signature of the Chairman to compel the attendance of witnesses and
the production of records and papers pertaining to any investigation or
inquiry.
A. The Commission shall make rules and regulations, to be approved by
Borough Council as above provided, providing for the examination of
applicants for positions and promotions in the police force and shall
prescribe the minimum qualifications of all applicants to be examined
and the passing grades. All examinations for positions or promotions
shall be practical in character and shall relate to such matters and
include such inquiries as will fairly test the merit and fitness of the
persons examined to discharge the duties of the employment sought. All
examinations shall be open to all applicants who have the minimum
qualifications required by the rules and regulations. Every applicant
shall be subject to the regulations adopted by the Commission and shall
be required to submit to a physical fitness or agility examination. Every
applicant, if made a conditional offer of employment, shall be given a
physical and psychological medical examination in accordance with the
regulations of the Commission.
§ 9-11 DRUG AND ALCOHOL POLICY § 9-13
6:21
§ 9-14. Rejection of applicant; appeals.
B. Public notice of the time and place of every examination, together with
information as to the kind of position or place to be filled, shall be given
by publication once in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Borough, or, at least two weeks prior to each examination, and a copy of
the notice shall be posted in the office of the Commission or Borough
Hall.
C. Once the testing process is completed, including any background,
physical agility or other examination, with the exception of any physical
and psychological medical examination, the Commission shall post in
the Borough Hall the eligibility list containing those individuals who
have passed the examination and rank the candidates who have
satisfied the minimum requirements for appointment. Persons, male or
female, who served in the military or naval service of the United States
during any war in which the United States has been, is now or shall
hereafter be engaged and who have honorable discharges from such
service who have successfully passed the examination shall be given the
additional credits and preference in appointment and promotion as
provided by law under 51 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 71 (relating to veterans'
preference). The eligibility list shall be valid for one year from the date
the Commission ranks all passing applicants, assigns veterans'
preference points and formally adopts the eligibility list. The
Commission may, at its sole discretion, void the eligibility list or extend
any eligibility list at any time and for any reason for up to an additional
12 months by a majority vote of the Commission at a duly authorized
Commission meeting.
D. Each person desiring to apply for examination shall complete and file
with the Commission a formal application with the Commission. The
Commission may reject any application that is incomplete or that fails
to conform to the rules and regulations of the Commission or as may
otherwise be required by law.
A. The Commission may refuse to examine, or, if examined, may refuse to
certify as eligible after examination, any applicant who is found to lack
any of the minimum qualifications for examination prescribed in the
Commission's rules and regulations. The Commission may also refuse to
examine, or, if examined, may refuse to certify as eligible, any applicant
who is physically or mentally unfit to perform the full duties of the
position to which he or she seeks employment or who is illegally using a
controlled substance, as defined in Section 102 of the Controlled
Substances Act (Public Law 91-513, 21 U.S.C. § 802), who is guilty of a
crime involving moral turpitude, or of infamous or notoriously
disgraceful conduct, or who has been dismissed from public service for
a delinquency or misconduct in office, or who is affiliated with any
group whose policies or activities arc subversive to the form of
government set forth in the constitutions and laws of the United States
and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 9-13 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 9-14
6:22
§ 9-15. Procedure for filing appointments.
§ 9-16. Provisional appointments.
B. If any applicant or person believes he or she is aggrieved by refusal of
the Commission to examine or certify the applicant as eligible after
examination, the Commission shall, at the request of the applicant,
within 10 days of said request, appoint a time and place for a public
hearing, where applicant may appear with or without counsel, at which
time the Commission shall review its refusal to make such examination
or certification and take testimony as may be offered. The decision of
the Commission shall be final.
A. Except as provided in Subsection B of this section, every original
position or employment in the police force, except that of Chief of
Police, shall be filled in the following manner:
(1) Borough Council shall notify the Commission of any vacancy which
is to be filled and shall request the certification of a list of eligible
candidates.
(2) The Commission shall certify, for each existing vacancy from the
eligible list, the names of three persons, or a lessor number where
three are not available, who have received the highest average.
(3) Borough Council shall make a conditional appointment from the
three names certified, based solely on the merits and fitness of the
candidates, unless Borough Council makes objections to the
Commission regarding one or more of the certified persons for any
of the reasons provided in this chapter. Should such objections be
sustained by the Commission, the Commission shall strike the
name of such candidate from the eligible list and certify the next
highest name for each name stricken off. As each subsequent
vacancy occurs in that same or another position, precisely the same
procedure shall be followed.
B. Any vacancy in an existing position in the police force which occurs as a
result of retirement, resignation, disability or death may be filled by
Borough Council by the reappointment or reinstatement of a former
employee of the police force who had previously complied with the
provisions of this section. No examination other than a physical
examination as directed by the Commission shall be required in any
case of reappointment or reinstatement.
C. In the case of a vacancy in the office of Chief of Police or equivalent
official, Borough Council may nominate a person to the Commission. It
shall become the duty of the Commission to subject that person to a
noncompetitive examination, and if such person shall be certified by the
Commission as qualified, he may then be appointed to that position, and
thereafter shall be subject to all the provisions of this chapter.
§ 9-14 DRUG AND ALCOHOL POLICY § 9-16
6:23
§ 9-17. Physical examinations.
All applicants for examination shall undergo a physical examination, either
before or after the written examination, which shall be conducted under
the supervision of a physician appointed by the Borough Council. No person
shall be eligible for appointment until that physician certifies that the
applicant is free from any bodily or mental defect, deformity or disease that
might incapacitate him for the discharge of the position desired.
§ 9-18. Promotions.
Promotions of any officer of the police force shall be based on examinations
as prescribed by the Commission. All questions relative to the promotion
shall be practical in character and shall fairly and reasonably test the
distinction and fitness of persons seeking promotion. Only the Borough
Council shall have the authority to determine in each instance whether an
increase in salary shall constitute a promotion.
§ 9-19. Removals.
A. Whenever there are urgent reasons for the filing of a vacancy in any
position in the police force and there are no names on the eligible list
for such appointment, Borough Council may nominate a person to the
Commission for noncompetitive examination, and if such nominee shall
be certified by the Commission as qualified after such noncompetitive
examination, he may be appointed provisionally to fill such vacancy.
B. Within three weeks of the provisional appointment, the Commission
shall hold a competitive examination and certify an eligible list. A
regular appointment shall then be made from the name or names
submitted by the Commission. Nothing herein shall be construed to
prevent the appointment, without examination, or persons, temporarily
as police officers in cases of riot or other emergencies.
A. No person employed in the police force of this Borough shall be
suspended, removed or reduced in rank except for the following
reasons:
(1) Physical or mental disability affecting the person's ability to
continue in service, in which case the person shall receive an
honorable discharge from service.
(2) Neglect or violation of any official duty.
(3) Violation of any law if the violation constitutes a misdemeanor or
felony.
(4) Inefficiency, neglect, intemperance, immorality, disobedience of
orders or conduct unbecoming of an officer.
(5) Intoxication while on duty.
§ 9-16 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 9-19
6:24
§ 9-20. Prior employees exempted.
All appointments to the police force, including the Chief of Police or
equivalent official, prior to the creation of the Commission and adoption
of Ord. No. 2017-05 shall continue to hold their positions and shall not
be required to take any examination under the provisions of this chapter,
except as may be required for promotion, provided that, this section shall
not be construed to apply to persons employed temporarily in emergency
cases.
§ 9-21. Prohibition.
No discrimination shall be exercised, threatened or promised by any person
against or in favor of any application or employee because of political or
religious opinions or affiliations or race, and no offer or promise or reward,
favor or benefit, directly or indirectly, shall be made to or received by any
person for any act done or duty omitted or to be done under chapter.
§ 9-22. "Police force" defined.
(6) Engaging or participating in the conduct of a political or election
campaign while on duty or in uniform or while using Borough
property otherwise than to exercise the person's own right of
suffrage.
(7) Engaging or participating in the conduct of a political or election
campaign for an incompatible office as provided in § 9-5 of this
chapter.
B. Any person suspended, removed or reduced in rank shall have the right
to demand a hearing, and a hearing shall be granted by the Commission
pursuant to Section 1191(a)9 of the Borough Code. In the event the
Commission shall sustain the charges and order the suspension or
removal or reduction in rank, the person suspended, removed or
reduced in rank shall have immediate right of appeal to the Court of
Common Pleas of Montgomery County as provided by law.
C. If, for financial or other reasons, it is deemed necessary by the Borough
to reduce the number of paid officers of the police force, the Borough
shall furlough the person, including a probationer, last appointed to the
police force. The removal shall be accomplished by furloughing in
numerical order commencing with the person last appointed until the
reduction shall have been accomplished. In the event the police shall
again be increased, the employees furloughed shall be reinstated in the
order of their seniority in the service. This subsection as to reductions
in force shall not be applicable to a chief of police.
A. The term "police force" as used in this chapter, shall mean a police force
organized and operating as prescribed by law, the members of which
9. Editor's Note: See 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 1191(a).
§ 9-19 DRUG AND ALCOHOL POLICY § 9-22
6:25
Chapter 10
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
devote their normal working hours to police duty or duty in connection
with the bureau, agencies, and services connected with police
protection work, and who are paid a stated salary or compensation for
such work by the Borough. "Police force" as used in this chapter shall
not include:
(1) Special police appointed by the Mayor to act in emergencies;
(2) Any person appointed solely for parking meter enforcement duties;
(3) Any special school police or any extra police servicing from time to
time on an hourly or daily basis;
(4) Any auxiliary policeman; or
(5) Any additional police serving from time to time or on an hourly or
daily basis.
§ 9-22 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 9-22
6:26
ARTICLE I
Secretary/Treasurer
[Adopted 12-4-1995 by Ord. No. 7-95]
§ 10-1. Authorization to appoint.
The Borough Council of the Borough of East Greenville is hereby authorized
to appoint a single individual to serve simultaneously in the capacity of
Borough Secretary and Borough Treasurer.
§ 10-1 DRUG AND ALCOHOL POLICY § 10-1
6:27

ARTICLE II
Borough Manager
[Adopted 6-7-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-05]
§ 10-2. Position created; election by Borough Council.
The position of Borough Manager is hereby created, and the Borough
Council is hereby authorized whenever there is a vacancy to elect, by a
majority of all the members, one person to fill said office, subject to removal
by the Borough Council at any time by a vote of the majority of all the
members.
§ 10-3. Powers and duties.
The powers and duties of the Borough Manager are per the job description
as follows and subject to modification by the Borough Council by a vote of
the majority of all the members:
A. Supervise and be responsible for the activities of all Borough
departments, except the Police Department.
B. With the concurrence of Council, hire, and when necessary for the good
of the Borough, suspend or discharge employees under the Manager's
supervision and jurisdiction.
C. Make recommendations to Council with respect to the compensation of
all employees under his/her supervision and jurisdiction.
D. Prepare and submit to Council before the close of the fiscal year, or on
such alternative date as Council may determine, a budget for the next
fiscal year as an explanatory budget message and administer same.
E. Obtain from the chief of each department, board, agency or other office
estimates of revenues and expenditures and other supporting duties for
the purpose of preparing the budget.
F. To the extent provided by law, execute and enforce the ordinances and
resolutions of the Borough.
G. Attend all meetings of Council and, upon request, attend its committee
meetings with the right to take part in any and all discussions pursuant
to the rules and regulations for the conduct of meetings as established
by Council.
H. Assist in the preparation of the agenda for each meeting of Council and
supply facts pertinent thereto.
I. Submit periodic reports of the condition of Borough ordinances and
such other reports, as Council deems appropriate and may request.
J. Make recommendations to Council as the Manager deems necessary
and appropriate.
§ 10-2 DRUG AND ALCOHOL POLICY § 10-3
6:29
K. Submit to Council as soon as practicable at the close of the fiscal year a
complete report of the administrative activities of the Borough for the
preceding year, if requested.
L. Secure compliance with all franchises, leases, permits, and privileges
granted by Council.
M. Employ, with the approval of Council, experts and consultants to
perform work and to advise in connection with any of the functions of
the Borough and to see to the letting of contracts in due form of law.
N. Supervise performance and faithful execution of all contracts.
O. Secure payment to the Borough of all money owed and insure that
proper proceedings are taken for the securing and collection of all of
the Borough's claims.
P. Be the Purchasing Officer of the Borough and purchase, in accordance
with the provisions of the Borough Code, all supplies and equipment for
various agents, boards and departments and other offices of the
Borough.
Q. Oversee the preparation of necessary invoices and collection of utility
fees for water service, and garbage service, and any other municipal fee
imposed by Borough ordinance.
R. Oversee the preparation of invoices for and collection of those taxes not
otherwise collected by the Tax Collector.
S. Serve as Secretary to the Zoning Hearing Board and Planning
Committee.
T. Serve as Borough Zoning Officer.
U. Be responsible for managing and directing the finances of the Borough
to insure proper investments of all municipal funds in excess of
immediate needs, as well as the administration of all loans.
V. Keep an account of all purchases and, when directed by Council, make a
full and written report thereof.
W. Issue rules and regulations, subject to the approval of Council,
governing the requisition and purchase of all municipal supplies and
equipment.
X. Investigate and dispose of all complaints regarding services or
personnel of the Borough.
Y. Be administrator, supervisor and be responsible for activities of any and
all Borough employees who shall be assigned to his/her jurisdiction by
ordinance or resolution of Council or assigned to his/her jurisdiction by
the Mayor, in writing, as hereinafter provided.
§ 10-3 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 10-3
6:30
Z. Keep a current inventory showing all real and personal property of the
Borough and its condition, and shall be responsible for the care and
custody of all such property, including equipment, buildings, parks and
all other Borough property, which is not by law assigned to some other
office or body for care and control.
AA. Ensure the publishing of all notices, ordinances or other documents
required by law to be published, and preparation or cause to be
prepared, all reports which the Borough or any officials thereof are
required by law to prepare.
BB. Prepare and have custody of all municipal records required by law to be
kept by the Borough and not by a specific officer.
CC. Where the law makes it the duty of a specific officer to keep or maintain
records, the Manager shall make available to such officer all necessary
clerical assistance for the preparation of such records and shall make
available a place for the custody of such records.
DD. Keep a complete set of maps and plats showing the location of all
Borough utilities and other Borough properties, streets and other
public places, and all lots or parcels of land subdivided according to
law.
EE. Shall maintain an office in Borough Hall and shall spend such time in
the performance of his/her duties as may be required by Council.
FF. When the Manager becomes ill or needs to be absent from the Borough,
the Manager shall designate, with the approval of Council, one qualified
member of his/her staff who shall perform the duties of the Manager
during the Manager's absence or disability.
§ 10-3 DRUG AND ALCOHOL POLICY § 10-3
6:31
Chapter 12
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 35.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
85.
Zoning — See Ch. 95.
§ 10-3 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 10-3
12:32
ARTICLE I
East Greenville Borough Planning Commission
[Adopted 4-2-1962 by Ord. No. 3-62; amended in its entirety
8-4-1969 by Ord. No. 1-69]
§ 12-1. Creation.
There is hereby created the East Greenville Borough Planning Commission
consisting of five residents of the Borough of East Greenville, three of whom
shall be citizen members and two of whom may either be members of the
Borough Council or a member of Council and a representative appointed by
the Borough to the Upper Perkiomen Valley Area Planning Council, or other
official, as determined from time to time by the Council.
§ 12-2. Term of office.
§ 12-3. Appointment of Chairman.
The Chairman of the Planning Commission shall be designated by the
Borough Council and shall perform all the customary duties of a presiding
officer until his term as a member shall expire, except that the Council at
its regular meeting in March of each calendar year may designate another
member as Chairman of the Planning Commission or, in its discretion, at the
expiration of the term of the Chairman, may reappoint him as the continuing
Chairman.
§ 12-4. Vacancies.
The Chairman of the Planning Commission shall promptly notify the
Borough Council concerning any vacancies in the Commission, and the
Council shall promptly fill such vacancy for the unexpired term.
A. The term of office of each member of the Commission shall be for four
years or until his successor is appointed and has qualified, except that
the members of the Borough Planning Commission appointed pursuant
to Ordinance No. 3-62, approved April 2, 1962,' shall continue in office
until the end of the terms for which they have been appointed.
B. The term of one member shall expire (after the terms of the first
Commission members shall expire) at the end of the 14th day of April of
each of three successive years, and at the end of the fourth year, the
terms of two members shall expire April 14, and thereafter terms shall
expire according to the same plan of three successive years and the
fourth year, respectively, so that there shall be five members at all
times, including the Chairman. No more than two terms shall expire in
any one calendar year.
§ 12-1 PLANNING COMMISSION § 12-5
12:33
§ 12-5. Statutory authority for changes to Planning Commission.
Changes in the constitution or responsibilities of the Planning Commission
shall be made only in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as the same may be amended.
§ 12-6. Powers and duties.
A. The powers and duties of the East Greenville Borough Planning
Commission shall be and include all those authorized under The
Borough Code,2 as amended, and the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, being Act No. 247, approved July 31, 1 968,§ the
provisions of which are incorporated herein by reference thereto the
same as though set forth at length herein and as the same may be
amended from time to time.
B. The Planning Commission shall prepare and keep up-to-date according
to professional surveys an Official Map and plan made on behalf of the
Borough Council or as may be authorized from time to time by said
Council upon behalf of the Borough Planning Commission, depicting the
exact location of existing streets, proposed streets and all public
grounds, public storm and sanitary sewers, the Borough water system
and all approved subdivisions and/or annexations.
C. The Planning Commission shall make recommendations for
amendments to the Comprehensive Plan and such additions or
amendments to the Borough Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance, the Zoning Ordinance of I 969§ or its amendments and such
other regulations or ordinances as the Commission may deem
necessary or desirable for the proper development of the Borough.
§ 12-5 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 12-6
12:34
ARTICLE II
Upper Perkiomen Valley Regional Planning Commission
[Adopted 9-2-1997 by Ord. No. 97-4]
§ 12-7. Creation; membership; and terms.
East Greenville Borough shall join with the municipalities of Pennsburg
Borough, Red Hill Borough, Green Lane Borough, Upper Hanover
Township, and Marlborough Township to create the Upper Perkiomen Valley
Regional Planning Commission (Commission) as per the guidelines set forth
under Section 1102 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Code, Act 247 of
July 31, 1968, as reenacted and amended. Each participating municipality
shall appoint two members. The term of each member shall be two years;
however, initially each municipality shall appoint one member for a oneyear
term and a second member for a two-year term so that the term
of membership of the members appointed by the individual municipalities
shall be on a staggered basis. Qualification of members, the removal of
members, the conduct of business, etc., shall be governed by Article II and
Article XI of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Code.
§ 12-8. Purpose.
A. The six municipalities of the Upper Perkiomen Valley have come to
recognize that the issues associated with growth and development,
such as, but not limited to, traffic congestion, air and water pollution,
and loss of open space, are too large for any one municipality to deal
with. They further recognize that current growth and anticipated
growth, if not properly managed, will lead to the diminution of the
region's quality of life. They are concerned that current zoning
requirements which call for each and every municipality to provide for a
full range of uses, regardless of historic development patterns, is
inefficient and potentially destructive to the region's economic and
social structure.
B. To this end, the six municipalities of the Upper Perkiomen Valley hereby
embark on a course of action to implement regional planning and
regional zoning. Only through regional planning and regional zoning
can growth and development be rationally and fairly managed.
Therefore, East Greenville Borough empowers the Upper Perkiomen
Valley Regional Planning Commission to undertake the development of
a Joint Municipal Comprehensive Plan that shall encompass the six
municipalities of the Upper Perkiomen Valley. Upon the successful
completion of the Joint Municipal Comprehensive Plan, and its adoption
by all the participating municipalities, the participating municipalities
may so instruct the Regional Planning Commission to undertake the
development of a Joint Municipal Zoning Ordinance and Zoning Map.
§ 12-7 PLANNING COMMISSION § 12-9
12:35
§ 12-9. Powers and duties.
The Upper Perkiomen Valley Regional Planning Commission shall have the
responsibility to prepare a Joint Municipal Comprehensive Plan for the six
participating municipalities of the Upper Perkiomen Valley. To this end, the
powers and duties of the Commission are as follows:
§ 12-10. Local Planning Commissions and Zoning Hearing Boards.
Each municipality shall retain its own municipal Planning Commission and
Zoning Hearing Board. The participating municipalities agree that for all
matters relating to lot line changes, subdivisions, land developments,
variances, special exceptions and conditional uses, or any other matter of
a planning or zoning nature in which jurisdiction resides in the governing
body of a municipality, shall not be a joint planning or joint zoning activity.
§ 12-11. Officers and terms.
The officers of the Upper Perkiomen Valley Regional Planning Commission
shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and Secretary, all of whom
A. To prepare a Joint Municipal Comprehensive Plan pursuant to Article III
and Article XI of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
B. That in the preparation of the Joint Municipal Comprehensive Plan, the
members of the Commission shall represent the interests of their
respective municipalities and shall cast one vote per municipality on all
matters that require action.
C. Any vote taken by Commission members pertaining to regional
planning and regional zoning must be unanimous for it to pass. All other
non-planning and zoning related matters may be approved by simple
majority.
D. Upon the completion of the Joint Municipal Comprehensive Plan by the
Commission, and its adoption by all the participating municipalities, the
Commission may be instructed by the participating municipalities to
prepare a Joint Municipal Zoning Ordinance and Zoning Map which
shall be presented to the participating municipalities for their
consideration and adoption.
E. If so directed by the participating municipalities to develop a Regional
Zoning Ordinance and Zoning Map, the Regional Zoning Ordinance and
Zoning Map shall be prepared pursuant to Article VI and Article VIII-A
of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
F. Should joint municipal zoning be formally adopted by the participating
municipalities, the Regional Planning Commission shall review all
proposed changes to the Joint Municipal Zoning Ordinance and Zoning
Map and shall make a formal recommendation to the participating
municipalities regarding said change. The recommendation of the
Commission shall be advisory only.
§ 12-9 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 12-11
12:36
are to serve for a term of one year. The Chairperson and Vice Chairperson
shall be members of the Commission, but the Secretary need not be a
member of the Commission.
§ 12-12. Withdrawal.
Any participating municipality may withdraw from the Regional Planning
Commission after one month's formal notice. Upon receiving notice that a
municipality wishes to withdraw from the Regional Planning Commission,
the governing bodies of the remaining municipalities shall promptly
schedule a meeting to consider whether the remaining municipalities wish
to continue with the Regional Planning Commission. Should joint municipal
zoning be enacted, notice of withdrawal shall be pursuant to the standards
set forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
§ 12-11 PLANNING COMMISSION § 12-12
12:37
Chapter 13
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS, AUTHORITY OVER
§ 13-1. Jurisdiction.
Responsibility for the maintenance of public parks and municipal open
space land, and the creation and regulation of such recreational activities
conducted thereon or in which the municipality participates, is vested in the
Property Committee of Borough Council.
§ 13-2. Duties.
The Property Committee of Borough Council shall be vested with the
following managerial and advisory functions:
Chapter 13A
PENSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Pension Fund — See Ch. 15.
A. Operate and supervise, on behalf of Borough Council, the public parks,
playgrounds and recreational areas of the Borough.
B. To conduct the recreational programs in which the Borough presently
participates and to advise Borough Council concerning additional such
programs as might be instituted, particularly those to be located within
the public parks.
C. To facilitate cooperation and joint utilization of the recreational services
and facilities maintained and operated by East Greenville Borough, the
Upper Perkiomen School District and YMCA.
§ 12-12 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 13-2
13:38
ARTICLE I
Municipal Employees Retirement System
[Adopted 6-25-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-0210]
§ 13A-1. Amendment of plan; agreement.
East Greenville Borough (the Borough), being a member municipality of the
Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System (the system), hereby elects to
amend its Municipal Pension Plan administered by the system in accordance
with Article IV of the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Law, 53 P.S.
§ 881.101 et seq. (Retirement Law) and does hereby agree to be bound
by all the requirements and provisions of the Retirement Law and the
Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act, 53 P.S.
§ 895.101 et seq., and to assume all obligations, financial and otherwise,
placed upon member municipalities.
§ 13A-2. Administration and provision of benefits.
As part of this article, the Borough agrees that the system shall administer
and provide the benefits set forth in the amended Municipal Pension Plan
Contract entered into between the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement
Board and the Borough effective March 1, 2013 (the contract).
§ 13A-3. Acceptance of contract and obligations.
The passage and adoption of this article by the Borough is an official
acceptance of the contract and the financial obligations resulting from the
administration of the contract.
§ 13A-4. Payment of obligations; liability.
Payment for any obligation established by the adoption of this article and
the contract shall be made by the Borough in accordance with the
Retirement Law and the Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and
Recovery Act. The Borough hereby assumes all liability for any
unfundedness created due to the benefit structure set forth in the contract.
§ 13A-5. Effective date; repealer.
The Borough intends this article to be the complete authorization of the
contract and it shall become effective and specifically repeal Ordinance No.
2007-5 either immediately or on March 1, 2013, which is the effective date
of the contract, whichever is later.
§ 13A-6. Copies on file.
A duly certified copy of this article and an executed contract shall be filed
with the system.
10.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Municipal Employees
Retirement System, adopted 12-3-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-5.
§ 13A-1 PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS, § 13A-6
13:39
Chapter 14
POLICE SERVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police pension fund — See Ch. 15.
Interlocal police protection — See Ch. 16.
Social security — See Ch. 23.
§ 13A-6 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 13A-6
13:40
ARTICLE I
Establishment of Police Force
[Adopted 5-8-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-0211]
§ 14-1. Creation of police force; effective date.
The Borough Council hereby creates a police force within the Borough
boundaries which henceforth shall be known and referred to as the "East
Greenville Borough Police Department."
§ 14-2. Appointment of police.
The Borough Council shall provide for the organization of the Borough of
East Greenville Police Department and shall appoint a Chief of Police and
such police officers deemed necessary by Council and shall determine the
duties, benefits and compensation of the police officers. Borough Council
may assign any member of the police department to attend training classes
offered by the federal or state government and may pay the police officer's
expenses while attending the school.
§ 14-3. Powers of police officers.
Each police officer of the Borough of East Greenville Police Department
shall have those powers and abilities as are granted to police officers under
the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the rules of the Supreme
Court or the ordinances of the borough for which a fine or penalty is
imposed, unless otherwise excepted by law.
§ 14-4. Badge.
Each police officer, when on duty, shall wear a shield or badge with the
words "Borough of East Greenville Police" inscribed thereon and before
commencing his or her duties shall affirm the oath of office.
§ 14-5. Commencement of Police Department.
The Borough of East Greenville Police Department shall commence police
services upon appointment of a Chief of Police by Borough Council.
11.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Ch. 14, comprising Art. I, Police
Department, Unified, adopted 9-8-1998 by Ord. No. 98-8, and Art. II, Cooperative
Agreement, adopted 5-27-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-5.
§ 14-1 PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS, § 14-5
13:41
Chapter 15
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 15, Policy Pension Fund, adopted 12-4-1995 by Ord. No.
8-95, was repealed 12-28-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-08.]
Chapter 16
POLICE PROTECTION, INTERLOCAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unified Police Department — See Ch. 14. Police Pension Fund — See Ch. 15.
§ 16-1. Agreement authorized.
The Borough Council of the Borough of East Greenville is hereby
authorized, pursuant to the terms and provisions of the General Municipal
Law and the Borough Code as set forth above, to enter into a written
agreement with the Borough of Red Hill, the Borough of Green Lane, the
Borough of Pennsburg and Marlborough Township as said municipalities
are associated with each other for the purpose of providing additional police
protection for the citizens of their respective municipalities in accordance
with the proposed agreement attached hereto and marked Exhibit A, the
terms and conditions of which are incorporated herein by reference and
which are intended to comply with the requirements of Section 7, Act 180
of 1972, 53 P.S. § 487.
§ 16-2. Provisions accepted.
The conditions of the agreement, the duration of the term of this agreement,
the purpose and objectives of the agreement, the manner and extent of
financing the agreement, the organizational structure necessary to
implement the agreement and the manner in which property, real or
personal, shall be acquired, managed or disposed of shall be the same
as those set forth in the proposed written agreement attached hereto as
Exhibit A and shall be incorporated herein by reference to the same extent
as if specifically set forth herein.
Chapter 17
RECORDS
§ 14-5 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 16-2
16:42
ARTICLE I
Open Records Policy
[Adopted 4-25-2017 by Res. No. 2017-07]
§ 17-1. Policy.
§ 17-2. Procedure for access to public records.
§ 17-3. Response to written requests.
A. Unless otherwise provided by law, a public record shall be accessible
for inspection and duplication by a requester. A public record shall be
provided to a requester in the medium requested if the public record
exists in that medium; otherwise, it shall be provided in the medium in
which it exists. Public records shall be available for inspection and
copying at the Borough Hall during normal business hours, Monday
through Friday, normal business hours, with the exception of holidays.
B. It is the Borough's policy to require the presence of a designated
Borough employee when files are examined by a requester, and to
charge a reasonable and equitable fee for copying Borough files that
are deemed to be a public record. Such fees are set by Pennsylvania's
Office of Open Records and shall be listed in the Borough's official fee
schedule.
A. All requests for access to public records shall be submitted by the
requester, in writing, on an official request for public information form
and delivered via mail, fax, email, or in person. Requests made verbally,
nonverbally and anonymously, and not made in writing on an official
request form by a requester, will not be honored and are not eligible to
be appealed by said requester if the Borough denies the request.
Request forms are available on the Borough's website at
egreenville.org. Acceptable forms are also available at the Pennsylvania
Office of Open Records website at openrecords.state.pa.us.
B. Each request shall be addressed to the Borough's Open Records Officer.
The request form shall include the requester's contact information, the
date of the request and shall identify or describe the records sought
with sufficient specificity to enable the Borough to ascertain which
records are being requested.
C. Creation of a public record. When responding to a request for access,
the Borough shall not be required to create a public record that does
not currently exist nor shall it be required to compile, maintain, format
or organize a public record in a manner in which the Borough does not
currently compile, maintain, format or organize the public record.
D. Record of request. A file shall be maintained for RTKL requests. Such
file shall contain the original request, a copy of the response, a record
of communications with the requester and a copy of other
communications.
§ 17-1 POLICE PROTECTION, INTERLOCAL § 17-3
16:43
A. Redaction. If the Borough determines that a public record contains
information that is subject to access, as well as information that is not
subject to access, the Borough's response shall be to grant access to the
information that is subject to access, and deny access to the information
that is not subject to access. If the information that is not subject to
access is an integral part of the public record and cannot be separated.
the Borough may redact from the public record the information that is
not subject to access.
B. Borough's response to written requests for access. Upon receipt of a
written request for access to a record, the Borough shall make a good
faith effort to determine if the record requested is a public record,
whether the Borough has possession of the same and whether the
public record is otherwise exempt and/or protected pursuant to the
RTKL. The Borough shall respond as promptly as possible under the
circumstances existing at the time of the request, but shall not exceed
five business days from the date the written request is received by the
Open Records Officer unless an extension is appropriate pursuant to
the RTKL. If the Borough fails to send the response within five days of
receipt of the written request for access, the written request for access
shall be deemed denied unless an extension is otherwise established.
C. Extension of time. Upon receipt of a written request for access to a
public record, the Borough shall make a good faith effort to respond as
promptly as possible under the circumstances existing at the time of the
request. The response shall not exceed five business days from the date
of the written request. The failure of the Borough to respond in the
designated time frame shall be deemed a denial of the request unless
one of the following exceptions applies:
(1) The request requires the redaction of information within a public
record;
(2) The request requires the retrieval of the document from a remote
location;
(3) A timely response cannot be accomplished due to legitimate
staffing limitations;
(4) A legal review is necessary;
(5) Requester did not comply with the Borough's policies regarding
public access;
(6) The requester refuses to pay fees; or
(7) The extent or nature of the request precludes a response within the
required time period.
D. The Open Records Officer shall determine if a timely response to the
requested record cannot be made due to one of the above exceptions. In
the event of one or more of the above exceptions, the Borough shall
§ 17-3 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 17-3
16:44
§ 17-4. Open Records Officer.
The Borough hereby designates the Borough Manager and/or Secretary as
the Open Records Officer in accordance with the Pennsylvania RTKL and
said Open Records Officer shall receive requests submitted to the Borough
under the RTKL, direct requests to other appropriate persons within the
Borough or to appropriate persons in another agency, track the Borough's
progress in responding to requests and issue interim and final responses.
The Open Records Officer shall also be charged with the responsibility of
providing Borough Council with a copy of each request that is received by
the Borough and each subsequent Borough response to each request.
§ 17-5. Severability.
In the event any provision, section, sentence, clause or part of this
resolution shall be held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect or
impair any remaining provisions, section, sentence, clause or part of this
send written notice to the requester within five business days of the
request stating the request is being reviewed, the reason for review
and the exception that applies, and a reasonable date that a response
can be expected, not to exceed 30 days from such notice. If a response
is expected more than 30 days after the five-day period, the request is
deemed denied unless otherwise agreed to by the requester in writing.
E. Denial of request. The Borough may grant a request, partially grant and
partially deny a request, or deny a request in its entirety. If the request
is denied or partially denied, the following must be included with the
denial:
(1) Description of the record requested;
(2) Specific reasons for the denial, including a citation of supporting
legal authority;
(3) Typed or printed name, title, business address, business telephone
number and signature of the Open Records Officer on whose
authority the denial was issued;
(4) Date of response; and
(5) Appeal procedure.
F. Appeal procedure. If the request is denied, partially denied or deemed
denied, the requester may file an appeal with the Office of Open
Records or judicial, legislative or other appeals officer designated
under the Pennsylvania RTKL, within 15 business days of the mailing
date of the Borough's response or deemed denial. The appeal shall
proceed in accordance with the Pennsylvania RTKL. The appeal shall
state the grounds upon which the requester asserts that the record is a
public record and shall address any grounds stated by the Borough for
denying or delaying the request.
§ 17-3 POLICE PROTECTION, INTERLOCAL § 17-5
16:45
resolution, it being the intent of the Borough Council that the remainder of
the resolution shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 17-5 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 17-5
16:46
Chapter 18
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Social security — See Ch. 23.
§ 18-1. Compensation of Councilmen.12
The compensation to be paid to Councilmen of the Borough of East
Greenville, except the President of Council, shall, for the year 2008 and
henceforth until repealed or amended, be the sum of $1,875 per year.
§ 18-2. Compensation of Mayor.13
The compensation to be paid to the Mayor of the Borough of East Greenville
and the President of Council shall, for the year 2008 and henceforth until
repealed or amended, be the sum of $2,500 per year.
Chapter 20
SEWER AUTHORITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 20.
Sewers — See Ch. 78.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
85.
Zoning — See Ch. 95.
12.Editor's Note: Compensation of other Borough officers of the Borough of East Greenville
will be as provided by the Borough Council by ordinance and/or resolution from time to
time.
13.Editor's Note: Compensation of other Borough officers of the Borough of East Greenville
will be as provided by the Borough Council by ordinance and/or resolution from time to
time.
§ 17-5 SEWER AUTHORITY § 20-1
20:47
§ 20-1. Intent to organize.14
The Council of the Borough of East Greenville, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania, hereby signifies its intention and desire to organize an
Authority jointly with the Borough of Pennsburg and the Borough of Red
Hill, both of Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, under the provisions of the
Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, known as the "Municipality Authorities Act
of 1945," its amendments and supplements,15 for the purpose of acquiring,
holding, constructing, improving, maintaining and operating, owning,
leasing, either in the capacity of lessor or lessee, sewers, sewer systems
or parts thereof, sewage treatment works, including works for treating and
disposing of industrial waste and the facilities and equipment therefor.
§ 20-2. Articles of Incorporation.
The Mayor, President of Council and the Secretary of this borough are
hereby authorized and directed to execute on behalf of this borough Articles
of Incorporation for said Authority in substantially the following form:
ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION
TO THE SECRETARY OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA:
In compliance with the requirements of the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382,
known as the "Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, " as amended and
supplemented,_ and pursuant to Ordinances adopted by the municipal
authorities of the Boroughs of Red Hill, Pennsburg and East Greenville,
respectively, all situated in Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, expressing
the intention and desire of the municipal authorities of said municipalities
to organize a joint municipality authority under said Act, the said
municipalities hereby do certify:
1. The name of the Authority is "Upper Montgomery Joint
Authority."
14.Editor's Note: The Borough of Est Greenville, in conjunction with the Boroughs of Red Hill
and Pennsburg, all of Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, entered into an agreement on
3-3-1960 with Upper Montgomery Joint Authority, whereby the Authority covenanted to
construct a sanitary sewage collection system and related sewer facilities in and for said
boroughs, and the boroughs made certain agreements with respect to the proposed
construction, including the enforcing of abutting property owners to connect to said
system, the granting of certain easements and rights-of-way and certain other related
matters. Said agreement was ordained by Ord. No. 5-60, adopted 3-7-1960. On 4-6-1964,
by Ord. No. 1-64, the Borough of East Greenville entered into a supplemental agreement,
amending Section 2 of the original agreement but keeping the original agreement intact
and operative. Said ordinances are on file in the office of the Borough Secretary.
15.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
§ 20-1 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 20-2
20:48
ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION
TO THE SECRETARY OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA:
2. The said Authority is formed under the provisions of
the Act of May 2,1945, P.L. 382, known as the
"Municipality Authorities Act of 1945," as amended
and supplemented, for the purpose of acquiring,
holding, constructing, improving, maintaining and
operating, owning, leasing, either in the capacity of
lessor or lessee, sewers, sewer systems or parts
thereof, sewage treatment works, including works for
treating and disposing of industrial waste and the
facilities and equipment therefor.
3. No other Authority has been organized under the said
Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, as amended and
supplemented, or under the Act of June 28, 1935, P.L.
463, as amended,_ and is in existence in or for any of
the incorporating municipalities, except Pennsburg
Borough Authority, incorporated January 16, 1952, for
erection of the Pennsburg Auditorium.
4. The names of the incorporating municipalities are:
Borough of Red Hill, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania; Borough of Pennsburg, Montgomery
County, Pennsylvania; Borough of East Greenville,
Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
5. The names and addresses of the municipal authorities
of said incorporating municipalities are:
Borough of Red Hill, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania
Office Name Address
Burgess R. B. Walker 8th and Washington
Streets Red Hill, PA
Councilman and
President of Council
A. R. Shup 632 Main Street Red
Hill, PA
Councilman J. Bruce Wallace Jefferson Street Red
Hill, PA
Councilman Walter Fronheiser Washington Street Red
Hill, PA
Councilman Harold L. Schwenk 616 Washington Street
Red Hill, PA
Councilman Wilford R. Gaugler West Second Street Red
Hill, PA
Councilman M. C. Wehr 204 Sixth Street Red
Hill, PA
§ 20-2 SEWER AUTHORITY § 20-2
20:49
Councilman C. R. Hillegass North Main Street Red
Hill, PA
Borough of Pennsburg, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania
Office Name Address
Burgess George Ruth 417 Seminary Avenue
Pennsburg, PA
Councilman and
President of Council
Dr. Robert Maglieri 516 Main Street
Pennsburg, PA
Councilman Elmer Jones 710 Main Street
Pennsburg, PA
Councilman Stanley Berger 118 Main Street
Pennsburg, PA
Councilman Roger Kline East Eighth Street
Pennsburg, PA
Councilman Donald Fox 490 Macoby Street
Pennsburg, PA
Councilman Harvey Freed 656 Main Street
Pennsburg, PA
Councilman Charles Roberts 231 Seminary Avenue
Pennsburg, PA
Borough of East Greenville, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania
Office Name Address
Burgess Franklin B. Snyder 222 Jefferson Street
East Greenville, PA
Councilman and
President of Council
Ralph P. Frutchey 432 Third Street East
Greenville, PA
Councilman Clarence A. Roth 513 Jefferson Street
East Greenville, PA
Councilman Wilmer A. Leister 12 Cherry Street East
Greenville, PA
Councilman Aaron H. Stoudt North Washington
Street East Greenville,
PA
Councilman Robert A. Thomas 138 Main Street East
Greenville, PA
Councilman Alton R. Bauman Cherry Street East
Greenville, PA
Councilman Lester K. Bieler 440 Fourth Street East
Greenville, PA
§ 20-2 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 20-2
20:50
6. The names and addresses and terms of office of the first members
of the Board of said Authority, each of whom is a resident and
citizen of the appointing municipality, are as follows:
Name Address Appointee of
the Borough of
Term of Office
(number of
years from Jan.
1, 1959)
Clarence R.
Richard
368 Main Street
Red Hill, PA
Red Hill 5
R.B. Erb 148 Jefferson
Street East
Greenville, PA
East Greenville 4
Forrest J. Beyer 805 Main Street
Red Hill, PA
Red Hill 3
John F. Keelor 771 Main Street
Pennsburg, PA
Pennsburg 2
Foster C.
Hillegass
404 Main Street
Pennsburg, PA
Pennsburg 1
Wilmer G.
Dimmig
232 Main Street
East Greenville,
PA
East Greenville 1
7. The members of the Board of the said Authority shall be six in
number; and said members shall be apportioned on the basis of
two members for each of the incorporating municipalities.
Each member of the Board of the said Authority shall be appointed by the
municipal authorities of the municipality which he is to represent on said
Board. The terms of office of any members of the Board appointed to
succeed any of the first members of the Board shall be for a period of five
years.
The municipal authorities of each of said municipalities, at a meeting held
not later than one month prior to January 1st in each year in which a
vacancy will occur in the Board by reason of the expiration of the term of
a member appointed by that municipality, shall appoint, as a member of
the Board, a citizen of that municipality, for a term of five years, to
succeed the member whose term expires on January 1st, next succeeding.
Any other vacancy in the Board shall be filled by the municipal authorities
of the municipality which appointed the member whose vacancy is to be
filled and the person so appointed to fill said vacancy shall hold office for
the remainder of the unexpired term of the member whose vacancy in
office he has been appointed to fill.
§ 20-2 SEWER AUTHORITY § 20-2
20:51
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Boroughs of Red Hill, Pennsburg and East
Greenville, all situated in Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, each have
caused these Articles of Incorporation to be executed by its Burgess and
its President of Council, attested by its Secretary and the seal of the
Borough to be affixed, this 15th day of April, 1958.
Borough of Red Hill, Montgomery
County, PA
Attest: By:............................ ..................
Burgess
........................
Secretary
By: ...........................
President of Council
(SEAL)
Borough of Pennsburg, Montgomery
County, PA
Attest: By:............................ ..................
Burgess
........................
Secretary
By: ...........................
President of Council
(SEAL)
Borough of East Greenville,
Montgomery County, PA
Attest: By:............................ ..................
Burgess
........................
Secretary
By: ...........................
President of Council
(SEAL)
§ 20-3. Publication of notice of incorporation.
The Mayor, President of Council and Secretary of this borough are further
directed to cause a notice of the substance of this chapter, including the
substance of the above Articles of Incorporation, and of the proposed filing
§ 20-2 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 20-3
20:52
of the above Articles of Incorporation, to be published once in a newspaper
published and of general circulation in the County of Montgomery,
Pennsylvania, and once in the Montgomery County Law Reporter, all as
required by the said Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, as amended and
supplemented.16
§ 20-4. Filing of Articles and proofs of publication.
The Mayor, President of Council and Secretary of this borough are further
directed to cause said Articles of Incorporation, together with the necessary
proofs of publication, to be filed with the Secretary of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, and to do all other acts and things necessary or appropriate
to effect the incorporation of Upper Montgomery Joint Authority, including
the payment of any filing fees in connection therewith.
§ 20-5. Appointment of initial representatives to Board.
The following-named persons are hereby appointed as the first members of
the Board of the Authority, for the following terms of office:
Name Address Term of Office
(number of years)
Wilmer G. Dimmig 232 Main Street East
Greenville, PA
1
R.B. Erb 148 Jefferson Street
East Greenville, PA
4
§ 20-6. Declaration of necessity.
The adoption of this chapter is deemed necessary for the benefit and
preservation of the public health, peace, comfort and general welfare of,
and will increase the prosperity of, the people of this borough.
Chapter 22
SHADE TREE COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 12.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 83.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
85.
16.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
§ 20-3 SHADE TREE COMMISSION § 22-1
22:53
§ 22-1. Commission established.
There is established a Shade Tree Commission for the Borough of East
Greenville, the members of which shall be five residents of the borough at
large to be appointed by the Mayor to serve for the Mayor's term in office
during which such residents are appointed.
§ 22-2. Compensation; duties.
Commission members shall receive no compensation for their service,
which shall entail the following duties:
§ 22-3. Guidelines.
Whenever called upon to recommend a variety of tree to be planted in
a particular location, the Commission shall be guided in making such
selection by the following considerations:
A. Establish an inventory, by species and location, of all trees growing
within or upon or the branches of which spread above or over the
streets and highways of East Greenville or within or upon any other
property in which the borough has an ownership interest.
B. Recommend to the Borough Council such shade trees as said borough
might have planted upon such streets, highways or property of the
Borough of East Greenville as referenced in § 22-2A.
C. Recommend to the Borough Planning Commission such trees as might
be appropriate to meeting the shade tree and landscaping requirements
of Chapter 85, Subdivision and Land Development, with respect to such
subdivisions and land developments as come before the Planning
Commission.
D. Periodically indicate to the Code Enforcement Officer those trees upon
the inventory, the growth of which or the deterioration to which renders
them a hazard to persons making use of the streets, highways or
property of the Borough of East Greenville as referenced in § 22-2A.
E. Annually report to the Borough Council its activities for the preceding
year and prescribe such action as it then may deem appropriate for the
current year.
A. The ability of that variety to grow at the planting location.
B. The value of that variety as animal habitat.
C. The compatibility of that variety with other trees in the area.
D. The compatibility of that variety with such adjoining structures, such as
power lines, buildings, roads and sidewalks.
§ 22-1 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 22-4
22:54
§ 22-4. Orders to remove or prune.
Upon receipt of notification from the Shade Tree Commission that a
particular tree or trees on the street tree inventory poses a threat to
members of the public, the Code Enforcement Officer shall immediately
make such situation known to the owner of the property upon which such
tree is located. Unless the Code Enforcement Officer shall determine that
the threat posed by the tree is imminent, he shall direct, in his notice, that
the owner of the property upon which the tree is located have it removed or
pruned, as per the Code Enforcement Officer's instructions, within 30 days
of the date of the notice.
§ 22-5. Noncompliance; performance of work by borough.
If the property owner to whom notice of a dangerous condition, as set forth
above, has been given shall fail to comply within the specified thirty-day
period, the borough may cause the offending tree to be removed or pruned,
as the case may be, and collect from the owner the costs and expenses
thereof by way of municipal claim, civil action at law or such other legal
proceedings as may be designated.
Chapter 23
SOCIAL SECURITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auditor — See Ch. 3.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 10.
Police Pension Fund — See Ch. 15.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 18.
§ 23-1. Legislative intent.
It is the considered opinion of the Borough Council that the extension of
the social security system to employees and officers of the Borough of
East Greenville will be of great benefit not only to the employees of the
borough by providing that said employees and officers may participate
in the provisions of the old-age and survivors insurance system, but also
to the Borough of East Greenville by enabling it to attract and retain in
employment the best of personnel and thus increase the efficiency of its
government.
§ 23-2. Statutory authority.
The 1951 Session of the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, in regular session, enacted a statute, known as "Act No.
491,"17 which is the Enabling Act provided for in Section 218 of Public
17.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S.§ 201 et seq.
§ 22-4 SOCIAL SECURITY § 23-2
23:55
Law 734, 81st Congress,18 which designated the Secretary of Labor and
Industry of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to act as the state agency
to implement the coverage of employees and officers under the said old-age
and survivors insurance system.
§ 23-3. Authorization to execute plan and agreement.
The Borough of East Greenville is hereby authorized to execute and deliver
to the state agency a plan or plans and agreement, required under Section
6 of said Enabling Act and the Social Security Act, to extend coverage to
employees and officers of the Borough of East Greenville, and do all other
necessary things to effectuate coverage of employees and officers under the
old-age and survivors insurance system.
§ 23-4. Deductions and contributions.
The Secretary is hereby authorized to establish a system of payroll
deduction to be matched by payments by the Borough of East Greenville to
be made into the Contribution Fund of the Social Security Act through the
office of the state agency, and to make charges of this tax to the fund or
funds from which wage or salary payments are issued to employees of the
Borough of East Greenville. Such payments are to be made in accordance
with the provisions of the law and regulations promulgated by the state
agency and the Federal Security Administrator. Such payments which are
delinquent shall bear interest at the rate of 1/2 of 1% per month until such
time as payments are made.
§ 23-5. Appropriation of funds; commencement of participation.
Appropriation is hereby made from the proper fund or funds of the Borough
of East Greenville in the necessary amount to pay into the Contribution
Fund as provided in Section 4 of the Enabling Act and in accordance with
the plan or plans and agreement. Authority is given to the President and
the Secretary of the Borough Council of the Borough of East Greenville to
enter into an agreement with the state agency, which agreement shall be in
accordance with Act No. 49119 and with Section 218 of the Social Security
Act.20 Such plan and agreement shall provide that the participation of this
Borough of East Greenville shall commence as of January 1, 1951.
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 30
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
18.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 418.
19.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S.§ 201 et seq.
20.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 418.
§ 23-2 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 30-1
30:56
§ 30-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ON OR ABOUT THE PERSON — The location of any container, bottle
or can containing any alcoholic beverage which is nearby, close at hand,
convenient of access and within such distance of the party so having it as
that such party could, without materially changing his position, get his hand
on it.
OPEN — The condition of a container whose cap, cork, top or other closing
device has been removed, or the condition of a can which has been
punctured or pulled open so as to break its seal.
POSSESSION — The exercising of conscious dominion or control over any
container, bottle or can containing an alcoholic beverage.
§ 30-2. Possession of open containers or consumption in public
prohibited.
§ 30-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction before any District Justice, be subject to a fine of not less than
$25 nor more than $300, together with costs of prosecution for the
violation, or, in default of payment thereof, to suffer imprisonment for not
more than 30 days.
A. No person shall have on or about his person, possess, carry or transport
liquor, wine, beer or other alcoholic beverages in open containers in or
about any public sidewalk, street, alley, walkway, public park or
playground or any other public place in the Borough of East Greenville.
No person shall drink or consume liquor, wine, beer or other alcoholic
beverages in or upon any street, sidewalk, alley, walkway, public park or
playground or any other public place in the Borough of East Greenville
except as hereinafter provided.
B. Possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages may be permitted
on borough property under such regulations as shall be promulgated
from time to time by the Borough Council with the advice and
concurrence of the Borough Council.
C. Any person or persons desiring to possess and consume alcoholic
beverages on any borough property may do so only after obtaining a
written permission from the Borough Council.
D. Failure to obtain permission from the Borough Council as aforesaid in
Subsection C shall constitute a violation of this chapter and shall be
subject to the penalties provided in § 30-3 herein.
§ 30-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 30-4
30:57
§ 30-4. Word usage.
In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall
include the feminine.
Chapter 32
ANIMAL CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 56. Parks and recreation — See Ch. 62.
§ 32-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
ANIMAL — All nonhuman vertebrate and invertebrate species, whether wild
or domestic, commonly considered to be part of the animal kingdom.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — The contracted official ordained with the
authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
ANIMAL HOUSING — Any property, premises or places where animals are
located, but not a place that is defined as a kennel.
AT LARGE — An animal off the premises of the owner not secured by a leash
or lead or under the control of a responsible person and obedient to that
person's commands.
BOROUGH — The Borough of East Greenville, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH OFFICIAL — The Borough Code Enforcement Officer shall have
the power to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
OWNER — Every person, firm or corporation having a right of property in
any animal which is kept, harbored or cared for within the Borough of East
Greenville for a period of three or more days, as well as every person, firm
or corporation occupying any premises within the Borough which permits
any animal to remain on or about its premises for a period of three or more
days.
POLICE PERSONNEL — All police officers with the authority to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
RESIDENTIAL AREA — Any area of the Borough where the predominant
land use is the residential dwelling use of human beings and shall include,
but not be limited to, the residential zones as defined in Chapter 95, Zoning,
of the Borough's codified ordinances.
VETERINARIAN — A graduate of a recognized school of veterinary
medicine licensed to practice in the State of Pennsylvania.
§ 30-4 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 32-1
30:58
WILD OR EXOTIC ANIMAL —
§ 32-2. Trespass; running at large; cleanup of fecal matter; noise.
Any animal of a species prohibited by Title 50, Code of Federal
Regulations, or otherwise controlled by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. It shall include any animal which is wild, fierce,
dangerous, noxious or naturally inclined to do harm.
A.
Wild animals, however domesticated, shall include but not be limited
to:
Dog family (Canidae): all except domesticated dogs, including wolf,
fox, coyote, dingo, etc.
(1)
Cat family (Felidae): all except commonly accepted domestic cats,
including lions, pumas, panthers, mountain lions, leopards,
jaguars, ocelots, margays, tigers, wild cats, etc.
(2)
Bears (Ursidae): all bears, including grizzly, brown bears, black
bears, etc.
(3)
Weasels (Mustelidae): all except domesticated mink and ferrets,
including weasels, martens, wolverine, badgers, otters, ermines,
mongooses, etc.
(4)
(5) Raccoons (Procyonidae): all raccoons and civets.
(6) Primates (Hominidae): all subhuman primates.
(7) Porcupines (Erethizontidae): all porcupines.
(8) Skunks: all excepting domesticated skunks.
(9) Snakes: all venomous snakes and venomous lizards.
(10)Crocodilians: all alligators, caimans, crocodiles, gavials, etc.
(11)Venomous fish and piranha.
(12)Venomous invertebrates.
B.
A. The owner, possessor or manager of any animal shall not permit the
same to trespass upon the premises of another property owner without
prior permission or he shall be in violation of this chapter and shall have
the burden of proving that permission to maintain his animal on the
property of such other.
B. It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in custody or control of any
animal to allow the animal to run at large upon public property or upon
the private property of other than the owner or person in custody or
control of said animal. The Borough official may seize a trapped, caged
or otherwise detained animal which is found running at large, either
upon public property or upon the property of other than the owner of
§ 32-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 32-2
30:59
§ 32-3. Reclaiming seized animals; fees; disposition of unclaimed
animals.
§ 32-4. Summary destruction of animals for humane reasons.
When, in the judgment of the Borough official, it is determined at the scene
of an accident that an animal is injured beyond any medical help, such
animal may be humanely destroyed.
such animal, and unaccompanied by the owner or keeper. Once seized
by a Borough official, the Borough official may transport the animal to
the Humane Society.
C. No owner of any animal or any person having the care, custody and
control of any animal shall permit the same to discharge or deposit any
fecal matter upon the property of another without immediately
removing such matter and disposing of it in a sanitary manner.
D. No owner or possessor of real property shall permit animal fecal matter
to accumulate on such property, and it shall be the owner's or
possessor's responsibility to remove such matter to prevent any such
matter, to prevent any such accumulation, from becoming a danger to
public health.
E. The owner, possessor or manager of any animal shall not permit the
same to make noise, bark, howl, or yelp continuously. "Continuously"
shall mean for a period of not less than 15 minutes during which the
animal in question persists in the noise described even though there is
intermittent periods of quiet.
A. The owner of an animal so seized and detained may reclaim the same
by:
(1) Paying all expenses incurred in feeding and boarding the animal at
a prevailing rate established by the Humane Society or other
similar organization at which the animal is detained; and
(2) Paying a transportation fee of $30; and
(3) Providing proof of compliance with such state legislation pertinent
to vaccination against rabies.
B. If the Borough official should seize an animal bearing a license tag or
legible tattoo, he shall cause immediate notice of such seizure to be
sent by registered or certified mail with return receipt to the person in
whose name the license was procured, or his agent, to claim such
animal within five days of the date of his receipt of such notice. Should
the owner not claim his licensed animal in accordance with such notice,
that animal can be given to the Humane Society or other similar
organization or destroyed by the Borough official in a humane manner.
§ 32-2 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 32-5
30:60
§ 32-5. Burial or cremation of dead animals and fowl.
The owner of any animal or fowl which has died, when said owner knows of
such death, shall forthwith have its body cremated or buried or otherwise
disposed of in a manner acceptable to the Borough official. Should the
owner of any dead animal or dead fowl fail to comply with the provisions of
this section, and after 48 hours of written notice delivered to such owner by
the Borough official, said Borough official shall be authorized to cause any
dead animal or fowl to be cremated or buried at the expense of said owner.
§ 32-6. Keeping of certain animals prohibited.
§ 32-7. Power to promulgate rules and regulations.
The Borough official, with the approval of the Borough Council, may
promulgate such written rules and regulations as may be reasonably
necessary for the administration of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 32-8. Interference with Borough official.
Any person directly or indirectly interfering with the Borough official in the
enforcement of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter.
§ 32-9. Unlawful release of seized animal.
Any person who shall take away or attempt to take away or who shall cut or
attempt to cut the leash of any animal from the possession and custody of
the Borough official or any police officer shall be guilty of a violation of this
chapter.
§ 32-10. Cruelty to animals.
A. Wild or exotic animals prohibited. No person shall keep a wild or exotic
animal in any place other than a veterinary hospital or clinic, humane
society or circus, sideshow or facility used for educational or scientific
purposes which provides proper cages, fences and other protective
devices adequate to prevent such animal from escaping or causing
injury to the public.
B. Sale, exchange, adoption or transfer of wild or exotic animals
prohibited. No person shall sell or offer for sale, adoption or transfer,
with or without charge, any wild or exotic animal. This section is not
intended to apply to persons owning or possessing wild or exotic
animals prior to the enactment of this chapter, provided that the person
or persons taking possession of such wild or exotic animal following
said sale, adoption, exchange or transfer is/are not a resident of the
Borough of East Greenville.
C. Keeping farm animals prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to
keep or maintain any cattle, swine, sheep, goats or fowl in the Borough.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
§ 32-5 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 32-10
30:61
§ 32-11. Severability; enforcement.
§ 32-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation that shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply
with any of the terms or provisions of this chapter or any regulation or
requirement promulgated pursuant thereto and authorized thereby shall,
upon conviction thereof, be ordered to pay a first-time fine of not less than
$50 and, in default of payment of fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment
of not more than 90 days. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate
offense. In the event of a second offense, the fine will double to no less than
$100.
Chapter 33
(RESERVED)
Chapter 35
(1) Overdrive, overload, overwork, torture, beat, mutilate, kill
needlessly, carry in a vehicle in an inhumane manner or otherwise
mistreat any animal.
(2) Fail to provide any pet or animal with proper food, drink, protection
from the weather and veterinary care.
(3) Abandon any pet or animal.
(4) Intentionally poison any pet or animal.
(5) Allow or promote any fight between animals or allow or permit any
such fight in or upon the premises of an individual.
B. In the event that the Borough official or other authorized agency finds
an animal in neglected conditions or to be suffering, it shall have the
right forthwith to remove or cause to be removed any such animal to a
safe place for care at the owner's expense, provided that the owner is
properly notified. Return to the owner shall not be permitted until the
owner has made full payment for expenses incurred. Said payment shall
not be considered in lieu of criminal charges which may be filed.
A. The provisions of this chapter are severable, and if any provision is held
unconstitutional or illegal, the remaining provisions of this chapter
shall in no way be affected or impaired.
B. Should any provisions of this chapter be held unenforceable with
respect to a particular type of animal because state legislation has been
regulating, with respect to that type of animal, the activity herein
sought to be regulated with respect to all types of animals, such
provision shall remain effective with respect to those types of animals
that are not the subject of such state legislation.
§ 32-10 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 32-12
33:62
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 12.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 44.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 53.
Plumbing — See Ch. 67.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 73.
Sewers — See Ch. 78.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
85.
Zoning — See Ch. 95.
§ 32-12 (RESERVED) § 32-12
33:63

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Uniform Construction Code
[Adopted 4-5-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-821; amended in its entirety
8-1-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-2]
§ 35-1. Election to administer and enforce state statute.
The Borough of East Greenville hereby elects to administer and enforce
the provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999,
35 P.S. §§ 7210.101-7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its
regulations.
§ 35-2. Adoption of uniform code by reference.
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters
401-405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference as the municipal building code of the Borough of East
Greenville.
§ 35-2.1. Amendments and revisions. [Added 8-4-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-04; amended 7-5-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-01]
Section 403.62 of the Uniform Construction Code, adopted by the Borough
Council of the Borough of East Greenville as the Building Code of that
Borough, is amended to henceforth read as follows:
§ 403.62 Permit requirements and exemptions.
(a) The following construction activities require a permit application to be
filed with the Borough, the applicable fees paid to the Borough and a
permit to be issued:
(1) The construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, movement,
demolition or change in occupancy of a residential building or the
erection, installation, enlargement, alteration, repair, removal,
conversion or replacement of an electrical, gas, mechanical or
plumbing system regulated by the Uniform Construction Code shall
first apply to the Building Code Official and obtain the required
permit under § 403.62a (relating to permit application).
(2) The construction, erection or installation of a one-story detached
accessory structure used as a toolshed, storage shed, playhouse
and similar uses, provided the floor area equals or exceeds 200
square feet.
(3) The addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil,
waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical.
21.Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Article I, Adoption of Building Code,
adopted 5-5-1997 by Ord. No. 97-2.
§ 35-1 (RESERVED) § 35-2.1
33:65
(4) An emergency repair or replacement of equipment may be made
without first applying for a permit if a permit application is
submitted to the Building Code Official within three business days
of the repair or replacement.
(b) A permit is not required for the exceptions listed in § 403.1(b) (relating
to scope) and the following construction if the work does not violate a
law or ordinance:
(1) Sidewalks and driveways that are 30 inches or less above the
adjacent grade and not placed over a basement or story below;
(2) Exterior or interior painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, floor
covering, cabinets, countertops and similar finishing work;
(3) Swings and other playground equipment accessory to a one- or
two-family dwelling;
(4) Window awnings supported by an exterior wall which do not
project more than 54 inches from the exterior wall and do not
require additional support;
(5) Replacement of glass in any window or door, provided the
replacement glass shall comply with the minimum requirements of
the International Residential Code;
(6) Installation of a window, door, garage door, storm window and
storm door in the same opening if the dimensions or framing of the
original opening are not altered;
(7) Replacement of existing roof material that does not exceed 25% of
the total roof area performed within a twelve-month period;
(8) Replacement of existing siding;
(9) Repair or replacement of porch or stoop flooring which does not
structurally support a roof located above the porch or stoop;
(10) Installation of additional roll or batt insulation;
(11) Replacement of exterior rainwater gutters and leaders;
(12) Installation of an uncovered deck where the floor of the deck is no
more than 30 inches above grade and the deck area does not
exceed 200 square feet;
(13) Fences not over six feet in high;
(14) Retaining walls that are not over four feet in height, measured from
the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a
surcharge;
(15) Listed cord-and-plug-connected temporary decorative lighting;
§ 35-2.1 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 35-2.1
33:66
(16) Reinstallation of attachment plug receptacles but not the outlets
therefor;
(17) Replacement of branch circuit over-current devices of the required
capacity in the same location;
(18) Electrical wiring, devices, appliances, apparatus or equipment
operating at less than 25 volts and not capable of supplying more
than 50 watts of energy;
(19) Minor repair work, including the replacement of lamps or the
connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved
permanently installed receptacles;
(20) Replacement of dishwashers and domestic clothes washers;
(21) Replacement of kitchen range hoods;
(22) Installation of battery-powered smoke alarms;
(23) Replacement of a minor part that does not alter approval of the
equipment or make the equipment unsafe;
(24) Portable heating, cooking, or clothes-drying appliances;
(25) Portable fuel-cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed
piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid;
(26) Portable heating appliances;
(27) Portable ventilation appliances;
(28) Portable cooling units;
(29) Steam, hot- or chilled-water piping within any heating or cooling
equipment regulated by this code;
(30) Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of
equipment or make such equipment unsafe;
(31) Portable evaporative coolers;
(32) Self-contained refrigeration systems containing 10 pounds (4.54
kg) or less of refrigerant or that are actuated by motors of one
horsepower (746 W) or less;
(33) The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe;
provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drainpipe, water,
soil, waste or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes
necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, such
work shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be
obtained and inspection made as provided in this code;
(34) The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves
or fixtures, and the removal and reinstallation of water closets,
§ 35-2.1 (RESERVED) § 35-2.1
33:67
provided such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or
rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures;
(35) Replacement of hose bib valves, provided the replacement hose bib
valves are provided with an approved atmospheric vacuum breaker,
replacement of ball cocks, replacement of plumbing faucets or
working parts of faucets, replacement of plumbing traps,
replacement of plumbing valves other than shower or combination
shower/tub valves;
(36) Replacement of a water closet, lavatory, or kitchen sink in its
original location without changing the supply, drain, or vent piping;
(37) Repair and replacement of heating, supply, and return piping and
radiation elements which do not require rearrangement of the
piping system, and the repair and replacement of heating duct
work;
(38) Repair and replacement of air-conditioning equipment and systems
and control devices;
(39) Replacement of clothes dryers, if there is no change in the fuel
type, location, or electrical requirement/characteristics.
Application or notice to the Building Official is not required for
ordinary repairs to structures, replacement of lamps, or the
connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved
permanently installed receptacles. Such repairs shall not include
the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or load-bearing support,
or the removal or change of any required means of egress, or
rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress
requirements, nor shall ordinary repairs include addition to,
alteration of, replacement or relocation of any water supply, sewer,
drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping,
electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting public health
or general safety.
§ 35-2.1 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 35-2.1
33:68
ARTICLE II
(Reserved)22
§ 35-3. through § 35-44. (Reserved)
22.Editor’s Note: Former Art. II, Flood-Prone Areas, adopted 11-6-1978 by Ord. No. 78-2, was
repealed 3-7-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01.
§ 35-3 (RESERVED) § 35-3
33:69

ARTICLE III
Upper Montgomery Board of Appeals
[Adopted 8-1-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-223]
§ 35-45. Creation of Board.
East Greenville Borough shall join with Upper Hanover Township,
Pennsburg Borough, Red Hill Borough, Green Lane Borough and
Marlborough Township, contiguous units of local government situate in
Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, each of which has chosen to adopt, as its
municipal building code, the Uniform Construction Code contained in 34 Pa.
Code, Chapters 401-405, in establishing a five-member board, to be known
as the Upper Montgomery Board of Appeals to hear and decide appeals
taken from the decisions of each of their municipal code enforcement
officers.
§ 35-46. Membership and appointment.
A. Members of the Upper Montgomery Board of Appeals shall be selected
by majority vote of those serving on a nominating committee comprised
of the presidents of the borough councils and chairmen of the boards of
supervisors of the member municipalities.
B. The initial members of the Upper Montgomery Board of Appeals shall
be chosen to serve for staggered terms. One member shall be chosen to
serve for a term of two years, two members chosen to serve for terms of
three years, and two members shall be chosen to serve for terms of four
years. Subsequent appointments shall be for terms of four years each. If
any member of the Board should resign or be unable to complete his
tenure, the nominating committee shall select a replacement to serve
for the balance of his term. Board members shall not be limited in the
number of successive terms they may serve.
C. Those who accept appointment to the Upper Montgomery Board of
Appeals must, by training and experience, be:
(1) A licensed engineer or architect;
(2) Employed in the construction industry; or
(3) An inspector or plan reviewer.
D. No member of the governing body of a constituent municipality or any
of their code enforcement officers may serve upon the Upper
Montgomery Board of Appeals. In the absence of a resident from one of
the constituent municipalities who is willing and qualified to accept
Board appointment, the nominating committee may seek a qualified
nonresident to serve.
23.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed and replaced former Art. III, Chimneys,
Stovepipes and Solid-Fuel-Burning Stoves, adopted 10-6-1980 by Ord. No. 6-80.
§ 35-45 (RESERVED) § 35-47
33:71
§ 35-47. Board functions.
It shall be the function of the Upper Montgomery Board of Appeals to rule
upon:
§ 35-48. Criteria for Board action.
A. Appeals from decisions rendered by the code enforcement officers of
the member municipalities regarding the meaning of Uniform
Construction Code provisions or the applicability of such provisions to
prospective building projects.
B. Applications for variance from the provisions of the Uniform
Construction Code or for extensions to the period of time granted an
owner by either the code or the code enforcement officer of a member
municipality to take some required action.
A. In considering an appeal, the Board shall find for the owner/appellant if
it determines that:
(1) The true intent of the Uniform Construction Code, or the act which
establishes it as a statewide code, was incorrectly interpreted by
the code enforcement officer;
(2) The provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act of
Nov. 10, 1999, P.L. 491, 35 P.S. § 7210.101 et seq., do not apply to
the circumstances out of which arose the decision appealed from;
or
(3) A form of construction equivalent to that prescribed by the Uniform
Construction Code is to be used.
B. In ruling on a request for extension of time or variance, the Board shall
consider the following:
(1) The reasonableness of the Uniform Construction Code's
applicability to a given set of circumstances.
(2) The degree to which the variance or extension of time requested
deviates from strict adherence to the requirements of the Uniform
Construction Code.
(3) The extent to which granting the variance or extension of time
requested will create an unsafe condition.
(4) The availability of such professional or technical personnel as is
needed to bring the appellant's project into compliance.
(5) The availability of such materials and equipment as is needed to
bring the appellant's project into compliance.
(6) The efforts of the appellant to come into compliance as quickly as
possible.
§ 35-47 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 35-48
33:72
§ 35-49. Proceedings before the Board.
(7) Compensatory measures that will provide equivalent protection to
the community.
A. An owner seeking relief from the Upper Montgomery Board of Appeals
shall commence proceedings before that Board by filing a petition with
the code enforcement officer of the member municipality in which his
property is situate. Petitions shall be on a form prepared by the Board
and provided to appellants for such purpose. Filing shall be complete
when the petition, with supporting documentation and filing fees, is
postmarked or hand delivered to the pertinent code enforcement
officer.
B. An appeal to the Upper Montgomery Board of Appeals will suspend, for
the duration of the Board's deliberations, all municipal enforcement
efforts against the appellant, excepting those brought under § 403.84
dealing with unsafe buildings, structures or equipment.24
C. Unless an appellant, in his petition requests a hearing, the Board shall
render its decision based upon a consideration of the petition along
with such supporting documents and legal memoranda as accompany
it.
D. Being an agency, as such is defined in the Sunshine Act, 65 Pa. C.S.A.
§ 701 et. seq., the Upper Montgomery Board of Appeals can take official
action only at an open meeting conducted in accordance with public
notice. The Board shall meet to consider appellant's petition, or to
conduct a hearing if such has been requested, at a meeting to be held
within 10 days of the date a filing is complete. Written notification of the
date, time and place when and where the petition will be considered or
the evidence heard shall be given to appellant and the Code
Enforcement Officer.
E. The Board shall provide a written notice of its decision to the appellant
and to the code enforcement officer. In its decision the Board of Appeals
may:
(1) Deny the request in whole or in part.
(2) Grant the request in whole or in part.
(3) Grant the request upon certain conditions being satisfied.
F. The Upper Montgomery Board of Appeals may not act upon appeals,
requests for variance or for extension of time relating to accessibility.
Such appeals and applications are within the exclusive purview of the
Accessibility Advisory Board under § 403.142 of the Uniform
Construction Code.
24.Editor's Note: See 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401-405.
§ 35-48 (RESERVED) § 35-50
33:73
§ 35-50. Board organization.
§ 35-51. Municipal responsibility.
A. The Upper Montgomery Board of Appeals shall reorganize annually, at
its first scheduled meeting of the year, by selecting one of its members
as Chairperson and another as Secretary.
B. The function of the Chairperson shall be to conduct meetings and
preside at hearings before the Board. In the Chairperson's absence, the
Secretary shall assume the Chair with a member selected from the
balance of those in attendance substituting as Secretary.
C. The function of the Secretary shall be to prepare and publish public
notice of Board meetings, keep minutes of all Board proceedings,
prepare all items of Board correspondence and draft and circulate the
decisions of the Board. In the absence of the Secretary, a member other
than the Chairperson, selected from those in attendance, shall assume
his role.
D. In all matters brought before the Board, the presence of three of the
Board's five members shall be sufficient to allow for the transaction of
business.
A. When it considers an appeal taken with respect to the impact of the
Uniform Construction Code upon a construction project within the
Borough of East Greenville, the Upper Montgomery Board of Appeals
functions as an internal agency of the Borough. It shall apply the
Uniform Construction Code with such modifications thereto as the
Borough Council of the Borough of East Greenville has enacted. All
Board meetings pertinent to such an appeal shall be held at an East
Greenville facility. The Borough, through its Code Enforcement Officer,
shall be a party to each proceeding pertinent to construction within its
borders.
B. The Borough of East Greenville does hereby establish Five Hundred
($500.00) Dollars as a fee imposed upon those persons who present a
petition to the Upper Montgomery Board of Appeals pertinent to
construction within the Borough. This fee shall be used to defray the
cost of public notice of any Board meetings held to hear or consider the
matter raised in appellant's petition, to compensate the members of the
Board and to cover any other costs associated with the proceedings.
Within 30 days of the date of the written decision, the Borough
Secretary shall forward to the appellant an itemized statement listing
all draws upon the fee paid at the outset of the appeal. The statement
shall be accompanied by the Borough's check in the sum of the unused
portion of the appellant's fee.
§ 35-50 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 35-52
33:74
§ 35-52. Withdrawal.
Any member municipality may depart the Upper Montgomery Board of
Appeals by advising the remaining members of its intention to do so.
§ 35-52 (RESERVED) § 35-52
33:75
Chapter 37
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
§ 37-1. Numbering required.
All dwelling houses and other buildings shall be numbered.
§ 37-2. Beginning points for numbering; even and odd numbers.
[Amended 2-2-1998 by Ord. No. 98-4]
§ 37-3. System of numbering.
The numbering shall be by blocks or squares and the basis for each number
shall be 20 feet, more or less as is required.
Chapter 39
CABLE TELEVISION
A. In causing numbers to be placed upon the buildings, Main Street shall
serve as a line of beginning for those streets extending east and west
therefrom. The portions of these streets which extend to the west of
Main Street shall have their names prefaced by the word "West" while
the portions thereof which extend to the east of Main Street shall have
their names prefaced by the word "East."
B. In causing numbers to be placed upon the buildings, Front Street shall
be the line of beginning for all streets extending north and south
therefrom.
C. Even numbers shall be placed on buildings located on the south and
west sides of streets and odd numbers on those situate on the north and
east sides of same.
§ 35-52 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 37-3
37:76
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 39-1. Title.
This Ordinance No. 3-96 shall be known and may be cited as the "East
Greenville Borough Cable Television Ordinance."
§ 39-2. Purpose.
A. The Borough of East Greenville finds that the development of cable
television and communications systems has the potential of having
great benefit and impact upon the people of East Greenville Borough.
Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated
with cable television, the borough further finds that the public
convenience, safety and general welfare can best be served by
establishing regulatory powers which should be vested in the borough
or such persons as the borough shall designate. It is the intent of this
chapter and subsequent amendments to provide for and specify the
means to attain the best possible public interest and public purpose in
these matters, and any franchise issued pursuant to this chapter shall
be deemed to include this finding as an integral part thereof.
B. Further, it is recognized that cable communications systems have the
capacity to provide not only entertainment and information services to
the borough's residents, but can provide a variety of broadband,
interactive communications services to institutions and individuals.
C. For these purposes, the following goals underlie the regulations
contained herein:
(1) Cable communications services should be available to all borough
residents.
(2) The system should be capable of accommodating both the present
and reasonably foreseeable future communications needs of the
borough and its residents and be upgraded to correspond to
present state of the Act.
(3) The system shall be constructed and maintained during the
franchise term so that new components may be integrated to the
maximum extent possible with existing facilities.
(4) The communications system authorized by this chapter shall be
responsive to the needs and interests of the local community.
§ 39-1 CABLE TELEVISION § 39-2
39:77

ARTICLE II
Definitions and Word Usage
§ 39-3. Word usage.
The present tense includes the future; the singular number includes the
plural, and the plural, the singular; and the masculine gender includes the
feminine gender. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory, and "may" is
permissive.
§ 39-4. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall be
construed throughout this chapter to have the meanings indicated:
ACCESS CHANNELS [PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL AND GOVERNMENT)
(PEG)] — Any channel on a cable system set aside by the franchisee for
public, educational and/or governmental use.
AFFILIATE — Any person who owns or controls, is owned or controlled by
or is under common ownership or control with the franchisee.
BASIC SUBSCRIBER TELEVISION SERVICE OR BASIC CABLE SERVICE
— Any service tier which includes the retransmission of local broadcast
signals, being the lowest cost tier of service provided.
CABLECAST SIGNAL — A nonbroadcast signal that originates within the
facilities of the cable communications system.
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM, CABLE SYSTEM, SYSTEM, CATV OR
CABLE TELEVISION — A facility consisting of a set of closed transmission
paths and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment
that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming
and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but
such term does not include a facility that serves only to retransmit the
television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; a facility
that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple unit dwellings under
common ownership, control or management, unless such facility or facilities
is covered within the terms and regulations of the Cable Act; a facility of
a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions
to Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, except that
such facility shall be considered a cable system [other than for purposes
of Section 621(c) of the Cable Act] to the extent such facility is used in
the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; any facilities
of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems;
or a facility which provides noncable services (other than those for public,
educational and governmental use).
CABLE SERVICE — The one-way transmission to subscribers of video
programming or other programming service and subscriber interaction, if
any, which is required for the selection of such video programming or other
programming service.
§ 39-3 CABLE TELEVISION § 39-4
39:79
CHANNEL — A video channel shall include both the visual and aural
carriers and corresponding side bands which constitute the picture and
sound of a television program. If at any time during the term of any
franchise agreement entered into pursuant to this chapter the bandwidth
necessary to deliver a video signal decreases so that a video signal may be
delivered on a band of frequencies of less than six Megahertz (Mhz), the
channel capacity on the cable system shall be increased accordingly if the
borough finds that such increase in channel capacity will not result in a loss
of signal quality or will meet any FCC signal quality standards that may
apply to such signals. A franchisee may establish additional requirements
concerning voice and data channels consistent with the franchise
agreement in order to ensure technical and operational integrity and
compatibility of the system, including switching, provided that they are
consistent with the performance standards of this chapter and the franchise
agreement.
CLOSED-CIRCUIT OR INSTITUTIONAL SERVICE — Such video, audio,
data and other services provided to institutional users on an individual
application basis. These may include, but are not limited to, one-way video,
two-way video, audio or digital signals among institutions and as may be
specified in the franchise to residential subscribers.
COMMERCIAL SUBSCRIBER — A subscriber who receives a service in a
place of business where the service may be utilized in connection with a
business, trade or professional and who pays the charges therefor.
COMMUNICATIONS POLICY ACT OR CABLE ACT — The Cable
Communications Policy Act of 1934 and the Cable Communications Policy
Act of 1984, as it may be amended or succeeded, including the Cable
Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and/or any
amendments.
CONVERTER — An electronic device which converts signals to a frequency
not susceptible to interference within the television receiver of a subscriber
and any channel selector which permits a subscriber to view all signals
delivered at designated converter dial locations at the set or by remote
control.
DISCRETE CHANNEL — A channel which can only be received by the
person and/or institution intended to receive signals on such channel.
DROP — A coaxial connection from feeder cable to the subscriber/user
premises in accordance with the Cable Act.
EDUCATIONAL ACCESS CHANNEL — Any channel designated for
educational access use.
FAIR MARKET VALUE — The price that a willing buyer would pay to a
willing seller for a going concern based on the system valuation prevailing
in the industry at the time, without the assignment of any value to the
franchise rights.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed
successor.
§ 39-4 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 39-4
39:80
FRANCHISE — The nonexclusive rights granted pursuant to this chapter
to construct, operate and maintain a cable communications system along
the public ways within all or a specified area in the borough. Any such
authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not mean or include any
license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on
a business within the borough as required by other ordinances and laws of
the borough.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT — A contract entered into between the borough
and any franchisee setting forth the specific terms and provisions of the
grant of a franchise pursuant to this chapter.
FRANCHISE AREA — The entire borough, or portions thereof, for which a
franchise is granted under the authority of this chapter. If not otherwise
stated in the franchise agreement, the franchise area shall be the corporate
limits of the borough, including all territory thereafter annexed to the
borough.
FRANCHISEE OR GRANTEE — The natural person(s), partnership(s),
domestic and foreign corporations, associations, joint venture(s) or
organizations of any kind which has been legally granted a franchise by the
borough and its lawful successor, transferee or assignee.
FRANCHISE FEE — The percentage, as specified by the borough, of the
franchisee's gross annual revenues from all sources payable in exchange for
the rights granted pursuant to this chapter and the franchise agreement.
The term "franchise fee" does not include any tax, fee or assessment of
general applicability that may be assessed against a franchisee by the
borough, including but not limited to the business privilege tax.
GOVERNMENT ACCESS CHANNEL — Any channel specifically designated
or dedicated for government access use.
GRANTOR — The Borough of East Greenville as represented by the Borough
Council acting within the scope of its jurisdiction.
GROSS ANNUAL REVENUES — Any and all cash, credits, property or other
consideration of any kind or nature received annually, directly or indirectly,
by the franchisee, its affiliates or any person in which the franchisee has a
financial interest or by any other entity that is a cable operator of the system
arising from, attributable to or in any way derived from the operation of
the franchisee's cable system, including the studios and other facilities
associated therewith. Gross annual revenues include, but are not limited
to, monthly fees charged subscribers for any basic, optional, premium, perchannel
or per-program service; installation, disconnection, reconnection
and change-in-service fees; leased channel fees; late fees and administrative
fees; fees, payments or other consideration received from programmers for
carriage of programming on the system; revenues from converter rentals or
sales; studio rental, production equipment and personnel fees; advertising
revenues; barter; revenues from program guides; revenues from the sale or
carriage of noncable services, including information services; and revenues
from home shopping and bank-at-home channels. Gross annual revenues
shall be the basis for computing the franchise fee under this chapter. Gross
§ 39-4 CABLE TELEVISION § 39-4
39:81
annual revenues shall not include any taxes on services furnished by the
franchisee which are imposed directly on any subscriber or user by the
state, borough or other governmental unit and which are collected by the
franchisee on behalf of said governmental unit.
INSIDE WIRING — That portion of the wire installation within and about
a premise that is transferable upon purchase in accordance with the Cable
Act.
INSTALLATION — The connection of the system from feeder cable to
subscribers' terminals.
LEASED ACCESS CHANNEL OR COMMERCIAL ACCESS CHANNEL — Any
channel designated or dedicated for use by persons unaffiliated with the
grantee, at rates in accordance with the Cable Act.
NARROWCASTING — The ability to distribute cable programming to a
particular segment or segments of the cable subscribers.
NONCABLE SERVICES — Except as expressly set forth in the franchise
agreement, the borough has not granted authority for the provision of
noncable services except public, educational and governmental uses. The
borough may grant authority for the provision of noncable services on
whatever terms and conditions the borough reasonably determines are
appropriate in the circumstances, it being understood and agreed that, at
a minimum, in each case, such terms and conditions may include payment
to the borough of compensation at rates different from those set forth for
franchise fees. The franchisee shall pay to the borough an amount equal to
the reasonable costs for the use of the borough's streets to provide noncable
services in the franchise area. Payment of such costs and expenses shall not
be deemed to be franchise fees within the meaning of the Cable Act, and
such payments shall not be deemed to be payments-in-kind or involuntary
payments chargeable against the compensation to be paid to the borough
by the franchisee as franchise fees or part of the compensation to be paid to
the borough by the franchisee as franchise fees.
PAY AUDIO/VIDEO — Any type of audio or audio/video service for which a
fee is charged.
PAY PER VIEW — Any channel for which a fee is charged for a single or
multiple viewing of a specific program.
PAY TV CHANNEL — Any channel for which a fee is charged for viewing.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, association, organization,
corporation or any lawful successor transferee of said individual,
partnership, association, organization or corporation.
PUBLIC ACCESS CHANNEL — Any channel designated or dedicated for
use by the general public or organizations which is made available for use
without charge on a nondiscriminatory basis in accordance with the rules
and regulations specified in the franchise agreement.
PUBLIC WAY OR PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY — The surface, the air space
above the surface and the area below the surface of any public street,
§ 39-4 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 39-4
39:82
highway, lane, path, alley, sidewalk, boulevard, drive, bridge, tunnel, park,
parkways, waterways, utility easements or other public right-of-way or
hereafter held by the borough which shall entitle the borough and the
grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing and maintaining the
grantee cable television system. No reference herein or in any franchise to
the "public way" shall be deemed to be a representation or guaranty by the
borough that its title to any property is sufficient to permit its use for such
purpose, and the grantee shall, by its use of such terms, be deemed to gain
only such rights to use property in the borough as the borough may have
the undisputed right and power to give.
REASONABLE NOTICE — Where not elsewhere specified, shall be written
notice addressed to the grantee at its principal office within the borough
or such other office as the grantee has designated to the borough as the
address to which notice shall be transmitted to it, which notice shall be
certified and postmarked not less than 10 business days prior to that day
in which the party giving such notice shall commence any action which
requires the giving of notice. In computing said 10 business days, holidays
recognized by the borough shall be excluded.
RESIDENT — Any person residing in the borough as defined by applicable
law.
RESIDENTIAL SUBSCRIBER — A subscriber who receives a service in an
individual dwelling unit where the service is not to be utilized in connection
with a business, trade or profession and who pays the charges therefor.
SALE — Include any sale, exchange or barter transaction.
SCHOOL — Any public or nonprofit education institution, including primary
and secondary schools, colleges and universities, both public and private.
SUBSCRIBER — Any person who legally receives cable services and/or
noncable services (to the extent franchisee is authorized to provide
noncable services).
STATE — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
SYSTEM FACILITIES OR FACILITIES — Cable communications system
equipment used by the franchisee to provide services in the franchise area;
provided, however, that such system facility excludes buildings, contracts,
facilities and equipment whose primary use is for providing service to other
system facilities located outside the borough limits.
TIER — Any level of service having one or more channels offered as a
program service or group of services.
TRANSFER — Any transaction in which an ownership or other interest in
a franchisee, its cable system or of any person that is a cable operator of
the cable system is transferred from one person or group of persons to
another person or group of persons so that control or controlling interest
of the franchisee is transferred; or the rights and/or obligations held by
the franchisee under a franchise agreement are transferred or assigned
to another person or group of persons. "Control" or "controlling interest"
means actual working control in whatever manner exercised, including,
§ 39-4 CABLE TELEVISION § 39-4
39:83
without limitation, working control through ownership, management, debt
instruments or negative control, as the case may be, of a system, a franchise
or a franchisee. A rebuttable presumption of the existence of control or
a controlling interest may arise from the beneficial ownership, directly or
indirectly, by any persons or group of persons acting in concert (other than
underwriters during the period in which they are offering securities to the
public) of 5% or more of any person (which person or group of persons is
hereinafter referred to as "controlling person"). "Control" or "controlling
interest," as used herein, may be held simultaneously by more than one
person or group of persons.
TRUNK LINE — The major distribution cable used in cable communications,
which divides into feeder lines which are tapped for service to subscribers.
USER — A person or organization utilizing channel or equipment and
facilities for purpose of producing and/or transmission of material, as
contrasted with receipt thereof in a subscriber capacity.
§ 39-4 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 39-4
39:84
ARTICLE III
Grant of Franchise
§ 39-5. Grant and continuing obligations.
A. In the event that the borough shall grant to a grantee a nonexclusive
revocable franchise to construct, operate and maintain a cable
communications system within the borough, said franchise shall
constitute both a right and an obligation to provide the services of a
cable communications system as regulated by the provisions of this
chapter and a franchise agreement.
B. The franchise shall be granted under the terms and conditions
contained herein, consistent with the Municipal Borough Code25 and/or
other applicable statutory requirements.
C. Any franchise granted by the borough is hereby made subject to the
general ordinances provisions now in effect and hereafter made
effective. Nothing in the franchise shall be deemed to waive the
requirements of the various codes and ordinances of the borough
regarding permits, fees to be paid or manner of construction.
D. State-of-the-art continuing obligation.
(1) General requirement. Throughout the term of any franchise
agreement, the franchisee shall construct, operate, maintain and
upgrade the cable communications system in order to ensure that it
continuously conforms to the state of the art in accordance with the
requirements set forth herein below. In addition, the franchisee,
either on its own initiative or at the reasonable request of the
borough, shall participate in or undertake experiments, tests and
other activities to enhance and advance the state of the art of cable
communications systems technology.
(2) State-of-the-art report. A franchisee shall provide to the borough, in
a form satisfactory to the borough, at the borough's request, but no
more often than once every year, a report setting forth the
franchisee's review and assessment of the current state of the art
of cable communications systems and its plans, if any, for
upgrading the system to conform to the state of the art. The report
shall address, at a minimum, technological advances making
possible enhanced signal quality, publicly available equipment for
the receipt of services or greater channel capacity and interactive
systems; a list of each jurisdiction in which new technologies have
been or are being used and a description of the experience those
jurisdictions have had with such new technologies; an assessment
of the costs associated with implementing such new technologies
into the system; the franchisee's activities to enhance or advance
such technology in connection with the system and any other cable
25.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 45101 et seq.
§ 39-5 CABLE TELEVISION § 39-5
39:85
communications system or systems operated by the franchisee
or any affiliated person in the borough or elsewhere and the
franchisee's compliance with and any modifications with respect
thereto; an assessment of the need to scramble signals distributed
over the system in order to prevent theft of service (such
assessment to investigate alternatives to scrambling of signals and
include a cost/benefit analysis of both scrambling and such
alternatives that takes into account significant costs and benefits
both to the franchisee and subscribers); a discussion of additional
technological advances anticipated during the remainder of the
term of the franchise, along with a projection of the costs and
timetable for the franchisee offering such advances as part of or
over the system; a discussion of what improvements the franchisee
anticipates making in its customer service facilities, equipment,
systems and operations during the remainder of the term of the
franchise, along with a projection of the costs and timetable for
the implementation of such improvements; a description of any
technical experimentation which the franchisee or any affiliated
person anticipates undertaking during the remainder of the term
of the franchise; an assessment of the compatibility of the system
with subscribers' televisions and video cassette recorders, the
franchisee's compliance with the rules and regulations
promulgated by the FCC pursuant to Section 624A of the Cable
Act (47 U.S.C. § 544a) and any experimentation the franchisee is
making to enhance such compatibility; and, generally, the steps the
franchisee or any affiliated person is undertaking to continuously
construct, operate, maintain and upgrade the system in accordance
with the state of the art. The state-of-the-art report submitted
by a franchisee may be only one resource that the borough will
consider in evaluating the franchisee's obligation pursuant to the
terms and conditions of the ordinance to continuously construct,
operate, maintain and upgrade the system in accordance with the
state of the art, and the borough may commission third parties,
as necessary, to ascertain the current state of the art in cable
communications systems generally.
(3) Procedures for maintaining state of the art. Upon receiving the
report from a franchisee required pursuant to this section of the
ordinance, the borough will evaluate such report and assemble any
additional data necessary to ascertain whether the franchisee's
system or any aspect thereof needs to be upgraded so that it meets
the state-of-the-art requirement set forth herein.
(4) Directive. Upon completing the evaluation contemplated by this
section of the ordinance and after providing notice to a franchisee
and an opportunity for the franchisee to comment, the borough
may issue a reasonable directive to the franchisee to upgrade the
system so as to incorporate state-of-the-art features. Within 45 days
after receipt of such directive, such franchisee shall submit plans,
as specified by the borough, describing how it intends to complete
§ 39-5 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 39-5
39:86
§ 39-6. Use of public rights-of-way.
For the purpose of operating and maintaining a cable communications
system in the borough, a grantee may erect, install, construct, repair,
replace, reconstruct and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along
the public streets and ways within the borough such wires, cables,
conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances,
pedestals, attachments and other property and equipment as are necessary
to the operation of the cable communications systems; provided, however,
that the grantee complies with all design, construction, safety and
performance provisions contained in this chapter, the franchise agreement
and other applicable laws, including but not limited to the Federal Technical
Performance Standards, National Electrical Safety Code (current edition),
and the power company and telephone company pole contract standards.
§ 39-7. Use of grantee facilities.
No poles shall be erected by a grantee without prior approval of the
borough with regard to location, height, type and any other pertinent
aspect. However, no location of any pole of the grantee shall be a vested
right, and such poles shall be removed or modified by the grantee at its
own expense whenever the borough determines that the public convenience
would be enhanced thereby. The grantee shall utilize existing poles and
conduits, where possible. The borough shall have the right, during the life
of the franchise, to install and maintain free of charge upon the poles owned
such upgrade. Upon approval of such plans by the borough, the
franchisee shall commence and diligently pursue implementation
of the required upgrade.
(5) "State-of-the-art" or "state of the art," as applicable, means that
level of technical or service performance, capacity and capability
(including but not limited to plant or other equipment; access
channel and other production equipment or facilities; construction
techniques; customer service; facilities, equipment, systems and
operations; and performance standards) which have been
developed and demonstrated in the cable industry or any other
comparable industry that provides services to the public under
similar conditions; to be workable and economically and technically
feasible and viable from time to time through the term of the
franchisee.
(6) "Economically and technically feasible and viable" means capable
of being provided through technology which has been
demonstrated in actual applications (not simply through tests or
experiments) to operate in a workable manner and in a manner
which has a reasonable likelihood of generating additional
revenues or other financial benefits for a system, when measured
over the term of the franchise.
§ 39-5 CABLE TELEVISION § 39-7
39:87
by the grantee any wire and pole fixtures that do not unreasonably interfere
with the operations of the grantee.
§ 39-8. Franchise required.
No cable communications system shall be allowed to occupy or use the
streets of the borough or be allowed to operate without a franchise.
§ 39-9. Term of franchise.
The term of any franchise as granted pursuant to this chapter shall be
specified in the franchise agreement in the discretion of the borough.
§ 39-10. Franchise nonexclusive.
Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be nonexclusive. The
borough specifically reserves the right to grant at any time such additional
franchises for a cable communications system as it deems appropriate and/
or build, operate and own such cable communications system or systems as
it deems appropriate.
§ 39-11. Transfer of ownership or control.
A. Transfer of franchise. No franchise granted hereunder shall be
transferred and no control or controlling interest in any system,
franchise or franchisee shall be transferred without the prior written
consent of the borough and then only under such reasonable conditions
as the borough may establish and only if in compliance with Section 617
of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. § 537) and regulations promulgated by the
FCC to implement Section 617.
B. The franchisee shall promptly notify the borough by written petition of
any proposed transfer. The petition shall fully describe the proposed
action and shall be accompanied by a justification for the action and, if
applicable, an argument as to why such action would not involve a
change in control or controlling interest. The borough shall notify the
franchisee as soon as all of the information required by the FCC, the
franchise agreement, this chapter and all applicable state and local law
has been received by the borough and that therefore the petition is
complete, after which the borough shall take action within 120 days
following the date such notice is provided by the borough, pursuant to
Section 617(e) of the Cable Act.
C. For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to a transfer,
the borough may inquire, with the assistance of the grantee, into the
legal, financial, character, technical, customer service and operations
qualifications of the prospective controlling party and the effect that the
proposed transfer and sale price may have on rates being paid by
subscribers. Failure to provide all information reasonably requested by
the borough as part of said inquiry shall be grounds for denial of the
proposed transfer. If the borough finds the results of this inquiry are
§ 39-7 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 39-11
39:88
satisfactory, its consent to such transfer shall not be unreasonably
withheld.
D. Assumption of control. Any financial institution having a pledge of the
franchise or its assets for the advancement of money for the
construction and/or operation of the franchise shall have the right to
notify the borough that it or its designees satisfactory to the borough
will take control and operate the cable television system. Further, said
financial institution shall also submit a plan for such operation that will
ensure continued service and compliance with all franchise obligations
during the term the financial institution exercises control over the
system. The financial institution shall not exercise control over the
system for a period exceeding one year, unless extended by the borough
at its discretion, and during said period of time, it shall have the right to
petition for transfer of the franchise to another grantee. If the borough
finds that such transfer, after considering the legal, financial, character,
technical, customer service and operations qualifications of the
applicant are satisfactory and that the proposed transfer and sale price
will not result in a rate increase to subscribers, the borough will
transfer and assign the rights and obligations of such franchise as in the
public interest. The consent of the borough to such transfer shall not be
unreasonably withheld.
E. The consent or approval of the borough to any transfer of the grantee
shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the borough in
and to the streets, and any transfer shall, by its terms, be expressly
subject to the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise
agreement.
F. The borough reserves the right to review the purchase price of any
transfer or assignment of the cable television system. Any negotiated
sale value which the borough deems unreasonable will not be
considered in the rate base for any subsequent request for rate
increases, if permitted by applicable law and § 39-16 of this chapter.
G. Any approval by the borough of transfer of ownership or control shall be
contingent upon the prospective controlling party becoming a signatory
to the franchise agreement.
H. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection D above, the borough
reserves the right of first purchase in any transfer of the system. Should
the borough exercise this option, it shall do so within 30 days of
notification and thereafter shall make payment therefor under the same
terms and conditions as the proposed transferee or as the parties might
otherwise agree.
I. The transfer of any franchise or the transfer of control or controlling
interest in any system, franchise or franchisee without the prior written
consent of the borough shall be deemed to be an abandonment of the
system by the franchisee under § 39-33C of this chapter and shall
entitle the borough to all of the rights set forth under § 39-33C.
§ 39-11 CABLE TELEVISION § 39-12
39:89
§ 39-12. Franchisee fees.
§ 39-13. Revocation and acceleration of expiration date.
A. Because the borough finds that the streets of the county, state and
borough to be used by the grantee in the operation of its system within
the boundaries of the franchise area are valuable public properties
acquired and maintained by the county, state and borough at great
expense to its taxpayers; and the grant to the grantee to said streets is a
valuable property right without which the grantee would be required to
invest substantial capital in right-of-way costs and acquisitions; and the
administration of this chapter and the franchise imposes upon the
borough additional regulatory responsibility and expense; and the
presence of the grantee and its facilities places additional burdens upon
the Borough Police and Road Departments and the volunteer fire
company serving the area which is supported by the borough, a grantee
of any franchise hereunder shall pay to the borough a franchise fee in
an amount as designated in the franchise agreement up to the
maximum amount permitted under applicable federal, state or local
law. The present maximum franchise fee allowable is 5% of gross
annual revenues.
B. In the event that any franchise fee payment or recomputed amount is
not made on or before the dates specified in the franchise agreement,
the grantee shall pay as additional compensation an interest charge,
computed from such due date, at the annual rate equal to the
commercial prime interest rate of the borough primary depository bank
during the period that such unpaid amount is owed.
C. The franchise fee shall be payable as specified in the franchise
agreement and shall commence as of the effective date of the
agreement. The borough shall be furnished at the time of each payment
with a statement certified by the grantee's chief financial officer
reflecting the total amounts of gross revenues for the period conveyed
by the payment.
D. The borough shall have the right to inspect the grantee's income
records and the right to audit and to recompute any amounts
determined to be payable under this chapter for a period of five years
from the date of payment. Audits shall be at the expense of the borough
unless the audit discloses an underpayment in any one year of 5% or
more, in which case the costs of the audit shall be borne by the grantee.
Any additional amount due the borough as a result of the audit shall be
paid within 30 days following written notice to the grantee by the
borough, which notice shall include a copy of the audit report unless
written notice of disagreement is filed by the grantee with the borough
within such time.
A. Grounds for revocation or acceleration of expiration date. The borough
reserves the right to accelerate the expiration of the franchise term
and/or revoke any franchise granted hereunder and rescind all rights
§ 39-12 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 39-13
39:90
and privileges associated with the franchise in the following
circumstances, each of which shall represent a default and breach
under the ordinance and the franchise agreement:
(1) If the grantee shall default in the performance of any of the
material obligations under this chapter or under such documents,
contracts and other terms and provisions entered into by and
between the borough and the grantee.
(2) If the grantee shall fail to provide or maintain in full force and
effect the liability and indemnification coverage or any
performance bond or security fund as required.
(3) If the grantee shall violate any lawful orders or rulings of any
regulatory body having jurisdiction over the grantee relative to this
chapter or the franchise.
(4) If the grantee practices any fraud upon the borough or any
subscriber.
(5) If it is determined that the grantee underpaid its franchise fee by
15% or more for any year.
(6) If the grantee's construction schedule is delayed later than the
schedule contained in the franchise agreement or beyond any
extended date set by the borough.
(7) If there is an occurrence of any event which may reasonably lead to
the foreclosure or other similar judicial or nonjudicial sale of all or
any material part of the system, including but not limited to any of
the following events:
(a) Default under any loan or any financing arrangement material
to the system or the obligations of the grantee under the
franchise agreement;
(b) Default under any contract material to the system or the
obligations of the grantee under the franchise agreement; or
(c) Termination of any lease or mortgage covering all or any
material part of the system.
(8) If in regards to any grantee:
(a) A grantee shall suspend or discontinue its business, shall make
an assignment for the benefit of creditors, shall fail to pay its
debts generally as they become due, shall become insolvent
(however such an insolvency may be evidenced), shall be
adjudicated insolvent, shall petition or apply to any tribunal
for, or consent to, the appointment of or taking possession by a
receiver, custodian, liquidator or trustee or similar official
pursuant to state or local laws, ordinances or regulations of or
§ 39-13 CABLE TELEVISION § 39-13
39:91
for it or any substantial part of its property or assets, including
all or any part of this system;
(b) A writ or warrant of attachment, execution, distraint, levy,
possession or any similar process shall be issued by any
tribunal against all or any material part of a grantee's property
or assets;
(c) Any creditor of a grantee petitions or applies to any tribunal for
the appointment of, or taking possession by, a trustee, receiver,
custodian, liquidator or similar official for the grantee or of any
substantial parts of the assets of the grantee under the law of
any jurisdiction, whether now or hereinafter in effect, and an
order, judgment or decree is entered appointing any such
trustee, receiver, custodian, liquidator or similar official or
approving the petition in any such proceedings; or
(d) Any order, judgment or decree is entered in any proceedings
against a grantee decreeing the voluntary or involuntary
dissolution of the grantee.
(9) If there is a failure to restore service after 96 consecutive hours of
total system outage in 40% or more of the system, except when
approval of such interruption is obtained from the borough or is
excused pursuant to Subsection B.
(10) If the grantee transfers the franchise or transfers control or a
controlling interest in any system, franchise or in the grantee itself
without the prior written consent of the borough pursuant to the
provisions set forth in § 39-11 of this chapter.
B. Effect of circumstances beyond control of grantee. Not withstanding
any other provision of this chapter or the franchise agreement, a
grantee shall not be liable for delay in performance of or failure to
perform in whole or in part its obligations pursuant to the franchise
agreement or this chapter, due to strike, war or act of war (whether an
actual declaration of war is made or not), insurrection, riot, act of
public enemy, accident, fire, flood or other act of God, sabotage or other
events, where a grantee has exercised all due care in the prevention
thereof and to the extent that such causes or other events are beyond
the control of the grantee and such causes or events are without the
fault or negligence of the grantee. In the event that any such delay in
performance or failure to perform affects only part of a company's
capacity to perform, the company shall perform to the maximum extent
that it is able to do so and shall take all steps within its power to correct
such cause or causes. In correcting such cause or causes, a grantee
shall take all reasonable steps to do so in as expeditious a manner as
possible. A grantee shall notify the borough, in writing, of the
occurrence of an event covered by this subsection within five business
days of the date upon which the grantee learns of its occurrence.
Shortage or unavailability of equipment from suppliers shall not be
§ 39-13 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 39-13
39:92
deemed to be beyond the control of the grantee in regards to any
construction delays.
C. Pending litigation or any appeal to any regulatory body or court having
jurisdiction over the grantee shall not excuse the grantee from the
performance of its obligations under this chapter or the franchise
agreement. Failure of the grantee to perform such obligations because
of pending litigation or petition may result in forfeiture or revocation
pursuant to the provisions of this section. The borough shall comply
with any related court orders.
D. Procedure prior to revocation.
(1) The borough shall make written demand that the grantee do so
comply with any such requirement, limitation, term, condition, rule
or regulation or correct any action deemed cause for revocation.
After written demand is made, the borough may place its request
for revocation of the franchise upon a regular Borough Council
meeting agenda. The borough shall cause to be served upon such
grantee, at least seven days prior to the date of such Borough
Council meeting, a written notice of this intent to request such
revocation and the time and place of the meeting, notice of which
shall be published by the borough once, at least seven days before
such meeting, in a newspaper of general circulation within the
borough.
(2) The Borough Council shall hear any persons interested therein and
shall determine, in its discretion, whether or not any failure, refusal
or neglect by the grantee was with just cause.
(3) If such failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee was with just
cause, as determined by the Borough Council, the Borough Council
shall direct the grantee to comply within such time and manner and
upon such terms and conditions as are reasonable.
(4) If the Borough Council shall determine such failure, refusal or
neglect by the grantee was without just cause, then the Borough
Council may, by resolution, declare that the franchise of the
grantee shall be revoked and the performance bond forfeited.
E. Disposition of facilities. In the event that a franchise expires, is revoked
or otherwise terminated, the borough may, in its sole discretion, do any
of the following:
(1) Order the removal of the system facilities from the borough within
a reasonable period of time as determined by the borough.
(2) Require the grantee to maintain and operate its system for a period
of up to 18 months or such further time as may be mutually agreed
upon. During any time the grantee continues to operate the system,
it shall do so pursuant to the terms of this chapter and its franchise
agreement and shall be entitled to the revenues from the system.
§ 39-13 CABLE TELEVISION § 39-13
39:93
§ 39-14. Receivership and foreclosure.
F. Restoration of property. In removing its plant, structures and
equipment, the grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation
that shall be made by it and shall leave the prevailing prior to the
grantee's removal of its equipment and appliances without affecting the
electrical or telephone cable wires or attachments. The borough shall
inspect and approve the condition of the public ways and public places
and cables, wires, attachments and poles after removal. The liability,
indemnity, insurance and performance bond as provided herein shall
continue in full force and effect during the period of removal and until
full compliance by the grantee with the terms and conditions of this
subsection, this chapter and the franchise agreement.
G. Restoration by borough; reimbursement of costs. In the event of a
failure by the grantee to complete any work required by Subsection E
or F of this section or any other work required by borough law or
ordinance within the time as may be established and to the satisfaction
of the borough, the borough may cause such work to be done and the
grantee shall reimburse the borough the cost thereof within 30 days
after receipt of an itemized list of such costs or the borough may
recover such costs through the performance bond or letter of credit
provided by the grantee. The borough shall be permitted to seek legal
and equitable relief to enforce the provisions of this section.
A. Termination by insolvency. The franchise granted hereunder shall, at
the option of the borough, cease and terminate 120 days after the
appointment of a receiver or receivers or trustee or trustees to take
over and conduct the business of the grantee whether in a receivership,
reorganization, bankruptcy or similar action or proceeding unless such
receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the
expiration of said 120 days or unless:
(1) Such receivers or trustees shall have, within 120 days after their
election or appointment, fully complied with all the terms and
provisions of this chapter and the franchise agreement and the
receivers or trustees within said 120 days shall have remedied all
defaults under this chapter or the franchise agreement; and
(2) Such receivers or trustees shall, within said 120 days, execute an
agreement duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the
premises, whereby such receivers or trustees assume and agree to
be bound by each and every term, provision and limitation of the
franchise agreement and the ordinance.
B. Termination by judicial action. In the case of a foreclosure or other
judicial sale of the plant, property and equipment of the grantee or any
part thereof, including or excluding the franchise, the borough may
serve notice of termination upon the grantee and the successful bidder
at such sale, in which event the franchise and all rights and privileges of
§ 39-13 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 39-14
39:94
§ 39-15. Notices.
All notices from grantee to the borough pursuant to this chapter and the
franchise agreement shall be to the Borough Manager or Borough Secretary
or his designee. The grantee shall maintain with the borough, throughout
the term of the franchise, an address for service of notices by mail. The
grantee shall also maintain with the borough a local office and telephone
number for the conduct of matters related to the franchise during normal
business hours. The grantee shall be required to advise the borough of such
address and telephone numbers and any changes thereof.
the grantee granted hereunder shall cease and terminate 30 days after
service of such notice, unless:
(1) The borough shall have approved the transfer of the franchise, in
the manner this chapter provides; and
(2) Such successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed with the
borough to assume and be bound by all the terms and conditions of
the franchise agreement.
§ 39-14 CABLE TELEVISION § 39-15
39:95

ARTICLE IV
Regulation of Franchise
§ 39-16. Regulatory authority.
§ 39-17. Supervision of franchise.
A. The borough shall exercise appropriate regulatory authority under the
provisions of this chapter and applicable law. This authority shall be
vested in the Borough Council and administered through the Borough
Manager or Borough Secretary or his designee in order to provide dayto-
day administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter
and any franchise granted hereunder and to carry out the borough's
responsibilities with regard to cable communications.
B. The borough reserves the right to exercise the maximum plenary
authority, as may at any time be lawfully permissible, to regulate the
cable communications system, the franchise and the grantee. Should
applicable legislative, judicial or regulatory authorities at any time
permit regulation not presently permitted to the borough, the borough
may without the approval of the grantee engage in any such additional
regulation as may then be permissible, whether or not contemplated by
this chapter, including, without limitation, regulation regarding
franchise fees, taxes, programming, rates charged to subscribers and
users, consumer protection or any other similar or dissimilar matter.
A. The borough shall have the following regulatory responsibility:
(1) Administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter
and any franchise agreement.
(2) Award, renewal, extension or termination of a franchise pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter, the franchise agreement and other
applicable law.
(3) Consent prior to sale or transfer of any franchise granted
hereunder.
(4) Performance evaluation.
(5) Rate regulation, to the extent authorized and/or elected by the
borough under law. If the borough elects to regulate rates, it will
comply with all FCC regulations and permit all members of the
public to participate in rate-making proceedings.
(6) Establishment of customer service standards.
B. The borough also reserves the right to perform the following functions
and all other functions allowed by law present or future:
(1) Develop objective and coordinate activities related to the operation
of government channels.
§ 39-16 CABLE TELEVISION § 39-17
39:97
§ 39-18. Cable Television Evaluation and Advisory Committee.
(2) Approve procedures and standards for public, government and
educational access and operations and services, including the use
of dedicated channels and sharing of public facilities.
(3) Analyze plans for expansion, interconnection and growth of cable
services.
(4) Analyze the possibility of integrating cable communications with
other local, state or regional telecommunications networks.
(5) Formulate and recommend long-range telecommunications policy
for the borough and determine the future cable-related needs and
interests of the community.
(6) Provide the administrative effort necessary for the conduct of
performance evaluations and any other activities required for the
administration of the franchise.
(7) Monitor the grantee's training programs for customer service
representatives and its process for handling citizen complaints and
periodically inspect and analyze the records related to such
complaints.
(8) Receive applications for rate changes if applicable and provide staff
assistance in the analysis and recommendations thereto.
(9) Monitor the grantee's adherence to operational standards, service
requirements and line extension policies.
(10) Assure compliance with applicable laws and ordinances.
(11) Arrange tests and analysis of equipment and performance, as
needed, to ensure compliance with this chapter and the franchise
agreement.
(12) Assure continuity in service.
(13) Receive for examination all data and reports required by this
chapter.
(14) Regulate rates on a regional basis in cooperation with other
municipalities.
A. The borough may, in its discretion, create a citizen's committee entitled
the "Cable Television Advisory Committee." The responsibilities of the
Committee shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Monitor and advise the Borough Council and borough
administration on the performance of the grantee under the
provisions of the borough's cable television ordinance, franchise
agreement and related ordinances.
§ 39-17 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 39-18
39:98
§ 39-19. Rates and charges.
(2) Serve as advisory body with respect to the public, educational and
local government access channels of cable television and any
institutional programming that may be developed; encourage the
use of the public channels among the widest range of institutions,
groups and individuals within the borough.
(3) Advise the borough government of objectives to be obtained in the
borough's cable communications system based upon its continued
evaluation of the borough's cable television franchise, cable
technology, performance of the grantee and the future cablerelated
needs and interests of the community.
(4) Prepare an annual report to the Borough Council on the activities
of the Committee and the performance of the grantee.
(5) Cooperate with the borough and the grantee in fulfilling its
responsibilities herein.
B. The Committee shall be composed of at least three residents of the
borough who shall be appointed by the Borough Council and who shall
serve without compensation for terms of one, two and three years
respectively. Members shall not be employees of, nor have any financial
interest in, a grantee or a parent or subsidiary corporation of a grantee.
A. The grantee shall file with the borough schedules which shall describe
all services offered, all rates and charges of any kind and all terms and
conditions relating thereto on the effective date of the franchise and 60
days prior to any change. Notice of all proposed rate changes must be
filed with the borough at least 60 days prior to any change whether the
borough has the authority to regulate the rate or not so that the
borough can respond to any public inquiries or complaints. If the
borough elects to regulate rates pursuant to the Cable Act, the borough
will comply with all FCC regulations and permit all members of the
public to participate in rate-making proceedings. No rates or charges
shall be effective except as they appear on a schedule so filed. The
grantee shall notify subscribers in writing at least 30 days prior to the
implementation of any change in services offered, rates charged or
terms and conditions related thereto. The grantee's written notice shall
include a comparison of old and new rates and charges and shall be
included in the customer's bill. A complete schedule of the grantee's
rates shall be mailed to subscribers annually.
B. The grantee shall establish rates that are nondiscriminatory within the
same general class of subscribers which must be applied fairly and
uniformly to all subscribers in the franchise area for all services.
Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the grantee from offering
discounts to commercial and multiple-family dwelling subscribers billed
on a bulk basis; promotional discounts; senior citizens; and
§ 39-18 CABLE TELEVISION § 39-19
39:99
economically disadvantaged individuals. The grantee's charges and
rates for all services shall be itemized on subscriber's monthly bills.
C. The grantee shall provide the borough immediately upon receipt with
copies of all rate or other complaints received by it and/or the FCC.
§ 39-19 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 39-19
39:100
ARTICLE V
Bonds, Insurance and Indemnification
§ 39-20. Performance bond and/or letter of credit.
A. Performance bond. Upon the effective date of the franchise, the grantee
shall obtain and maintain during the entire term of the franchise and
any extensions and renewals thereof, at its cost and expense, and file
with the borough a corporate surety bond in such sum as specified in
the franchise agreement to guarantee the faithful performance by the
grantee of all its obligations provided under this chapter and the
franchise agreement. Failure to timely obtain, file and maintain said
bond shall constitute a substantial violation within the meaning of this
section.
B. Conditions. The performance bond shall provide the following
conditions:
(1) There shall be recoverable by the borough jointly and severally
from the principal and surety any and all fines and liquidated
damages due to the borough, as specified in the franchise
agreement, and any and all damages, losses, costs and expenses
suffered or incurred by the borough resulting from the failure of
the grantee to faithfully comply with the provisions of this chapter
and the franchise agreement; comply with all orders, permits and
directive of any borough agency or body having jurisdiction over its
acts or defaults; pay fees due to the borough; pay any claims, liens
or taxes due the borough which arise by reason of the construction,
operation, maintenance or repair of the cable communication
system. Such losses, costs and expenses shall include, but not be
limited to, attorney's fees and other associated expenses.
(2) The total amount of the bond shall be forfeited in favor of the
borough in the event that the borough revokes the franchise
pursuant to § 39-13 for the two following reasons:
(a) The grantee abandons the cable communication system at any
time during the term of the franchise or any extension thereto;
or
(b) The grantee assigns the franchise without the express written
consent of the borough, provided that the grantee has been
notified of such noncompliance in writing by the borough and
has failed to cure the same within 30 days.
C. Reduction of bond. Upon written application by the grantee, the
borough may, at its sole option, permit the amount of the bond to be
reduced or waive the requirements for a performance bond subject to
the conditions set forth below. Reductions granted or denied upon
application by the grantee shall be without prejudice to the grantee's
§ 39-20 CABLE TELEVISION § 39-20
39:101
subsequent applications or to the borough's right to require the full
bond at any time thereafter.
D. Letter of credit. If requested by the borough in lieu of the performance
bond required by this section, the grantee shall obtain, maintain and
file with the borough an irrevocable letter of credit from a financial
institution licensed to do business in the state in any amount specified
in the franchise agreement, naming the borough as beneficiary. The
form and contents of such letter of credit shall be approved by the
borough and shall be released only upon expiration of the franchise and
upon the replacement of the letter of credit by a successor grantee.
Failure to obtain the letter of credit within the time specified herein
shall constitute a substantial violation within the meaning of this
chapter.
E. Use of performance bond or letter of credit. Prior to drawing upon the
letter of credit or the performance bond for the purposes described in
this section, the borough shall notify the grantee in writing specifying
the item for which payment is claimed and the date it was due. The
grantee shall have 10 days from the receipt of such written notice to
make a full and complete payment. If the grantee does not make the
payment, the borough may withdraw the amount thereof, with interest
and penalties, from the letter of credit or the performance bond.
F. Notification. Within three days of a withdrawal from the letter of credit
or performance bond, the borough shall send to the grantee, by
certified mail, return receipt requested, written notification of the
amount, date and purpose of such withdrawal.
G. Replenishment of letter of credit or performance bond. No later than 30
days after mailing to the grantee by certified mail notification of a
withdrawal pursuant to Subsection F above, the grantee shall replenish
the letter of credit or performance bond in an amount equal to the
amount so withdrawn. Failure to make timely replenishment of such
amount to the letter of credit or performance bond shall constitute a
substantial violation of this chapter.
H. Nonrenewal, alteration or cancellation of letter of credit or
performance bond. The performance bond or letter of credit required
herein shall be in a form satisfactory to the borough and shall require
30 days' written notice of any nonrenewal, alteration or cancellation to
both the borough and the grantee. The grantee shall, in the event of any
such cancellation notice, obtain, pay all premiums for and file with the
borough written evidence of the issuance of replacement bond or letter
of credit within 30 days following receipt by the borough or the grantee
of any notice of cancellation.
I. To offset the effects of inflation, the amounts of the bond or letter of
credit provided for herein are subject to reasonable increases at the
end of every three-year period of the franchise, applicable to the next
three-year period, upon the determination of the borough.
§ 39-20 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 39-21
39:102
§ 39-21. Security fund.
§ 39-22. Liability and insurance.
A. Within 10 days after the effective date of a franchise agreement, the
grantee shall deposit with the grantor and maintain on deposit through
the term of this franchise, in cash, such sum as specified in the
franchise agreement, as security for the payment of any fees, liquidated
damages or penalties imposed under this chapter. Said sum shall be
placed by the grantor in an interest-bearing account.
B. Within 10 days after notice to the grantee that any amount has been
withdrawn from the security fund deposited pursuant to Subsection A
of this section, the grantee shall pay to or deposit with the grantor a
sum of money or securities sufficient to restore such security fund to
the original amount as specified in the franchise agreement.
C. The security fund deposited pursuant to this section shall become the
property of the grantor in the event that this franchise is canceled by
reason of default of the grantee. The grantee, however, shall be entitled
to the return of such security fund or portion thereof as remains on
deposit with the grantor at the expiration of the term of this franchise,
provided that there is then no outstanding default on the part of the
grantee.
D. The rights reserved to the grantor with respect to the security funds are
in addition to all other rights of the grantor, whether reserved by this
chapter or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a
right with respect to such security funds shall affect any other right the
grantor may have.
A. Within 30 days after the effective date of the franchise agreement and
thereafter continuously through the duration of the franchise and any
extensions or renewals thereof, the grantee shall furnish to the borough
certificates of insurance, approved by the borough, for all types of
insurance required under this section. Failure to furnish said
certificates of insurance in a timely manner shall constitute a violation
of this chapter.
B. Any insurance policy obtained by the grantee in compliance with this
section shall be filed and maintained with the borough during the term
of the franchise and may be changed from time to time to reflect
changing liability limits and/or to compensate for inflation. The grantee
shall immediately advise the borough of any litigation that may develop
that would affect this insurance.
C. Neither the provisions of this section or any damages recovered by the
borough hereunder shall be construed to or limit the liability of the
grantee under any franchise issued hereunder or for damages.
D. All insurance policies maintained pursuant to this chapter or the
franchise agreement shall contain the following, or a comparable,
§ 39-21 CABLE TELEVISION § 39-22
39:103
endorsement: "It is hereby understood and agreed that this insurance
policy may not be canceled by the insurance company nor the intention
not to renew be stated by the insurance company until 30 days after
receipt by the Borough Manager, Borough Secretary or his designee, by
registered mail, of a written notice of such intention to cancel or not to
renew."
E. All insurance policies maintained pursuant to this chapter or the
franchise agreement shall name the borough as an additional insured.
F. All insurance policies provided under the provisions of this chapter or
the franchise agreement shall be written by companies authorized to do
business in the state and approved by the State Insurance Commission.
G. At any time during the term of the franchise, the borough may request
and the grantee shall comply with such request to name the borough,
all elected borough officials and borough employees with cable-related
responsibilities as additional named insured for all insurance policies
written under the provisions of this chapter or the franchise agreement.
H. To offset the effects of inflation and to reflect changing liability limits,
all of the coverages, limits and amounts of the insurance provided for
herein are subject to reasonable increases at the end of every threeyear
period of the franchise, applicable to the next three-year period,
upon the determination of the borough by resolution.
I. General liability insurance. The grantee shall maintain and by its
acceptance of any franchise granted hereunder specifically agrees that
it will maintain throughout the term of the franchise general liability
insurance insuring the grantee for a minimum of $25,000,000 for all
damage, injury, accident or death.
J. Libel and allied torts. The grantee shall maintain a libel and allied torts
insurance policy in an amount specified in the franchise agreement.
K. Such general liability insurance must include coverage for all of the
following: comprehensive form, premises operations, explosion and
collapse hazard, underground hazard, products/completed operations
hazard, contractual insurance, broad-form property damage and
personal injury.
L. Motor vehicle liability insurance. The grantee shall maintain and by its
acceptance of any franchise granted hereunder specifically agrees that
it will maintain throughout the term of the franchise motor vehicle
liability insurance for owned, nonowned or rented vehicles in the
minimum amount of:
(1) Five million dollars for bodily injury and consequent death per
occurrence.
(2) Five million dollars for bodily injury and consequent death of any
one person.
§ 39-22 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 39-22
39:104
§ 39-23. Indemnification.
(3) One million dollars for property damage per occurrence.
M. Workers' compensation and employer's liability insurance. The grantee
shall maintain and by its acceptance of any franchise granted
hereunder specifically agrees that it will maintain throughout the term
of the franchise workers' compensation and employer's liability, valid in
the state, in the minimum amount of:
(1) Statutory limit for workers' compensation.
(2) One hundred thousand dollars for employer's liability.
A. To the fullest extent permitted by law, the grantee shall, at its sole cost
and expense, fully indemnify, defend and hold harmless the borough, its
officers, public officials, boards and commissions, agents and
employees from and against any and all lawsuits, claims (including,
without limitation, workers' compensation claims against the borough
or others), causes of action, actions, liability and judgments for injury or
damages (including, but not limited to, expenses for reasonable legal
fees and disbursements assumed by the borough in connection
therewith):
(1) To persons or property, in any way arising out of or through the acts
or omissions of the grantee, its subcontractors, agents or
employees.
(2) Arising out of any claim for invasion of the right of privacy, for
defamation of any person, firm or corporation or the violation or
infringement of any copyright, trademark, trade name, service
mark or patent or any other right of any person, firm or
corporation, but excluding claims arising out of or related to
borough programming or programming for which the grantee is
not legally responsible.
(3) Arising out of grantee's failure to comply with the provisions of any
federal, state or local statute, ordinances or regulation applicable
to the grantee in its business hereunder.
(4) Arising out of any action or claim related to obscenity, indecency or
sexually explicit programming.
B. The foregoing indemnity is conditioned upon the following: the borough
shall give the grantee prompt notice of any claim or the commencement
of any action, suit or other proceeding covered by the provisions of this
section. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent the borough from
cooperating with the grantee and participating in the defense of any
litigation by its own counsel at its own costs and expense.
§ 39-22 CABLE TELEVISION § 39-23
39:105

ARTICLE VI
Application; Fees; Use of Streets
§ 39-24. Application for grant of initial franchise.
A. A person may apply for an initial franchise by submitting a request for
issuance of a request for proposals ("RFP") and requesting an
evaluation of that proposal pursuant to Subsection C. Upon receipt of a
request for an RFP, the borough shall commence a proceeding to
identify the future cable-related needs and interest of the community
and, upon completion of that proceeding, shall promptly issue an RFP
and proposed franchise agreement, which shall be mailed to the person
requesting its issuance and made available to any other interested
party. The applicant shall respond within the time directed by the
borough, providing the information and material set forth in Subsection
C. The procedures, instructions and requirements set forth in the RFP
shall be followed by each applicant as if set forth and required herein.
The Borough Manager or Borough Secretary or his designee shall be
authorized to seek additional information from any applicant and to
establish deadlines for the submission of that information.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A, a person may apply for
an initial franchise by submitting an unsolicited proposal and
requesting an evaluation of that proposal pursuant to Subsection C.
C. An RFP for the grant of an initial franchise shall require and an
unsolicited proposal shall contain, at minimum, the following
information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant and identification of the
ownership and control of the applicant, including the names and
address of the 10 largest holders of an ownership interest in the
applicant and affiliates of the applicant and all persons with fivepercent
or more ownership interest in the applicant and its
affiliates; all officers and directors of the applicant and its affiliates;
and any other business affiliation and cable system ownership
interest of each named person.
(2) A demonstration of the applicant's technical ability to construct
and/or operate the proposed cable system, including identification
of key personnel.
(3) A demonstration of the applicant's legal qualifications to construct
and/or operate the proposed cable system, including but not
limited to a demonstration that the applicant meets the following
criteria:
(a) The applicant must not have submitted an application for an
initial or renewal franchise to the borough, which was denied
on the ground that the applicant failed to propose a system
meeting the cable-related needs and interests of the
§ 39-24 CABLE TELEVISION § 39-24
39:107
community or as to which any challenges to such franchising
decision were finally resolved adversely to the applicant,
within three years preceding the submission of the application.
(b) The applicant must not have had any cable television franchise
validly revoked by any municipality or governing body within
three years preceding the submission of the application.
(c) The applicant must have the necessary authority under
Pennsylvania law to operate a cable system.
(d) A franchise will not be issued to an applicant that may not hold
the franchise as a matter of federal law. An applicant must
have or show that it is qualified to obtain the necessary federal
licenses or waivers required to operate the system proposed.
(e) An applicant shall not be issued a franchise if, at any time
during the 10 years preceding the submission of the
application, the applicant was convicted of any act or omission
of such character that the applicant cannot be relied upon to
deal truthfully with the borough and the subscribers of the
cable system or to substantially comply with its lawful
obligations under applicable law, including obligations under
consumer protection laws and laws prohibiting anticompetitive
acts, fraud, racketeering or other similar conduct.
(f) An applicant shall not be issued a franchise if it files materially
misleading information in response to an RFP issued by the
borough or intentionally withholds information that the
applicant lawfully is required to provide.
(g) An applicant shall not be issued a franchise if an elected official
of the borough holds a controlling interest in the applicant or
an affiliate of the applicant.
(h) Notwithstanding the foregoing, the borough shall provide an
opportunity to an applicant to show that it would be
inappropriate to deny it a franchise under Subsection C(3)(b)
or (e), by virtue of the particular circumstances surrounding
the matter and the steps taken by the applicant to cure all
harms flowing therefrom, the lack of involvement of the
applicant's principals or the remoteness of the matter from the
operation of cable television systems.
(4) A statement prepared by a certified public accountant regarding
the applicant's financial ability to complete the construction and
operation of the cable system proposed.
(5) A description of the applicant's prior experience in cable system
ownership, construction and operation and identification of
communities in which the applicant or any of its principals have or
have had a cable franchise or license or any interest therein.
§ 39-24 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 39-24
39:108
(6) Identification of the area of the borough to be served by the
proposed cable system, including a description of the proposed
franchise area's boundaries.
(7) A detailed description of the physical facilities proposed, including
channel capacity, technical design, performance characteristics,
head end and access facilities.
(8) Where applicable, a description of the construction of the proposed
system, including an estimate of plant mileage and its location, the
proposed construction schedule, a description, where appropriate,
of how services will be converted from existing facilities to new
facilities and information on the availability of space in conduits,
including, where appropriate, an estimate of the cost of any
necessary rearrangement of existing facilities.
(9) The proposed rate structure, including projected charges for each
service tier, installation, converters and other equipment or
services.
(10) A demonstration of how the applicant's proposal will reasonably
meet the future cable-related needs and interests of the
community, including descriptions of how the proposal will meet
the needs described in any recent community needs assessment
conducted by or for the borough and how the proposal will provide
adequate public, educational and governmental access channel
capacity, facilities or financial support to meet the community's
needs and interests.
(11) Pro forma financial projections for the proposed franchise term,
including a statement of projected income and a schedule of
planned capital additions, with all significant assumptions
explained in notes or supporting schedules.
(12) If an applicant proposes to provide cable service to an area already
served by an existing cable franchisee, the identification of the area
where the overbuild would occur, the potential subscriber density
in the area that would encompass the overbuild and the ability of
the streets to accommodate an additional system.
(13) Any other information as may be reasonably necessary to
demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
(14) Information that the borough may request of the applicant that is
relevant to the borough's consideration of the application.
(15) An affidavit or declaration of the applicant or authorized officer
certifying the truth and accuracy of the information in the
application, acknowledging the enforceability of application
commitments and certifying that the proposal meets all federal and
state law requirements.
§ 39-24 CABLE TELEVISION § 39-24
39:109
D. In evaluating an application for a franchise, the borough shall consider,
among other things, the following factors:
(1) The extent to which the applicant has substantially complied with
the applicable law and the material terms of any existing cable
franchise for the borough.
(2) Whether the quality of the applicant's service under an existing
franchise in the borough, including signal quality, response to
customer complaints, level of services, billing practices and the
like, has been reasonable in light of the needs and interests of the
communities served.
(3) Whether the applicant has the financial, technical and legal
qualifications to provide cable service.
(4) Whether the applicant's proposal is reasonable to meet the future
cable-related needs and interests of the community, taking into
account the cost of meeting such needs and interests.
(5) Whether, to the extent not considered as part of Subsection C(4),
the applicant will provide adequate public, educational and
governmental access channel capacity, facilities or financial
support.
(6) Whether issuance of a franchise is warranted in the public interest
considering the immediate and future effect on the public rights-ofway
and private property which would be used by the cable system,
including the extent to which installation or maintenance as
planned would require replacement of property or involve
disruption of property, public services or use of the public rights-ofway;
the effect of granting a franchise on the ability of cable to
meet the cable-related needs and interests of the community.
(7) Whether the applicant or an affiliate of the applicant owns or
controls any other cable system in the borough or whether grant of
the application may eliminate or reduce competition in the delivery
of cable service in the borough.
E. If the borough finds that it is in the public interest to issue a franchise
considering the factors set forth above, it shall issue a franchise,
subject to the applicant's entry into an appropriate franchise
agreement. If the borough denies a franchise, it will issue a written
decision explaining why the franchise was denied. Prior to deciding
whether to issue or not to issue a franchise, the borough may hold one
or more public hearings or implement other procedures under which
contends from the public on an applicant's proposal may be received.
The borough also may grant or deny a request for a franchise based on
its review of an application without further proceedings and may reject
any application which is incomplete or fails to respond to an RFP. This
chapter is not intended and shall not be interpreted to grant any
§ 39-24 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 39-24
39:110
§ 39-25. Filing fees.
To be acceptable for filing, an application submitted after the effective
date of this chapter shall be accompanied by a filing fee in the following
amount26, as appropriate:
§ 39-26. System construction schedule.
The franchise agreement shall specify the construction schedule.
§ 39-27. Use of streets.
applicant or existing franchisee standing to challenge the issuance of a
franchise to another.
F. If the borough grants a franchise subject to the applicant's entry into a
franchise agreement, the borough and the franchisee shall agree on the
terms of a franchise agreement within 30 calendar days from the date
of borough resolution granting the franchise. This period may be
extended for good cause by the borough. If agreement is not reached
with the borough within 30 calendar days from the date of the borough
resolution granting the franchise or if the period is not extended by the
borough, the franchise will be null and void without further action by
the borough. The borough shall approve or disapprove the proposed
agreement by resolution or may direct that it be subject to further
negotiation.
A. For an initial franchise: $30,000.
(1) The request for issuance of an RFP: $5,000.
(2) The response to the RFP or the unsolicited proposal: $5,000.
B. For renewal of a franchise: $10,000.
C. For modification of a franchise agreement: $10,000.
A. All installations shall be underground in those areas of the borough
where public utilities providing both telephone and electric service are
underground at the time of installation. In areas where either telephone
or electric utility facilities are above ground at the time of installation,
the grantee may install its service above ground, provided that at such
time as both those facilities are required to be placed underground by
the borough or are placed underground, the grantee shall likewise
place its services underground. Where not otherwise required to be
placed underground by this chapter or the franchise agreement, the
grantee's system shall be located underground at the request of a
property owner, provided that the excess cost over the aerial location
shall be borne by the property owner making the request. All cable
26.Editor's Note: These fees may be increased in an amount equal to the increase in the
Consumer Price Index for the Philadelphia Metropolitan area using the year of this
chapter as the base year.
§ 39-24 CABLE TELEVISION § 39-27
39:111
passing under the public way shall be installed in accordance with all
state and local laws and ordinances.
B. Prior to construction or alteration in any public way, however, the
grantee shall in each case file plans with the appropriate borough
agencies and obtain all necessary construction permits and
authorizations before proceeding.
C. Interference with persons, improvements, public and private property
and utilities. The grantee's system and facilities, including poles, lines,
equipment and all appurtenances, shall be located, erected and
maintained so that such facilities shall:
(1) Not endanger or interfere with the health, safety or lives of
persons;
(2) Not interfere with the free and proper use of public streets, alleys,
bridges, easements or other public ways, places or property, except
to the minimum extent possible during actual construction or
repair;
(3) Not interfere with the rights and reasonable convenience of private
property owners, except to the minimum extent possible during
actual construction repair; and
(4) Not obstruct, hinder or interfere with any gas, electric, water or
telephone facilities or other utilities located within the borough.
D. Restoration to prior condition. In case of any disturbance of pavement,
sidewalk, property or other surfacing, the grantee shall, at its own cost
and expense and in a manner approved by the borough, replace and
restore all paving, sidewalk, landscaping or surfacing of any property or
public way disturbed, in as good a condition as or better than, before
said work was commenced and in a good workmanlike, timely manner
in accordance with standards for such work set by the borough. Such
restoration shall be undertaken within no more than 10 business days
after the damage is incurred and shall be completed within 30 business
days unless otherwise authorized by the borough.
E. Relocation of the facilities. In the event that, at any time during the
period of the franchise, the borough, county or state shall lawfully elect
to alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other public ways or
make repairs or improvements to any infrastructure, the grantee, upon
reasonable notice by the proper authority, shall remove or relocate as
necessary its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and
other fixtures at its own expense and with all due deliberate speed.
F. Cooperation with building movers. The grantee shall, on the request of
any person holding a building moving permit issued by the borough,
temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings.
The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires
shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the grantee shall
§ 39-27 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 39-27
39:112
§ 39-28. Erection, removal and common use of poles.
§ 39-29. Construction reporting requirements.
have the authority to require such payment in advance. The grantee
shall be given reasonable advance notice to arrange for such temporary
wire changes.
G. Tree trimming. The grantee shall have the authority, except when in
conflict with existing borough ordinances, to trim any trees upon or
overhanging the public right-of-way so as to prevent the branches of
such trees from coming in contact with system facilities, except that at
the option of the borough, such trimming as may be required by the
grantee may be done by the borough or under its supervision and
direction, at the expense of the grantee. The grantee shall notify the
borough prior to trimming any trees in the right-of-way.
H. Easements. All necessary easements over and under private property
shall be arranged for by the grantee.
A. Prior to the erection of any towers, poles or conduits or the upgrade or
rebuild of the cable communications system under this chapter, the
grantee shall first submit to the borough and other designated parties
for approval a concise description of the facilities proposed to be
erected or installed, including engineering drawings, if required,
together with a map and plans indicating the proposed location of all
such facilities. No erection or installation of any tower, pole,
underground conduit or fixture or any rebuilds or upgrading of the
cable communications system shall be commenced by any person until
approval therefor has been received from the borough, such approval
not to be unreasonably withheld.
B. Where poles already exist for use in serving the borough are available
for use by the grantee, the borough may require the grantee to use such
poles and structures.
A. Within 30 days of the grant, the grantee shall provide the borough with
a written progress report detailing work completed to date on initial
construction or a description of the progress in applying for any
necessary agreements, licenses or certifications and any other
information the Borough Manager or Borough Secretary or his
designee may deem necessary. The content and format of the report will
be determined by the Borough Manager or Borough Secretary or his
designee and may be modified at his discretion.
B. Such written progress reports shall be submitted to the borough on a
monthly basis throughout the entire initial construction or rebuild
process. The Borough Manager or Borough Secretary or his designee
may require more frequent reporting if he determines it is necessary to
better monitor the grantee's progress.
§ 39-27 CABLE TELEVISION § 39-29
39:113
C. Prior to the commencement of any initial construction or rebuild of a
cable television system, the grantee shall produce an informational
document to be distributed to all residents of the area to be under
construction, which shall describe the activity that will be taking place.
The informational document shall be reviewed and approved by the
Borough Manager or Borough Secretary or his designee prior to its
distribution.
§ 39-29 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 39-29
39:114
ARTICLE VII
Service Problems
§ 39-30. Services to subscribers and users.
A. Concurrently with the activation of the cable communications system in
the borough, the grantee shall provide all services to subscribers as
described in the franchise agreement.
(1) The system shall carry the broad categories of programming and
services listed in the franchise agreement. Should the grantee
desire to change the selection of programs or services offered, it
shall maintain the mix, quality and level of services provided over
the system. Any such change in programs or services offered shall
comply with the conditions and procedures contained in the
franchise agreement and shall be reported to the borough at least
60 days prior to the proposed implementation. The grantee shall
notify all subscribers in writing at least 30 days prior to
implementing any change in the selection of programs or services
offered on any tiers or prior to adding or deleting any channels or
changing the channel number for any station. The grantee shall
endeavor to ensure diversity of programming regarding the
community's needs.
(2) The grantee shall provide and maintain on such channels as the
franchise agreement may direct, at a minimum, the following
access services:
(a) "Government Access Channel," which shall be a specifically
designated channel for governmental use by the borough and
shall be managed, scheduled and programmed exclusively by
the borough or shared with other local governmental entities
at the discretion of the borough.
(b) "Educational Channel," which shall be a specifically designated
channel for use by local, public and private school authorities
and shall be managed, scheduled and programmed exclusively
by them.
(c) "Public Access Channel," which shall be a specifically
designated channel available on a nondiscriminatory basis to
residents of the borough.
(d) No public, education or government access channel may be
assigned, transferred or leased, in whole or in part.
(3) The grantee shall make available leased access channels to assure
that the widest possible diversity of information sources are made
available to subscribers.
§ 39-30 CABLE TELEVISION § 39-30
39:115
§ 39-31. Connections and other grantee services.
(a) Such channels shall be specially designated for leased access
use by persons unaffiliated with the grantee, at rates which are
in accordance with the Cable Act.
(b) The number of such channels shall be determined by the
provisions of the Cable Act or other applicable federal and
state law.
(c) The grantee shall not exercise any editorial control over any
programming provided over such channels, except that the
grantee may consider such content to the minimum extent
necessary to establish a fair and reasonable price for the use of
such channels.
(4) The grantee shall fully provide the services, facilities and
equipment for public, educational and government access as
indicated in the franchise agreement.
(5) The grantee shall comply with all obscenity and indecency
regulations as adopted by the FCC.
B. Emergency override. The grantee shall, without charge, provide,
service and maintain public emergency transmission facilities on all
channels to the borough, as described in the franchise agreement.
A. Deposits. For any deposit required by grantee that earns interest, such
interest shall be returned to the subscriber at such time as the deposit
is returned.
B. Parental control devices. The grantee shall provide to subscribers, as
part of its literature, information concerning the availability of a
parental control device for use by a subscriber. The parental control
device described shall be made available to all subscribers upon
request.
C. Reconnection. The grantee shall restore service to customers wishing
restoration of service, provided that the customer shall first satisfy any
previous obligations owed.
D. Free disconnection. Subscribers shall have the right to have basic
subscriber television service disconnected without charge. A refund of
unused service charges shall be paid to the customer within 60 days
from the date of termination of service.
E. Billing. The grantee shall not require subscribers to pay for services
more than one month in advance. All bills shall be itemized by level of
service.
F. Delinquent accounts. The grantee shall use its best efforts to collect on
delinquent subscriber accounts. In all cases, the grantee shall provide
§ 39-30 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 39-31
39:116
§ 39-32. Customer standards, services and procedures.
the customer with at least 10 working days' written notice prior to
disconnection.
G. Prohibited activities. In the conduct of its business franchised
hereunder, neither the grantee nor its officers, employees or agents
shall directly or indirectly sell, lease, repair, install or maintain
television sets or receivers or antennas; provided, however, that
nothing hereunder shall prohibit the grantee, at customer's request,
from examining or adjusting customer's receiving set to determine
whether reception difficulties originate in the set or in the grantee's
system.
A. The grantee shall adopt and abide by any and all customer service
standards for cable operators issued by the FCC, including but not
limited to the standards appearing at 47 CFR Section 76.309, as
amended, which are hereby adopted by the borough. The standards
issued by the FCC are the minimum standards for customer service
under this chapter, and additional standards may be set forth in the
franchise agreement or otherwise adopted by the borough.
B. The grantee shall prepare and file with the borough copies of all of its
rules and regulations in connection with the handling of inquiries,
requests and complaints. The grantee shall, by appropriate means, such
as a card or brochure, furnish information concerning the procedures
for making inquiries or complaints, including the name, address and
local telephone number of the employee or employees or agent to whom
such inquiries or complaints are to be addressed.
C. The grantee shall keep full records of service calls in connection with
the system. Such records shall identify the person contacting the
grantee and the person responding on behalf of the grantee, the subject
matter of the contact, the date and time it was received, the resolution
of the matter in question or the action taken by the grantee in
connection with the contact and the date and time thereof and such
other information as may be deemed pertinent by the grantee. These
records shall be made available for periodic inspection by the borough.
D. The grantee shall repair or replace without charge all defective
equipment provided by it to the subscriber; provided, however, that the
grantee may charge a subscriber for service to or replacement of any
equipment rendered inoperable or damaged due to negligence of such
subscriber.
E. Hearing impaired. The grantee shall, upon request of the subscriber,
install equipment designed to enhance reception of programming with
encoded signals for the hearing impaired.
F. Credit for service interruption. The grantee shall, upon request of
subscriber, give a credit for 24 hours of free cable service for every
§ 39-31 CABLE TELEVISION § 39-32
39:117
§ 39-33. Continuity of service mandatory.
service outage lasting for more than four hours in any twenty-four-hour
period or 1/30 of the monthly bill. For this purpose, a "service outage"
is defined as the loss of picture or sound on one or more channels.
A. It shall be the right of all subscribers to receive continuous,
uninterrupted service insofar as their financial and other obligations to
the grantee are honored.
B. In the event that a grantee elects to rebuild, modify or sell its system or
the borough gives notice of intent to terminate or fails to renew its
franchise, the grantee shall cooperate with the borough or new grantee
or operator in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers.
During such period, the grantee shall be entitled to the revenues for
any period during which it operates the system.
C. Abandonment of system. In the event that the grantee willfully fails to
operate the system for a continuous twenty-four-hour period without
prior approval of the borough or without just cause, the borough may, at
its option, operate the system or designate an operator until such time
as the grantee restores service under conditions acceptable to the
borough or a permanent operator is selected. If the borough is required
to fulfill this obligation for the grantee, the grantee shall reimburse the
borough for all reasonable costs or damages in excess of revenues from
the system received by the borough that are the result of the grantee's
failure to perform, and the grantee should be obligated to continue to
provide head end programming services until the borough is able to
obtain equivalent head end service from another source.
§ 39-32 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 39-33
39:118
ARTICLE VIII
Books, Records and Reports
§ 39-34. Records and books available to grantor.
The borough shall have the right to inspect, copy or transcribe at any time
during normal business hours at the grantee's office within the franchise
territory all records of the grantee which are required to carry out its
regulatory responsibilities hereunder.
§ 39-35. Reports required.
Except where a different time or requirement is specified by this chapter
or the franchise agreement, the grantee shall file with the borough upon
request:
A. Regulatory communications. All correspondence received from the
FCC, as well as all reports submitted to the FCC, including but not
limited to annual proof of performance tests and results and Equal
Employment Opportunity (EEO) reports and all petitions, applications
and communications of all types submitted by the grantee to the FCC,
the Security and Exchange Commission (SEC) or any other federal or
state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction over any
matter affecting operation of grantee's system, shall be provided
simultaneously to the borough.
B. Facilities report. An annual report setting forth the physical miles of
plant construction and plant in operation during the fiscal year shall be
submitted to the borough. Such report shall also contain any revisions
to the system as-built maps filed with the borough.
C. Construction reports. Construction reports shall be sent to the borough
30 days after the franchise is awarded and monthly thereafter until
construction is completed.
D. Proof of bonds and insurance. The grantee shall submit to the borough
the required performance bond or a certified copy thereof and written
evidence of payment of required premium and all policies of insurance
required by this chapter or certificates evidencing the same.
E. Financial and ownership reports.
(1) An annual ownership report, indicating all persons who at any time
during the preceding year did control or benefit from an interest in
the franchise of 1% or more.
(2) An annual financial report for the previous calendar year specific to
operations within borough, certified by the grantee's chief financial
officer or appropriate corporate officer attesting to the truth and
accuracy of the information provided, including year-end balance
sheet; income statement for the twelve-month period ending
December 31, showing subscriber revenue, nonsubscriber
§ 39-34 CABLE TELEVISION § 39-35
39:119
revenue, operating expenses, depreciation expense, interest
expense and taxes paid; statement of sources and applications of
funds; and depreciation schedule, prepared in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles.
(3) A current annual statement of all capital expenditures, including
the cost of construction and of equipment.
(4) An annual list of officers and members of the Board of the grantee
specific to operations within the borough and of any parent
corporation.
F. Operational reports.
(1) An annual report on the system's technical tests and measurements
as set forth herein and in the franchise agreement.
(2) An annual summary of programs and services offered by the
grantee, including public, educational, government and leased
access.
(3) An annual projection of system and service plans.
(4) A semiannual summary of service calls received and handled, in
addition to any reports required in the franchise agreement.
(5) A quarterly summary of activities, including but not limited to
subscriber totals for each category of service offered, including
number of pay units sold and new services offered.
G. Additional reports. The grantee shall prepare and furnish to the
borough, at the times and in the form prescribed, such additional
reports with respect to its operation, affairs, transactions or property as
may be reasonably necessary and appropriate to the performance of
any of the regulatory duties of the borough in connection with this
chapter or the franchise agreement.
§ 39-35 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 39-35
39:120
ARTICLE IX
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 39-36. Time is of the essence.
Whenever this chapter shall set forth any time for an act to be performed by
or on behalf of the grantee, such time shall be deemed of the essence, and
any failure of the grantee to perform within the time allotted shall always
be sufficient ground for the borough to invoke an appropriate penalty,
including possible revocation of the franchise.
§ 39-37. Statutory law governs.
In any controversy or dispute under this chapter, the law of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall apply.
§ 39-38. Prior ordinance repealed.
Ordinance No. 2-70 of the Code of East Greenville borough and all
amendments thereto and all previous ordinances or parts thereof in conflict
with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed upon the effective
date as defined in § 39-39 or upon the date of execution of a new franchise
agreement with Suburban Cable Communications, the current sole
franchisee within the borough, whichever shall last occur.
§ 39-39. Effective date.
This chapter shall become effective five days after the date of enactment,
subject to the provisions of § 39-38 herein.
§ 39-36 CABLE TELEVISION § 39-39
39:121
Chapter 41
CURFEW
§ 41-1. Legislative purpose.27
The purpose of this section is to:
§ 41-2. Definitions.
As used within this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings ascribed to them below:
CURFEW HOURS — The hours, on Sunday through Thursday nights, from
10:00 p.m. until the following 6:00 a.m., and on Saturday and Sunday
mornings, from 12:01 a m. through 6:00 a.m.
EMERGENCY — Unforeseen circumstances, or the status or condition
resulting therefrom, requiring immediate action to safeguard life, limb or
property. The term includes, but is not limited to, fires, natural disasters,
automobile accidents, or other similar circumstances.
ESTABLISHMENT — Any privately-owned place of business within the
Borough operated for a profit, to which the public is invited, including but
not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment. With respect to
such establishment, the term "operator" shall mean any person, and any
firm, association, partnership (and the members or partners thereof) and/
or any corporation (and the officers thereof) conducting or managing that
establishment.
MINOR — Any person under 18 years of age.
OFFICER — A police officer charged with the duty of enforcing the laws of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the ordinances of the Borough of
East Greenville.
A. Promote the general welfare and protect the general public through the
reduction of juvenile violence and crime within the Borough;
B. Promote the safety and well-being of the Borough's youngest citizens,
persons under the age of 17, whose inexperience renders them
particularly vulnerable to becoming participants in unlawful activities,
particularly unlawful drug activities, and to being victimized by older
perpetrators of crime; and
C. Foster and strengthen parental responsibility for children.
27.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for a review of its effectiveness and the
continuing need for its provisions one year after its effective date.
§ 39-39 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 41-2
41:122
PARENT —
PERSON — An individual, not any association, corporation, or any other
legal entity.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public or a substantial group of
the public has access, including but not limited to streets, highways, roads,
sidewalks, alleys, avenues, parks, and/or the common areas of schools,
hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transportation facilities and
shops.
REMAIN —
TEMPORARY CARE FACILITY — A nonlocked, nonrestrictive shelter at
which minors may wait, under visual supervision, to be retrieved by a
parent. No minors waiting in such facility shall be handcuffed and/or
secured (by handcuffs or otherwise) to any stationary object.
§ 41-3. Unlawful activity.
A person who is a minor's biological or adoptive parent and who has
legal custody of a minor (including either parent, if custody is shared
under a court order or agreement);
A.
A person who is the biological or adoptive parent with whom a minor
regularly resides;
B.
C. A person judicially appointed as a legal guardian of the minor; and/or
A person 18 years of age or older standing in loco parentis (as indicated
by the authorization of an individual listed in Subsection A, B or C of
this definition above, for the person to assume the care or physical
custody of the child, or as indicated by any other circumstances).
D.
A. To linger or stay at or upon a place; and/or
To fail to leave a place when requested to do so by an officer or by the
owner, operator or ether person in control of that place.
B.
A. It shall be unlawful for a minor, during curfew hours, to remain in or
upon any public place within the Borough, to remain in any motor
vehicle operating or parked therein or thereon, or to remain in or upon
the premises of any establishment within the Borough, unless:
(1) The minor is accompanied by a parent;
(2) The minor is involved in an emergency;
(3) The minor is engaged in an employment activity, or is going to or
returning home from such activity, without detour or stop;
(4) The minor is on the sidewalk directly abutting a place where he or
she resides with a parent;
§ 41-2 CURFEW § 41-3
41:123
§ 41-4. Enforcement.
(5) The minor is attending an activity sponsored by a school, religious,
or civic organization, by a public organization or agency, or by
another similar organization or entity, which activity is supervised
by adults, and/or the minor is going to be returning from such an
activity without detour or stop;
(6) The minor is on an errand at the direction of a parent, and the
minor has in his or her possession a writing signed by the parent
containing the following information: the name, signature, address
and telephone number of the parent authorizing the errand, the
telephone number where the parent may be reached during the
errand, the name of the minor, and a brief description of the
errand, the minor's destination(s) and the hours the minor is
authorized to be engaged in the errand;
(7) The minor is involved in interstate travel through, or beginning or
terminating in, the Borough of East Greenville; or
(8) The minor is exercising First Amendment rights protected by the
United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion,
freedom of speech and the right of assembly.
B. It shall be unlawful for a minor's parent to knowingly permit, allow or
encourage such minor to violate § 41-3A.
C. It shall be unlawful for a person who is the owner or operator of any
motor vehicle to knowingly permit, allow or encourage a violation of
§ 41-3A.
D. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any establishment, or for any
person who is an employee thereof, to knowingly permit, allow or
encourage a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment
during curfew hours. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this
subsection that the operator or employee of an establishment promptly
notified the Police Department that a minor was present at the
establishment after curfew hours and refused to leave.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person (including any minor) to give a false
name, address, or telephone number to any officer investigating a
possible violation of § 41-3.
A. Minors. Before taking any enforcement action hereunder, an officer
shall make an immediate investigation for the purpose of ascertaining
whether or not the presence of a minor in a public place, motor vehicle
and/or establishment within the Borough during curfew hours is in
violation of § 41-3A.
(1) If such investigation reveals that the presence of such minor is in
violation of § 41-3A, then:
§ 41-3 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 41-4
41:124
§ 41-5. Penalties for violations.
Each violation of this chapter shall constitute a summary offense punishable
by a fine of no more than $1,000.
Chapter 42
DISORDERLY CONDUCT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 56. Parades and motorcades — See Ch. 60.
(a) If the minor has not previously been issued a warning for any
such violation, then the officer shall issue a verbal warning to
the minor, which shall be followed by a written warning mailed
by the Police Department to the minor and his or her parent(s);
or
(b) If the minor has previously been issued a warning for any such
violation, then the officer shall charge the minor with a
violation of this chapter, and shall issue a summons requiring
the minor to appear in court.
(2) As soon as practicable, the officer shall:
(a) Release the minor to his or her parent(s);
(b) Place the minor in a temporary care facility for a period not to
exceed the remainder of the curfew hours, so that his or her
parent(s) may retrieve the minor; or
(c) If a miner refuses to give an officer his or her name and
address, refuses to give the name and address of his or her
parent(s), or if no parent can be located prior to the end of the
applicable curfew hours, or if located, no parent appears to
accept custody of the minor, the minor may be taken to a
nonsecure crisis center or juvenile shelter and/or may be taken
to a judge or intake officer of the juvenile court to be dealt with
in the manner and pursuant to such procedures as required by
law.
(3) Others. If an investigation by an officer reveals that a person has
violated § 41-3B, C, and/or E, and if the person has not previously
been issued a warning with respect to any such violation, an officer
shall issue a verbal warning to the person, which shall be followed
by a written warning mailed by the Police Department to the
person; however, if any such warning has previously been issued to
that person, then the officer shall charge the person with a
violation and shall issue a summons directing the person to appear
in court.
§ 41-4 CURFEW § 41-5
41:125

ARTICLE I
Noise
[Adopted 3-1-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-03]
§ 42-1. Unnecessary or excessive noise prohibited and defined as
disorderly conduct.
The creation within the Borough of East Greenville of any unnecessary or
excessive noise or of any noise of such character, intensity or duration as to
be detrimental to the health or life of any individual or in the disturbance
of the public peace and welfare or the aiding and abetting in the creation
of any such noise to continue is hereby prohibited and defined as disorderly
conduct.
§ 42-2. Enumeration of unnecessary or excessive noises.
Prohibited noise, within the meaning of this article, is hereby defined to
include the following:
A. For any person at any time to use a horn or other warning device
otherwise than as a reasonable warning, or to make any unnecessary or
unreasonable loud or harsh sound by means of a horn or other warning
device.
B. The playing of any radio, phonograph or any musical instrument in such
a manner or with such volume as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort
or repose of persons in any office, hospital or any dwelling, hotel or
other type of residence or of any persons in the vicinity thereof.
C. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets
and/or public property so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or
repose of any persons in any hospital, dwelling, hotel or other type of
residence or of any persons in the vicinity thereof.
D. Permitting any animal, bird or fowl in one's possession or under one's
control to make any frequent or long continued noise of such character
or intensity as to disturb the comfort or repose of any person.
E. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler,
except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of
fire or danger.
F. The erection (including excavating), demolition, alteration or repair of
any building in any residential district or section, the excavation of
streets or highways in any residential district or section other than
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on Monday through
Saturday, except in the case of urgent necessity in the interest of public
health and safety, and then only with a permit from the Borough
Secretary, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed 30
days while the emergency continues. If the Borough Council should
determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the
§ 42-1 CURFEW § 42-2
41:127
§ 42-3. Exceptions.
None of the terms or prohibitions hereof shall apply to or be enforced
against:
erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the
excavation of streets and highways between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m., and if they shall further determine that loss or inconvenience
would result to any party in interest, they may grant permission for
such work to be done between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.,
upon application being made at the time the permit for the work is
awarded or during the progress of the work.
G. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school,
institution of learning, church or court, while the same are in session,
which unreasonably interferes with the workings of sessions thereof
and the making of any other noise so as to annoy the users and/or
occupants of such places or buildings as are herein defined.
H. The use of any drum, loud speaker or other instrument or device for the
purpose of attracting attention to the sale or display of merchandise of
a commercial character.
I. Refuse-compacting vehicles. Operating of or permitting to be operated
the compact cycle of the motor vehicle which can compact refuse
between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day in
residential areas.
J. For any person or persons to make any unreasonable noise continuously
and/or incessantly for a period in excess of 10 minutes, or make such
noise intermittently for 30 minutes or more which results in a
disturbance to any person at any time of the day or night, regardless of
whether the noise disturbance is physically situated in or upon private
property.
A. Any vehicle or personnel of the Borough while engaged upon necessary
public business, and/or emergency vehicles such as police, ambulance
and fire companies.
B. Excavations or repairs of bridges, streets or highways by or on behalf of
the Borough during the nighttime, when the public welfare and
convenience renders it impossible to perform such work during the
daytime.
C. Parades with band music on holidays or by civic organizations or by the
public schools or divisions of the public schools.
D. School sports events which may or may not be accompanied by
cheering and/or music.
E. The reasonable use of amplifiers or loud speakers in the course of
public addresses which are noncommercial in character.
§ 42-2 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 42-3
41:128
§ 42-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more than $300 and costs
of such proceedings or, upon default of payment of such fine and costs,
by imprisonment in the county jail for a term of not more than 30 days;
provided, however, that if the District Justice determines that the defendant
is without financial means to pay the fines and costs immediately or in a
single remittance, such defendant shall be permitted to pay the fines or
costs in installments and over such periods of time as the District Justice
deems to be just.
F. Fireworks exhibits held under permit by the Borough.
§ 42-3 CURFEW § 42-4
41:129
Chapter 44
(RESERVED)
Chapter 47
GARBAGE AND REFUSE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 44. Nuisances — See Ch 56.
§ 42-4 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 42-4
44:130
ARTICLE I
General Regulations
[Adopted 6-6-1966 by Ord. No. 8-66]
§ 47-1. Definitions. [Amended 9-5-1989 by Ord. No. 11-89]
The following words, as used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context
clearly indicates otherwise:
BULK ITEM — An individual combustible or noncombustible article which
the owner or occupier of a unit seeks to dispose of and which, because
of size or weight, is not amenable to containment in a thirty-three-gallon
clear plastic bag as provided by the Borough. Such shall include discarded
furniture, small household appliances and fixtures, but shall specifically
exclude tires and white goods. The size and weight of bulk items subject
to collection shall be limited to those that reasonably can be lifted by two
persons.[Added 6-7-1999 by Ord. No. 99-3]
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group
acting as a unit.
REFUSE — Garbage and rubbish, as herein defined.
RUBBISH — Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage, and the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood,
coal, coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes,
wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans,
metals, mineral matter, grass, crockery and dust and other similar
materials. Wood, as that word is defined in § 58-1 of this Code, shall not be
considered to be rubbish.[Amended 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-06]
UNIT — One household, one apartment, business establishment or location
entitled to the collection and disposal services authorized by this article
or subsequent amendments thereto.[Amended 12-27-1990 by Ord. No.
90-19; 3-4-1991 by Ord. No. 91-2; 6-7-1999 by Ord. No. 99-3]
§ 47-2. Collection by borough; exception. [Amended 12-27-1990 by
Ord. No. 90-19; 3-4-1991 by Ord. No. 91-2; 6-7-1999 by Ord. No.
99-3]
All refuse accumulated in the Borough of East Greenville shall be collected,
conveyed and disposed of by the Borough of East Greenville. The person or
persons owning or occupying a unit whose accumulated refuse at each time
of collection exceeds four bags, with a total weight of 50 pounds per bag
and/or one bulk item shall personally or by arrangement with the person or
firm holding the then-current contract with the Borough of East Greenville
to perform such services within the Borough collect, convey and dispose
of such excess refuse in accordance with all regulations for collection,
conveyance and disposal prescribed in this article or made by the Borough
§ 47-1 (RESERVED) § 47-2
44:131
Council. Only the refuse deposited in the clear plastic thirty-three-gallon
bags which shall be provided by the Borough of East Greenville and bulk
items identified by an attached, Borough-issued sticker will be collected,
conveyed and disposed of by the Borough of East Greenville.
§ 47-3. Authorization to contract; contractual obligations.
Borough Council is authorized hereby to contract for the performance of the
service provided by this article and to award a contract therefor from time
to time for such periods of time as shall be determined by Borough Council.
Such contract shall require the contractor to assume all responsibility for
the collection of refuse in the Borough of East Greenville in accordance with
the provisions of this article and all regulations, orders and specifications
provided under the authority thereof, and to convey, dump and dispose in
a lawful manner all such refuse beyond and outside the boundaries of the
Borough of East Greenville in a lawful place, and to fix and regulate, in a
manner not inconsistent with the terms of this article, the manner, method
and time of collecting and conveying refuse, the type of equipment required
for the purpose and the price to be paid for the performance of said contract
and the time or times for the payment thereof.
§ 47-4. Supervision of collection. [Amended 9-5-1989 by Ord. No.
89-11]
The collection of refuse in the Borough of East Greenville and the disposal
thereof shall be under the supervision of the Borough Council. The Borough
Council shall have authority to make regulations concerning the hours and
days of collection and such other matters pertaining to the collection and
disposal as it may deem advisable and to change and modify the same
after notice as required by law, provided that such regulations are not
contrary to the provisions hereof. An aggrieved person shall have the right
to appeal against any regulations or order made by the Borough Council to
the Borough Council, and the latter may confirm, modify or revoke any such
regulations or order; provided, however, that no such appeal to the Borough
Council shall be permitted as to any regulation contained in this article.
§ 47-4.1. Containers for collection. [Added 3-4-1991 by Ord. No.
91-2; amended 6-7-1999 by Ord. No. 99-3]
Every premises from which refuse is collected and removed shall use a
clear plastic thirty-three-gallon bag as provided by the Borough of East
Greenville. Under this exclusive bag-removal system only refuse deposited
in the aforesaid bags and bulk items tagged with bulk item stickers also
provided by the Borough of East Greenville will be accepted by the trash
collection contractor. Bags and bulk item stickers may be purchased at
Mohr's Store, Fourth and Main Streets; Baumans Paint Store, 114 Main
Street; or First Union Bank, Fourth and Washington Streets, or at such
other or additional locations as the Borough Council may from time to time
designate by resolution, and at a cost of $1.75 per bag and $2.00 per sticker
§ 47-2 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 47-4.1
44:132
or at such cost as the Borough Council may from time to time designate by
resolution.
§ 47-4.2. Dumpsters. [Added 7-7-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-6]
Persons owning residential buildings that contain in excess of three units
may, at the discretion of the Borough Council, be required to provide
for the residents of their building a dumpster or similar contrivance as
approved by the Code Enforcement Officer, situate at the property's normal
collection site, into which the residents may deposit their accumulated
refuse, contained in the aforedescribed Borough of East Greenville plastic
bags.
§ 47-5. Collection schedule. [Amended 12-27-1990 by Ord. No.
90-19]
The Borough Council is authorized to arrange date schedules for the
collection of refuse in the various categories and sections of the borough
and shall give public notice thereof. Such schedules shall provide for a
single collection for each and every week throughout the year. No collection
shall be made on Sundays or on any of the following holidays: New Year's
Day, Good Friday, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving
and Christmas. All collections shall be scheduled and shall be made in
conformity with such schedule between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 1:00
p.m., provided that collections may be made after 1:00 p.m. to complete a
day's schedule when unusual conditions or emergencies reasonably justify a
time extension for a particular day, unless a different time shall be specified
by the Borough Council, in which event the latter determined time shall
be controlling. In the instance that a scheduled day of collection shall fall
upon one of the herein specified holidays, then collection shall occur on the
following day during the normal collection hours as herein set forth.
§ 47-6. Use of collection service required. [Amended 6-7-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-3]
All persons within the Borough of East Greenville shall dispose of refuse
by the municipal collection service only, and no person shall transport or
dispose of refuse by any means not approved by this article.
§ 47-7. Disposal of excess quantities; unauthorized methods of
disposal. [Amended 9-5-1989 by Ord. No. 89-11; 6-7-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-3]
Persons having refuse in excess of that which fills four collectible thirtythree-
gallon Borough-issued bags to a weight of 50 pounds per bag and/
or who have more than one bulk item they seek to dispose of at a given
collection time shall dispose of such excess refuse promptly and in
accordance with the provisions of this article and regulations adopted
thereunder, personally or by arrangement with the person or firm holding
the then-current contract with the Borough of East Greenville to perform
§ 47-4.1 (RESERVED) § 47-7
44:133
such services within the Borough. The making of a contract or arrangement
for the collection, conveyance and disposal of refuse from any location
within the Borough with any unauthorized person or firm shall constitute a
separate and distinct violation of this article by each party thereto, and each
shall be subject to the penalties hereinafter provided.
§ 47-8. Hauling refuse collected outside borough.
The Borough Council is authorized to make regulations concerning the
hauling of refuse collected outside the Borough of East Greenville over the
streets of the Borough of East Greenville.
§ 47-9. Vehicle regulations.
No refuse shall be hauled over the streets of the Borough of East Greenville
except in a watertight vehicle provided with a tight cover so as to prevent
offensive odors from escaping therefrom and refuse from being blown,
dropped or spilled therefrom.
§ 47-10. Disposal within borough prohibited.
No refuse shall be dumped or disposed of within the limits of the Borough
of East Greenville.
§ 47-11. Ownership of refuse.
Ownership of refuse set out for collection shall be vested in the Borough
of East Greenville until such time as the same shall be collected from the
containers into the vehicle of the contractor, at which time it shall become
the property of the contractor.
§ 47-12. Accumulation, storage and burning restrictions.
On and after the date of the award of a contract for collection service
pursuant to the authority contained in § 47-3 hereof it shall be unlawful:
A. For any person to collect, convey over any of the streets or alleys of the
Borough of East Greenville or dispose of any refuse accumulated in said
borough in any manner not approved of in this article or subsequent
regulations.
B. For any person to place any refuse in any street, alley or other public
place or upon private property, whether owned by such person or not,
within the borough, except in proper receptacles for collection. No
person shall throw or deposit any refuse in any stream or other body of
water.
C. For any person to allow any accumulation of refuse on any premises in
the Borough of East Greenville other than for the purpose of collection
in the manner provided by this article or by special regulation of
Borough Council. Any unauthorized accumulation of refuse on any
premises is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. Failure
§ 47-7 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 47-12
44:134
§ 47-13. Fee for permit to burn. [Added 11-7-1966 by Ord. No. 9-66]
Every applicant for a permit to burn, as provided by § 47-12G, and for
every renewal thereof, shall pay an application fee of $100 to the Borough
Treasurer for inspection and policing thereof, any balance thereof to go into
the general funds of the borough.
to remove an unauthorized accumulation of refuse within 15 days of
notice to either the occupant or the owner shall be deemed a separate
violation of this article by either or both of such persons.
D. For any person, other than the occupants of the premises on which
refuse receptacles are stored or the collector, to remove the covers of
any of the refuse receptacles or to remove the refuse stored in such
containers.
E. To place in any containers provided for regular collection any highly
flammable or explosive refuse or any wearing apparel, bedding or
refuse from premises where highly infectious or contagious diseases
have prevailed.
F. For any person to burn any refuse outside of any building. [Amended
11-7-1966 by Ord. No. 9-66; 9-5-1989 by Ord. No. 11-89]
G. For any person to burn any refuse within the Borough of East Greenville
except upon a showing of undue hardship, if found to exist by a
determination of the Borough Fire Marshal, and upon a written permit
to do so approved by the Borough Fire Marshal. Such burning shall be
permitted only in accordance with the provisions and conditions set
forth upon such permit and only by means of incineration inside a
building and under conditions that are safe and free from hazards of fire
to such building and surrounding buildings. The emission of any smoke,
fumes or odors resulting from such burning shall be sufficient cause for
revocation forthwith of such permit. Burning conducted contrary to the
terms and conditions of such permit or in an unsafe manner or so as to
emit smoke, fumes or odors shall be deemed to be a separate violation
of this article. [Added 11-7-1966 by Ord. No. 9-66; amended
9-5-1989 by Ord. No. 11-89]
H. For any person to place for collection refuse in containers other than
the clear plastic thirty-three-gallon bags provided by the Borough for
such purpose. [Added 9-5-1989 by Ord. No. 89-11; amended
6-7-1999 by Ord. No. 99-3]
I. For any person to place any refuse for collection in any street, alley or
other public place or private property, whether owned by such person
or not, within the borough more than 12 hours prior to the scheduled
collection time. [Added 9-5-1989 by Ord. No. 11-89]
§ 47-12 (RESERVED) § 47-14
44:135
§ 47-14. Permitted burning without license. [Added 11-7-1966 by
Ord. No. 9-66]
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the burning at practice
drills of such articles and at such locations as may be approved by the
Mayor if such burning shall be done in the presence and under the direct
supervision of the Fire Chief of the East Greenville Fire Company.
§ 47-15. Expenses of collection. [Amended 6-7-1999 by Ord. No.
99-3]
§ 47-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-7-1987 by Ord. No.
10-87; 9-5-1989 by Ord. No. 11-89; 2-1-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-02]
Except for the provisions provided for in § 47-17, any person who shall
violate any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject
to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a
term not to exceed 30 days, or both, at the discretion of the Court.
§ 47-17. Fees; penalties for nonpayment. [Added 2-1-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-02]
A. The Borough will pay from its general revenues as set aside in its
budget the expenses incident to collection of a maximum of four clear
plastic thirty-three-gallon bags as provided by the Borough of East
Greenville, each with a total weight of no more than 50 pounds and one
bulk item tagged with a bulk item sticker as provided by the Borough at
each collection time from every residence and place of business. Excess
bags of refuse and bulk items may be collected by special arrangement
between the owner or occupier of property upon which such refuse
accumulates and the person or firm holding the then-current contract
with the Borough of East Greenville to perform such services. The
owner or occupier of the property from which such excess refuse is
collected shall be solely responsible for payment of the person or firm
that collects the excess refuse from the unit in his possession. The
hauler holding the then-current contract for collection, conveyance and
disposal of refuse in the Borough of East Greenville shall not look to the
Borough for compensation in the collection of excess refuse from the
owner or occupier of a unit upon which such refuse has accumulated.
For collection of excess refuse the person or firm holding the municipal
contract shall charge the rate charged the Borough for collection of the
first four bags and one bulk item.
B. It shall be unlawful to charge any business or industry for any collection
rates proportionately in excess of the rates in effect for the first four
bags and bulk item collected at any location.
A. The fees for the collection or disposal of refuse and penalties for late
payment shall be determined from time to time by resolution of the
Borough Council of the Borough of East Greenville; public notice of the
§ 47-14 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 47-17
44:136
fee schedule shall thereupon be made. The initial fees are set as
follows:
(1) As of the tax year 2010, a yearly fee per dwelling unit of $113 shall
be due, payable on or before March 1. If paid after March 1, the
per-dwelling-unit fee due shall be $135.
(2) In addition, the cost per East Greenville Borough garbage bag shall
be modified to $1 per bag.
(3) This section shall be effective 30 days after being adopted.
B. All bills for the collection and disposal of refuse shall be rendered
annually and shall thereupon be immediately due and payable. All bills
shall be payable to the Borough Secretary. Payments representing
collection costs for January through December shall be subject to a perdwelling-
unit penalty if not paid on or before March 1. Accounts not
paid within 60 days of March 1 shall be referred to the Borough
Solicitor with instructions to proceed for the collection of such unpaid
charges, together with all penalties thereon, and the same shall be
collected by an action of assumpsit in the name of the Borough against
the owner of the property charged or by a lien filed in the nature of a
municipal lien against the subject property or in any other manner
provided by the law for the collection of a municipal lien.
§ 47-17 (RESERVED) § 47-17
44:137

ARTICLE II
Recycling
[Adopted 7-25-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-03]
§ 47-18. Short title.
The short title of this article shall be the "East Greenville Borough Recycling
Ordinance," and the same may be cited in that manner.
§ 47-19. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALUMINUM CANS — Any empty all-aluminum beverage and food
containers.
BOROUGH RECYCLING COMMITTEE — A committee of three members
of the Borough Council, appointed by the Borough Council President to
implement the terms of this article.
BI-METAL CANS — Any empty food or beverage containers consisting of
ferrous sides and bottom, and aluminum top. (See also "Tin Cans.")
CHIPPING — The act of turning solid wood into a small, slender piece of
wood, separated by mechanical chopping, cutting, or breaking.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Properties used primarily for
commercial or industrial purposes.
CORRUGATED PAPER — Any structural paper material with an inner core
shaped in rigid parallel furrows and ridges.
GLASS BOTTLE AND BEVERAGE CONTAINERS — Any bottles and jars
made of clear or colored glass.
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — All white paper, bond paper and computer
paper used in commercial, institutional and municipal establishments.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Facilities that house or serve groups
of people, e.g. hospitals, schools, day-care, nursing homes, etc.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves from trees and garden residues, but not including
grass clippings.
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING PROPERTIES — Any properties having four or
more dwelling units per structure.
MUNICIPAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Public facilities operated by the
Municipality and other governmental and quasi-governmental authorities.
MUNICIPALITY — East Greenville Borough.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or gaseous
material, resulting from operation of residential, municipal, commercial or
institutional establishments and from community activities and any sludge
§ 47-18 (RESERVED) § 47-19
44:139
not meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste in the Solid
Waste Management Act from municipal, commercial or institutional water
supply treatment plant, waste water treatment plant or air pollution control
facilities. The term does not include source-separated recyclable materials
and newspapers.
NEWSPAPERS — Paper of the type commonly referred to as newsprint
and distributed at fixed intervals, having printed thereon news and other
matters of public interest. Expressly excluded are glossy advertising inserts.
PERSON(S) — Any individual, cooperative, enterprise, corporation,
association, institution, municipality, municipal authority, federal
government or agency, state institution or agency, or other legal entity
whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
In any provisions of this article prescribing a fine, imprisonment or penalty,
or any combination of the foregoing, the term "person" shall include the
officers and directors of any corporation or other legal entity having officers
and directors.
RECYCLING CONTAINERS — Those durable containers used by each
residential dwelling unit for separating and storing recyclables until they
are collected by the proper collection agency of the Borough. Recycling
containers shall be of such type and design as to prevent materials from
blowing out of the container. The container size is limited to no more than
65 gallons in capacity.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Materials generated by business or
consumers which can be separated from municipal waste and returned to
commerce to be reused as a resource in the development of useful products.
Recyclables include the following: clear glass, colored glass, aluminum,
steel and bimetallic cans, high-grade office paper, newsprint, corrugated
paper, junk mail and other paper board products (i.e., cereal boxes), and
plastics (Nos. 1 through 7). Recyclable material must be free from
contamination that would affect its reuse. The list of recyclable materials
may be changed from time to time by resolution of the Borough.
RESIDENTIAL DWELLINGS — Any occupied single-family dwelling or
multifamily dwelling containing less than five dwelling units.
RESIDENTS — Any person residing within the boundaries of the Borough of
East Greenville.
SOURCE SEPARATED — Separated from municipal waste at the point of
origin.
TIN CANS — Any empty food or beverage containers consisting of ferrous
sides and bottom and top (See also "Bi-Metal Cans.")
YARD MATERIALS — Prunings, branches, and other natural organic matter
discarded from yards and gardens, including leaf waste, but not including
grass clippings, and branches. Prunings and branches shall not have a
diameter greater than two inches.
§ 47-19 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 47-20
44:140
§ 47-20. Separation of recyclables.
All residents shall separate recyclable materials from municipal waste
generated at their homes, apartments and other residential establishments
and shall properly store such material until collection. All recyclables shall
be free of contamination.
§ 47-21. Separation of newspapers.
All residents shall separate newspapers from municipal waste generated
at their homes, apartments and other residential establishments and shall
store such material until they are placed out for collection.
§ 47-22. Separation of recyclable materials and newspapers from
residential dwellings and placement for collection.
§ 47-23. Separation of recyclables and newspapers from multifamily
housing properties and placement for collection.
§ 47-24. Collection.
A. Recyclable materials separated from municipal waste generated at
residential dwellings shall be placed at the designated location for
collection in containers supplied by the resident for that purpose. The
designated location may be either curbside or at the rear where an alley
is present and accessible for collection vehicles.
B. Newspapers separated from municipal waste generated from
residential dwellings shall be bundled and tied with string, twine, or
tape. Plastic bags and bins shall not be used for this purpose. The
bundled newspaper shall be placed curbside only on such dates and
times as specified by Borough Council. Newspapers shall be secured in
bundles not to exceed one foot in thickness.
A. The owner, landlord or an agent of an owner or landlord of multifamily
housing properties shall establish a collection system for recyclable
materials and newspapers at each property. Suitable containers for
collecting and sorting recyclable materials and for collecting and
storing newspapers shall be provided by the owner, landlord or agent
thereof, in locations as easily accessible as those provided for municipal
wastes. Additionally, written instructions shall be provided to the
occupants of multifamily housing properties concerning the use and
availability of the collection system.
B. Owners, landlords and agents of owners and landlords who comply with
this article shall not be liable for the noncompliance of occupants of the
multifamily housing properties.
A. Recyclable materials collected by the Borough or pursuant to an
agreement with an independent outside hauler shall be collected each
§ 47-20 (RESERVED) § 47-24
44:141
§ 47-25. Mandatory separation of leaf waste and yard materials.
Monday, or at such other times and dates as established by the Borough
Council of East Greenville Borough.
B. Bundled newspapers, corrugated paper, and high-grade office paper
collected by the Borough or pursuant to an agreement with an
independent outside hauler, shall be collected on the first Saturday of
each month, or at such other times and dates as established by the
Borough Council of East Greenville Borough.
C. Placement for collection shall be made no earlier than 6:00 p.m. on the
day before the scheduled collection.
D. Each person or entity who, by contract with a household, an
establishment or the Borough collects and transports recyclable
materials and newspapers, shall screen and inspect all such materials
collected to the extent necessary to prevent the collection of municipal
wastes, hazardous waste and other wastes that are not recyclable
materials and newspapers.
E. Placement of recyclable materials shall not be made on days with
inclement weather where significant snowfall, or wind over 20 mph are
expected unless all materials are placed inside covered containers to
prevent spillage, blowing, and containers from being filled with snow.
F. Containers shall not be overflowing of recyclable materials and should
be clearly identifiable as recycling and not refuse.
G. Placement of recyclable material containers shall be in the alley. Where
no alley exists adjacent to the property, the recyclable containers shalt
be placed curbside. All containers shall be visible and obvious to the
collecting agency/contractor.
H. Electronics shall not be placed out for collection at any time. All
electronic equipment and waste shall be disposed of in accordance with
the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Placement of electronic
waste for collection shall be a violation of this article.
A. All residents must separate leaf waste and yard materials from other
municipal waste generated at their houses, apartments and other
residential establishments and/or church facilities for collection, unless
provision is made for composting such material.
B. Separated yard materials shall be placed for collection where
recyclable materials and municipal waste is placed for collection. Yard
materials placed in plastic or other bags or raked or piled in areas
where municipal refuse is not placed for collection or removal will not
be accepted.
C. Grass clippings will also not be accepted.
§ 47-24 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 47-25
44:142
§ 47-26. Branch chipping.
§ 47-27. Separation by commercial, municipal and institutional
establishments.
D. Borough Council shall provide for the collection of leaf waste on an
annual basis including instructions for collection, delivery, bagging and/
or drop off as necessary.
E. The burning of yard waste is prohibited unless used for agricultural
purposes.
A. Branches are collected and chipped April through October. Monday is
the scheduled pickup day. However, due to the popularity of this service
or inclement weather, we may not complete the pickup until later in the
week.
B. Place branches where you place your trash.
C. The amount of time spent at a location shall not exceed 10 minutes at
any given stop.
D. Branches shall be stacked/organized in an orderly fashion as close to
the alley as possible to save pickup time. Smaller branches may be
placed inside a container to assist the crew.
E. Branches shall be less than two inches in diameter.
F. The Borough shall not remove downed trees.
G. All soil and dirt shall be removed from plant roots.
H. No boards, lumber, vines, roots, flowers, weeds, leaves, bush
trimmings, branches with fruit, dried flowers, grass clippings, and no
weeds shall be placed out for chipping.
I. Christmas trees shall be chipped during the month of January only. All
decorations and tree stands shall be removed from Christmas trees.
A. Those commercial, municipal or institutional establishments that, as of
the date of this article, have otherwise provided for the recycling of
materials required by this section to be recycled may request to be
exempt from the requirements hereof. Any establishment seeking such
an exemption must apply for an exemption to the Borough Council of
the Borough. An exemption shall be granted if the applicant shows the
following:
(1) High-grade office paper, aluminum, corrugated paper and glass
containers are removed from the stream of waste at either the
point of generation of waste or by other separation procedures,
which shall be described in detail in the application;
§ 47-25 (RESERVED) § 47-27
44:143
§ 47-28. Collection by unauthorized person(s).
It shall be a violation of this article for any unauthorized person to collect,
pick up, or cause to be collected or picked up, any materials required by this
article. All collectors must possess a valid disposal permit. Nothing in this
article shall be deemed to impair the ownership of any materials required by
this article to be recycled by the persons generating such materials unless
they are placed at curbside or other designated locations for collection.
§ 47-29. Transport to unauthorized facility.
It shall be a violation of this article for any person to transport any
recyclable materials or newspapers to any facility outside the Borough not
approved and licensed for the collection of recyclable materials.
§ 47-30. Enforcement.
The Borough Council of the Borough is authorized and directed to enforce
this article and to delegate the enforcement of the provisions of this article.
Borough Council is hereby authorized and directed to establish and
promulgate reasonable regulations as to the manner, days, and times for
the collection of materials required to be recycled hereunder, in accordance
with the terms hereof. Borough Council may change, modify, repeal, or
amend any portion of said regulations at any time. The Borough reserves
the right to inspect cans and containers to ensure recyclable materials are
appropriate, and to leave noncompliant materials at the curb. The Borough
also reserves the right to refuse to collect any contaminated recycling
materials.
§ 47-31. Violations and penalties.
Any resident violating any provision of this article shall be subject to a
penalty not to exceed $600.
(2) The separated materials are brought to a center, which shall be
identified in the application, for either processing or packaging to
return the material to the stream of commerce; and
(3) The amount of waste, and the amount of materials separated from
the waste for recycling, during the preceding 12 months of
operation, or such shorter period as the operation may have been
in effect prior to enactment of this article.
B. Any establishment that is granted an exemption must annually provide
written documentation to the Borough Council of the total number of
tons recycled.
§ 47-27 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 47-31
44:144
Chapter 53
MUNICIPAL PARKING LOTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 91.
§ 47-31 (RESERVED) § 47-31
44:145

ARTICLE I
Parking Regulations
[Adopted 4-24-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-02; amended in its entirety
12-7-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03]
§ 53-1. Parking provisions established; violations and penalties;
towing, impounding and reclamation of vehicles.
The following rules and regulations shall be applicable to all municipal
parking lots on properties owned by the Borough of East Greenville:
A. Parking is prohibited at said municipal lots from 12:00 midnight until
6:00 a.m. at all times all year long.
B. Commercial vehicles. Parking of any commercial vehicle as herein
described is prohibited at all times. A commercial vehicle is any truck,
truck-trailer or commercial vehicle having a gross vehicle weight of
9,001 pounds or greater, or a Class A to Class C vehicle having a gross
vehicle weight of between 5,000 and 9,000 pounds which is affixed in
combination with a trailer or other apparatus regardless of the weight
thereof.
C. Recreational vehicles and general-purpose trailers. Parking of any
recreational vehicle or general-purpose trailer, as herein described is
prohibited at all times. A recreational vehicle and general-purpose
trailer is any motor home, travel trailer, camper trailer, boat, boat
trailer, or general-purpose trailer designed to be towed by any
motorized vehicle for transport of lawn equipment, other devices or
commodities, regardless of size or weight.
D. Parking is prohibited at said municipal lots at all times during which a
snow emergency has been declared for the Borough of East Greenville.
E. Parking is prohibited at said municipal lots at such times that it is for
the benefit and in the best interest of the Borough, to be determined by
the Mayor of the Borough of East Greenville or if the Mayor is
unavailable, then by the Borough Manager and if the Borough Manager
is unavailable, then by the President of the Borough Council of East
Greenville, Pennsylvania.
F. Penalties. Any person or persons who violate this article by parking in
said municipal lots when parking is prohibited shall be subject to being
towed by a towing company designated by the Borough of East
Greenville and subject to paying the costs of the towing company and
impoundment of illegally parked vehicles.
G. Applicability and scope. This article is enacted under authority of
§ 6109(a-22) of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code28 and gives authority to
the Borough of East Greenville to remove and impound those vehicles
28.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 53-1 (RESERVED) § 53-1
44:147
which are parked in a tow-away zone and in violation of parking
regulations of this article. Vehicles which have been abandoned (as
defined by the Vehicle Code) or which are parked in such a manner as
to interfere with traffic or pose a hazard to others may be towed under
the provisions of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
H. Authority to remove and impound.
(1) An approved towing company shall have authority to remove and
impound any vehicle parked overtime or otherwise illegally,
provided that the circumstances of its parking were within the
conditions stated in Subsection G of this section. No such vehicle
shall be removed or impounded except in strict adherence to the
provisions of this article or the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code.
(2) By separate resolution, the East Greenville Borough Council shall
authorize one or more individuals or entities to be authorized to
notify an approved towing company to remove and impound a
vehicle. No other person or entity shall be authorized to request the
removal of a vehicle which is in violation of this article.
I. Municipal parking lot tow-away zones. All municipal parking lots on
properties owned by the Borough of East Greenville are hereby
established as tow-away zones. Signs shall be posted to place the public
on notice that their vehicles may be towed for violation of the Borough
parking regulations between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m.
each day and at such other times as per the provisions of Subsections D
and E of this section.
J. Designation of approved storage facilities; bonding; towing and
storage. Removal and impounding of vehicles under this article shall be
done only by approved storage facilities that shall be designated from
time to time by the Borough of East Greenville, Pennsylvania 18041.
Every such facility shall submit evidence to the Borough Council that it
is bonded or has acquired liability insurance in an amount satisfactory
to the Borough Council as sufficient to indemnify owners of impounded
vehicles against loss or damage to those vehicles while in the custody of
the garage keeper for the purpose of towing or storage. The approved
storage facility shall submit to the Borough Council its schedule of
charges for towing and storage of vehicles under this article, and, when
the schedule is approved by Borough Council, those charges shall be
adhered to by the approved storage facility; no different schedule of
charges shall be demanded of or collected from any person whose
vehicle is removed or impounded under this article by any approved
storage facility. The Borough Council shall delete from its list of
approved storage facilities any facility that makes any unapproved
charge in connection with any vehicle removed or impounded under
this article.
§ 53-1 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 53-1
44:148
K. Payment of towing and storage charges. The payment of towing and
storage charges shall not relieve the owner or driver of any vehicle from
liability for any fine or penalty for the violation of the provision of this
article for which the vehicle was removed or impounded.
L. Reclamation costs. In order to reclaim his vehicle, the owner shall pay
towing and storage costs.
M. Records of vehicles removed and impounded. The Borough shall cause
a record to be kept of all vehicles impounded under this article and shall
be able to at all reasonable times furnish the owners or the agents of
the owners of those vehicles with information as to the place of storage
of the vehicle.
N. Restrictions upon removal of vehicles. No vehicle shall be removed
under the authority of this article or the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code29 if,
at the time of the intended removal, the owner or the person for the
time being in charge of the vehicle is present and expresses a
willingness and intention to remove the vehicle immediately.
O. Reports and disposition of unclaimed vehicles. If after a period of 15
days the vehicle in storage remains unclaimed, a report shall be filed
with PennDOT, in accordance with § 7311 of the Pennsylvania Vehicle
Code, by the person having legal custody of the vehicle. If the vehicle
has not been claimed after 30 days, the vehicle may be transferred to a
licensed salvor who will then be responsible for filing the proper reports
and disposing of the vehicle in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 73 of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code (75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101
et seq., as amended).
P. Towing and storage charges. Every such approved storage facility shall
have authority to charge the owner of record of every such impounded
vehicle the towing and storage charges that shall be fixed and approved
by resolution of the Borough Council.
Q. Garage to post bond. Every such approved storage facility shall furnish
a bond or have acquired liability insurance in an adequate amount as
shall be fixed by the Borough Council, for the indemnifying of the owner
of any such impounded vehicle against the loss thereof or injury or
damage thereto while in the custody of the keeper of the pound.
R. Notification to owners of impounded vehicles. Within 72 hours from the
time of removal of any vehicle under authority granted by this article,
notice of the fact that such vehicle has been impounded shall be sent by
the towing operator to the owner of record of such vehicle. Such notice
shall include the make, model, title number, vehicle identification
number and registration plate number, the location where the vehicle is
held, notification of the right to reclaim said vehicle within 30 days after
the date of the notice upon payment of towing and storage charges and
29.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 53-1 (RESERVED) § 53-1
44:149
notification that failure to reclaim said vehicle is deemed consent to the
disposition of the vehicle.
S. Effect of payment of towing and impoundment charges without protest.
The payment of any towing and impounding charges, authorized by this
article, shall, unless such payment shall have been made under protest,
be final and conclusive and shall constitute a waiver of any right to
recover the money so paid.
T. Effect of paying of towing and impounding charges under protest. In
the event that any towing and impounding charges, authorized by this
article, shall be paid under protest, the offender shall be entitled to a
hearing before a district justice or court of record having jurisdiction, in
which case the defendant shall be proceeded against and shall receive
such notice as is provided by the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 101
through 9701, as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or
reenacted by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania, in other cases of
summary offenses and shall have the same rights as to appeal and
waiver of hearing.
§ 53-1 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 53-1
44:150
Chapter 56
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 44.
Garbage and refuse disposal — See Ch. 47.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 64.
Posters and handbills — See Ch. 71.
§ 56-1. Definitions.
The following words or phrases as used in this chapter shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD — Any property or premises (including
any building or enclosure) used or used in part for collecting, dismantling,
salvaging or converting or wrecking any automobiles, trucks, vehicles or
machinery to scrap or parts, or where such items are stored incidentally to
these purposes or where the same are held for sale at retail or wholesale
and/or the business enterprise or activity wherein any person, firm or
association shall be so engaged.
DUMP — Any land area used to receive and accumulate useless, abandoned,
worn-out, mixed, sundry or collect articles or materials or any business
connected therewith, including the giving of permission to others, whether
for a fee or otherwise, to unload or discard upon such land or the land of
another such articles or materials.
JUNK — Any worn-out or discarded material, including but not limited to
old rope, chain, iron, copper, metal, parts of machinery, bottles, cans, glass,
containers and other odds and ends, whether or not such material may be
turned into some minor, incidental or other use. "Junk" is further defined
to include not more than one currently unregistered and/or uninspected
motor vehicle parked, kept or stored on any property or any vehicle in a
state of major disassembly, disrepair or in the process of being stripped or
dismantled. (Exception: A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major
overhaul, including body work, provided that such work is performed inside
a structure or similarly enclosed area designated and approved for such
purposes.)[Amended 10-1-1979 by Ord. No. 8-79; 8-7-1989 by Ord.
No. 8-89; 8-6-1990 by Ord. No. 12-90]
JUNKYARD — Any land area, with or without and/or including any buildings
or enclosures thereon, used or used in part for the collection, dismantling,
storage, assembling, disassembling, sorting, grading, piling, distribution
or sale of worn-out and discarded materials, including junk as defined in
this chapter, abandoned automobiles or automobiles for which a certificate
of junk has been issued by the Pennsylvania Secretary of Revenue or the
official of any other state designated to issue such certificates.
§ 53-1 NUISANCES § 56-1
56:151
PIGGERY — Any place where raw or cooked garbage is fed to pigs or other
animals or birds.
§ 56-2. Certain conditions, activities and businesses declared
nuisances.
It is declared hereby to be a public nuisance and it shall be unlawful
after the effective date of this chapter for any person to create, construct,
operate, maintain or own within the Borough of East Greenville any dump,
slaughtering house, piggery as defined in this chapter, stable, hogpen,
fertilizer or rendering plant, kennel or any other condition, activity or
business which may be noxious or offensive to the inhabitants of the
borough or endanger their health or safety.
§ 56-3. Automobile wrecking yards, junkyards and junk dealers:
license required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any automobile wrecking
yard or any junkyard as defined in this chapter, or to engage in business
within the borough as a junk dealer or to collect junk, without first having
applied for and obtained a license from the borough to carry on such activity
in accordance with state and borough regulations and ordinances then in
effect, or to permit any other person to use or occupy premises owned
or controlled by him for any of the foregoing purposes without having a
current and valid license as required in this chapter.
§ 56-4. Application for license.
A. Each application for a license shall be in writing, in triplicate, upon
forms provided by the borough, and shall be signed by the person
applying for such license in the presence of the Borough Secretary or
the Chief of Police.
B. Each application shall contain:
(1) An accurate description of the premises where or from which such
business will be conducted.
(2) The complete name, address for mailing purposes and legal
residence of applicant; if applicant is a corporation, the names and
addresses of all the officers and directors, the principal office
address of the corporation, reference to the date and
circumstances under which the corporation was authorized to do
business in Pennsylvania, the names, and addresses of all
employees and agents of the corporation who may conduct part of
the operations of the corporation in the Borough of East Greenville,
and the name and address of the person upon whom legal service of
process may be made in Pennsylvania with respect to such
corporation.
§ 56-1 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 56-4
56:152
§ 56-5. License fees.
Each application shall be accompanied by a certified check in the amount of
the required fee. The fee shall be $500 for the first or initial application and
$350 for each renewal thereof.
§ 56-6. Duration of license; renewal.
Each license shall be issued for the calendar year during which application
is made, and every license shall expire December 31 of that calendar
year. Each renewal of license, unless otherwise specified by the Borough
Secretary, shall be subject to all of the conditions, restrictions, regulations
and terms of the original license, and any license to be renewed shall be
renewed within six months of expiration of the original or the most recent
previous license of applicant.
§ 56-7. Disposition of fees collected.
Fees collected under the licensing provisions of this chapter shall be for
general borough purposes, including first the expenses of inspection,
enforcement and administration of this chapter and providing police
(3) The names and addresses of all persons associated with the
applicant either as business partners, partial owners of the
business or as employees or agents of the applicant authorized to
conduct business on its behalf.
(4) The nature and kind of business and the work in detail to be
conducted by the applicant, his or its agents and employees.
(5) Whether or not there are presently located or intended to be
located upon the premises any combustible, highly flammable,
toxic, noxious or explosive materials; the location upon the
premises where any junk may be stored, used, sold or kept; and the
distance that such combustibles, flammables, explosives and/or
junk are or shall be located from any building occupied, inhabited
or apt to be occupied or inhabited by persons within the borough. A
drawing, to scale, shall accompany the application, setting forth
the exact location of all buildings and/or of such combustible,
flammable, explosive, toxic or noxious materials or junk upon the
premises.
(6) Whether the applicant or any officer, employee or associate of the
applicant in such business is involved in any litigation, civil or
criminal; the names of pending cases; the court, jurisdiction, term
and number of each, and whether or not any fines have been levied
or judgments rendered against applicant or such persons within six
years prior to the date of application, growing out of any business
pertaining to or related to that of a junk dealer or in connection
with the collection and disposal of automobiles, automobile parts or
other junk.
§ 56-4 NUISANCES § 56-7
56:153
protection and supervision over all matters pertaining to or emanating from
such business for the benefit of the people and property of the borough.
§ 56-8. Separate licenses required.
A separate license shall be required for each business location and for
each person or business entity participating in the conduct, ownership,
management or profits of such business.
§ 56-9. Insurance required.
§ 56-10. Display of license; fee for duplicate licenses.
The license of every junk dealer shall be prominently displayed at the
entrance to the premises licensed, and upon proof of loss or damage to such
license, a duplicate license shall be issued by the Borough Secretary upon
payment by applicant of $10.
§ 56-11. Place of business restricted; transfer of license.
No person licensed under this chapter shall engage in business as a junk
dealer in any place within the Borough of East Greenville other than the
place designated upon his license, and no license shall be transferred from
one person to another except when the ownership of the licensed premises
shall change to the person to whom the license is to be transferred. In any
such case the new owner shall apply for a transfer of the license and pay a
fee of $25.
§ 56-12. Unsafe and dangerous buildings; abatement.
It shall be unlawful to use, maintain, occupy or own any unsafe or
dangerous building or structure or any appurtenances or parts thereof
which are unsafe or dangerous anywhere within the Borough of East
Greenville, and any such building, structure, appurtenance or part is
declared hereby to constitute a public nuisance, which shall be abated by
A. Every applicant for a license to store junk or engage as a junk dealer or
in the handling of combustible, highly flammable and/or explosive
materials shall supply proof of public liability insurance for any and all
personal injuries and wrongful death claims in a sum of at least
$100,000 for each person who may be injured and $300,000 for each
accident or willful act, and at least $300,000 public liability insurance
for claims for property damage for each accident or act for which
applicant may or might be held responsible.
B. Such insurance shall be written by a reputable company approved by
Borough Council. The failure or refusal of any insurance company to
pay any claim deemed reasonable by Borough Council shall be deemed
sufficient cause for Council to disapprove any such company until the
time the claim shall have been denied validity by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
§ 56-7 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 56-12
56:154
the owner, tenant or occupant thereof. Each day of continuance of the same
after written notice from the borough shall constitute a separate offense,
subject to the penalties hereinafter provided.
§ 56-13. Junk dealers to keep records; inspection.
Every junk dealer shall make and keep a daily record in a bound book in
which shall be written clearly in English at the time of the purchase of
any junk a description of every article or material purchased or received
by him, the date and hour and the name and address of the person from
whom the same was purchased or received, which records shall include
the manufacturer's serial number of all motor vehicles, trucks or trailers
located upon the premises. Such book and all such junk purchased, received
or handled by any licensed junk dealer at all times shall be subject to
inspection by the duly constituted police officers or other officials of the
borough.
§ 56-14. Junk dealers: operation and maintenance of licensed
premises.
Every junk dealer licensed under this chapter shall maintain constantly the
licensed premises in the following manner:
A. The premises and all articles located thereon shall be kept in such a
manner as to not constitute a menace to the health of the community
and as to guarantee against the breeding of rodents and vermin.
B. No garbage nor any organic waste shall be stored on the premises.
C. Whenever any motor vehicle shall be received on the premises as junk,
all gasoline shall be drained and removed therefrom forthwith, and no
such explosive or highly flammable materials shall be permitted to
remain upon the premises except in approved tanks buried
underground.
D. The manner of storage, arrangement of junk and the drainage facilities
of the premises shall be such as to prevent the accumulation of
stagnant water upon the premises and also to facilitate access for firefighting
purposes.
E. The premises shall not be open for business nor shall any work be done
thereon in connection with the storage, processing, transporting or
removal of junk at any time on the first day of the week (Sunday) nor on
any legal holiday nor before 7:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. on any other
day.
F. All such licensed premises shall be enclosed entirely by opaque fencing
not less than five feet high and of sufficient quality to prevent minor
children and animals from entering the premises without the
knowledge and consent of the licensee. Children under the age of 14
years shall not be permitted upon the premises licensed under this
§ 56-12 NUISANCES § 56-14
56:155
§ 56-15. Revocation of license.
The Borough Secretary shall revoke in writing any license upon receipt of
credible evidence that the licensee is violating any of the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 56-16. Duty to enforce.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police and any assistants assigned to him
to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 56-17. Construal of provisions.
§ 56-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall forfeit and pay a
fine, after summary conviction therefor according to the procedure in other
cases of summary conviction, in an amount of not less than $100 and not
in excess of $300 for the first offense as to each and every provision of this
chapter violated by him, and in an amount of not less than $300 for each
subsequent offense, and in the event of default in payment of such fine, such
person shall be liable to imprisonment for not more than one day for each
$5 of unpaid penalty or fine. Each day after written notice that the person
is in violation of this chapter shall be deemed and constitute a separate and
new violation.
Chapter 58
chapter except upon written permission of their parents or guardian
delivered previously in person to the licensee.
G. Trees or shrubs shall be planted and grown in an orderly and sightly
manner around the area where junk is stored or around the fence, or
both, as shall be determined by the Mayor and set forth upon the
application or upon the license, or upon both, so that the junk may not
be seen easily from any public road, human dwelling, school, church or
place of public recreation. The fence and/or junkyard shall not be closer
than 60 feet from the nearest edge of any street, highway or alley and
not closer than 30 feet from the nearest side of any building upon any
adjoining property nor closer than 10 feet from the property lines of
each adjoining lot.
A. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit the usual, normal
businesses of pharmacies, drugstores with or without sundry items,
gasoline service stations licensed by the commonwealth, clothes drycleaning
and laundry establishments, bona fide garages or repair
shops, rehabilitation centers operated by nonprofit corporations.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to contravene nor to restrict in
any way the operation and effect of the Garbage Disposal Ordinance
No. 8-66, its supplements and amendments.
§ 56-14 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 56-18
56:156
OUTDOOR BURNING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage and refuse disposal — See Ch. 47. Nuisances — See Ch. 56.
§ 56-18 NUISANCES § 56-18
56:157

ARTICLE I
Contained Open Burning
[Adopted 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-06]
§ 58-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BURNABLE MATERIALS — Burnable materials shall include the following:
WOOD — Includes any unpainted wood and wood in its natural state,
including the bark, and Duraflame logs.
A.
NONBURNABLE MATERIALS — The following is a partial list of those
materials that are classified as "nonburnable" under the guidelines of
this article.
Any wood that has been chemically treated to prevent rot or
moisture damage, or other similar treatment; wood products that
have a high glue content, such as Flakeboard or composition board
(also known as "oriented strand board"); and wood products in
combination with any nonburnable materials.
(1)
Plastic; rubber; oils; asbestos; composition boards; shingles; felt
paper; canvas; fiberglass; vinyl; or any similar materials; or any
combination of the above with any other materials.
(2)
Human or animal waste; sanitary napkins; diapers; food solids; oil
filters; or any other materials, individually or in combination, that
emit smoke or acrid, obnoxious or toxic odors.
(3)
(4) Grasses, green twigs or leaves.
Cardboard and chipboard boxes, sheets, packing materials, etc.
Excluded and not permitted to be burned are materials used to
absorb all oil or other noxious or toxic materials; cardboard or
chipboard in combination with any other nonburnable materials.
(5)
Paper: includes newsprint, wrapping paper, paper products, or
sheet paper items.
(6)
(7) Refuse: garbage and rubbish, as herein defined.
Rubbish: combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage, and the term shall include the residue from the burning
of wood, coal, coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags,
cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard
trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, grass, crockery and
dust and other similar materials.
(8)
Garbage: the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
(9)
B.
§ 58-1 NUISANCES § 58-1
56:159
BURN CONTAINER — Any container used for the purpose of burning
materials as authorized herein, constructed of masonry, metal or other
noncombustible rigid material, containing a bottom, sides, and a cover as
herein defined. Burn containers shall not be allowed to deteriorate to the
point where they contain holes or missing surface in the structure. Outdoor
fireplaces or incinerators shall be considered as burning containers for
the purpose of this article. Drums and barrels are not considered burn
containers. Exception: Portable outdoor grills, fired by propane or charcoal
and designed for food preparation, are excluded from the provisions of this
article.
BURN CONTAINER COVER — A metal screen with spaces not more than 1/
2 square inch, or other comparable material, which covers the entire open
area above the burn container opening. Such screen shall be maintained in
good order as to prevent large particles from escaping the burn container
during operation. The cover shall not be allowed to deteriorate to any point
whereby it loses its maximum efficiency.
BURNING — The igniting of any material to cause flame, smoke, embers,
hot ash or residue, in combination or individually.
§ 58-2. Containers required; burning of nonburnable materials
prohibited.
It shall henceforth be illegal for any resident of the Borough of East
Greenville or the possessor of real property within said Borough to burn
any materials, be they burnable or nonburnable, in other than an approved
burning container as defined herein. Examples of such containers are
chimineas, portable or fixed patio fireplaces, masonry fireplaces, etc. No
person or corporation shall cause to be burned any of the above
nonburnable materials or any like or similar materials not in compliance, or
inconsistent with, this article. It shall be illegal to burn any materials that
give off any acrid, obnoxious or toxic odors, or emit heavy smoke.
§ 58-3. Hours permitted.
Burning, in compliance with this article, shall be permitted only between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight. Under no conditions shall
burning, as defined herein, be permitted between the hours from 12:00
midnight and 7:00 a.m. Fires allowed to burn or smolder after 12:00
midnight shall be in violation of this article, and all those persons or
corporations causing such fires shall be prosecuted under the guidelines of
this article.
§ 58-4. Burning to be attended at all times.
Burning, in compliance with this article, shall be attended at all times by
an individual 18 years or older until such time as the flame has subsided
completely. Unattended burning shall be in direct violation of this article,
and all persons or corporations causing and allowing such unattended
burning shall be prosecuted under the guidelines of this article.
§ 58-1 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 58-5
56:160
§ 58-5. Use and storage of burning containers.
No burning container shall be used or stored within 20 feet of any dwelling.
No burning container shall be used or stored within 10 feet of any property
line or public sidewalk area. No burning container shall be used or stored
without the proper cover in place. No burning container shall be used for
any other purpose.
§ 58-6. Adequate means of fire extinguishment required.
Adequate means of fire extinguishment must be immediately available at
all times when outdoor burning is taking place. Adequate means of fire
extinguishment shall be one portable fire extinguisher with a minimum
4-A rating and properly inspected to prove serviceability, or a garden hose
connected to a reliable water supply. Dirt, sand, or water barrels may be
considered as alternates if neither a hose nor fire extinguisher is available.
§ 58-7. Special burning permits.
All fires outside of burning containers are hereby prohibited within the
Borough. This article does not prohibit the issuance of special burning
permit by the local Fire Marshal whenever circumstances so dictate. Such
special permits shall be issued, in writing, by the Fire Marshal on a form
provided by the Borough. In granting such permit, the Fire Marshall shall
determine whether or not the Fire Company shall be in attendance.
§ 58-8. Locations restricted.
No materials may be burned upon any street, curb, gutter, and sidewalk or
on any public property. No person shall be permitted to create or permit an
open fire on property unless he/she has the legal right to possession of that
property.
§ 58-9. Inspections; enforcement.
Any and all Borough police officers, the Borough Fire Marshal and the Fire
Chief of the East Greenville Fire Department or his deputy and assistants
are hereby granted the authority and responsibility for inspecting outside
burning containers for compliance with this article. In the event any
violations of this article are found to be in existence at the time of
inspection, the Fire Marshal is hereby charged with the responsibility of
issuing warnings or citations, as merited, for all violations of this article.
The Fire Marshal shall have the authority to prohibit open burning if such
burning is contrary to the provisions of this article, or if weather conditions
are unfavorable for burning.
§ 58-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person or corporation who violates the provisions of this article shall,
upon conviction, pay a fine not to exceed $1,000 and the costs of
§ 58-5 NUISANCES § 58-10
56:161
prosecution and, in default therewith, undergo imprisonment in the county
prison for a period not to exceed 30 days.
§ 58-10 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 58-10
56:162
ARTICLE II
Outdoor Wood-Fired Burners/Furnaces
[Adopted 12-7-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-07]
§ 58-11. Legislative intent.
Although outdoor wood-fired burners/furnaces may provide an economic
alternative to conventional heating systems, concerns have been raised
regarding the safety and environmental impacts of these heating devices,
particularly the production of offensive odors and potential health effects
of uncontrolled emissions. This article is intended to ensure that outdoor
wood-fired burners/furnaces are utilized in a manner that does not create a
nuisance and is not detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of
the residents of East Greenville Borough.
§ 58-12. Applicability.
This article applies to the installation and use of all outdoor wood-fired
boilers within East Greenville Borough. This article does not apply to
burning which does not create a nuisance or a fire hazard and which is
attended by a responsible person at all times until completely extinguished
and is done for the following purposes:
§ 58-13. Definitions and word usage.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise, shall have the following meanings
ascribed to them:
CLEAN WOOD — Wood that does not have paint, stains or other types of
coatings, and wood that has not been treated with substances, including,
but not limited to, copper arsenate, creosote or pentachlorophenol, and
wood pellets made from clean wood.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Zoning Officer or other person
appointed by East Greenville Borough to administer and enforce this article
whose duties shall include responding to resident questions and complaints
and performing other tasks as Borough Council may assign.
EPA OWHH PHASE 1 PROGRAM — EPA OWHH (Outdoor Wood-Fired
Hydronic Heater Program) Phase 1 Program administered by the United
States Environmental Protection Agency.
A. Outdoor grilling or cooking using charcoal, wood, propane or natural
gas in cooking or grilling appliances.
B. Burning in a stove, fireplace and those furnaces not regulated herein,
unless the material being burned includes refuse as defined herein.
C. The use of propane, acetylene, natural gas, heating oil, gasoline or
kerosene in a device intended for heating, construction, manufacturing
or maintenance activities.
§ 58-11 NUISANCES § 58-13
56:163
EPA OWHH PHASE 1 PROGRAM QUALIFIED MODEL — An outdoor woodfired
hydronic heater that has been EPA OWHH Phase 1 Program qualified.
The model has met the EPA OWHH Phase 1 emission level and has the
proper qualifying label and hangtag.
EXISTING OUTDOOR WOOD-FIRED BURNER/FURNACE — An Outdoor
Wood-Fired Burner or Boiler/Furnace that was purchased and installed
prior to the effective date of this article.
OUTDOOR WOOD-FIRED BURNERS/FURNACES — A fuel-burning device:
NEW OUTDOOR WOOD-FIRED BURNER/FURNACE — An outdoor furnace
that is installed, established or constructed after the effective date of this
article.
NUISANCE — Conduct tending to cause danger, discomfort or undue
annoyance or undue unpleasantness to persons.
STACK or CHIMNEY — Any vertical structure enclosing a flue or flues
that carry off smoke or exhaust from a solid-fuel-fired heating device or
structure, including that part of the structure extending above a roof.
§ 58-14. Permits required.
§ 58-15. Suspension of permit.
Designed to burn clean wood or other manufacturer-approved fuel
products (i.e., corn and coal);
A.
That the manufacturer specifies for outdoor installation or installation
in structures not normally occupied by humans (e.g., garages); and
B.
That heats building space and/or water via the distribution, typically
through pipes, of a fluid heated in the device, typically water or a
water/antifreeze mixture. Outdoor wood-fired boilers are also known as
"outdoor wood-fired furnaces," "outdoor wood-burning appliances," or
"outdoor hydronic heaters," etc.
C.
A. Any person desiring to install an outdoor wood-fired burner/furnace in
East Greenville Borough shall obtain a permit from the Code
Enforcement Officer and pay the permit fee set by resolution of East
Greenville Borough Council.
B. Prior to February 1 of each calendar year, the owner of a lot upon which
an outdoor wood-fired burner/furnace is located shall apply for an
operating permit, which shall be valid for the period from March 1 of
the year of application through March 1 of the following calendar year.
The owner shall pay all fees imposed by the Borough of East Greenville
for such operating permit application and the inspection of the outdoor
wood-fired burner/furnace to determine compliance with this article.
A. A permit issued pursuant to this article may be suspended if the Code
Enforcement Officer or other person appointed by Borough Council to
enforce this article determines such to be necessary to protect the
§ 58-13 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 58-15
56:164
§ 58-16. Existing outdoor wood-fired burners/furnaces.
Any outdoor wood-fired burners/furnaces in existence on the effective date
of this article shall be permitted to remain, provided that the owner applies
for and receives a permit from the Code Enforcement Officer within one
year of the effective date of this article. If the owner of an existing outdoor
wood-fired burner/furnace does not receive a permit within one year of the
effective date of this article, the outdoor wood-fired burner/furnace shall
be removed and is subject to the regulations provided for in § 58-18 of this
article.
§ 58-17. New outdoor wood-fired burners/furnaces.
public health, safety and welfare of the residents of East Greenville if
any of the following conditions occur:
(1) Malodorous air contaminants from the outdoor wood-fired burner/
furnace are detectable outside the property of the person on whose
land the outdoor wood-fired burner is located.
(2) The emissions from the outdoor wood-fired burner/furnace
interfere with the reasonable enjoyment of life on neighboring
property.
(3) The emissions from the outdoor wood-fired burner/furnace cause
damage to vegetation on neighboring property.
(4) The emissions from the outdoor wood-fired burner/furnace are or
may be harmful to human or animal health.
(5) The burning of any material referenced in § 58-20 of this article.
B. A suspended permit may be reinstated once the condition which
resulted in suspension is remedied and reasonable assurances are
given that such condition will not recur. Recurrence of a condition
which has previously resulted in suspension of a permit shall be
considered a violation of this article subject to the penalties provided
within this article.
A. No person shall, from the effective date of this article, construct, install,
establish, operate or maintain an outdoor furnace other than in
compliance with the applicable sections of this article.
B. No person shall, from the effective date of this article, operate an
outdoor furnace unless such operation complies with requirements of
this article regarding fuels that may be burned in an outdoor furnace as
set forth in § 58-18H of this article and chimney height as set forth in
§ 58-18J of this article.
C. All outdoor furnaces shall be constructed, established, installed,
operated and maintained in conformance with the manufacturer's
instructions and the requirements of this article. In the event of a
§ 58-15 NUISANCES § 58-17
56:165
conflict, the requirements of this article shall apply unless the
manufacturer's instructions are more strict, in which case the
manufacturer's instructions shall apply.
D. The owner of any outdoor furnace shall produce the manufacturer's
owner's manual or installation instructions to the Code Enforcement
Officer for his review prior to installation.
E. All outdoor furnaces shall be laboratory tested and listed to appropriate
safety standards, such as UL, CAN/CSA, ANSI or other applicable safety
standards.
F. If an existing outdoor furnace is, through the course of a proper
investigation by local authorities, found to be creating a verifiable
nuisance, as defined by the Borough's ordinance or state laws, the
Borough may issue a cease and desist order stopping operation of the
furnace until reasonable steps can be taken to terminate the nuisance.
G. Absent an emergency situation, the Code Enforcement Officer shall,
following an investigation that reveals a verifiable nuisance, serve upon
the owner of property on which an outdoor furnace is located his notice
of intent to issue a cease and desist from operation of said furnace until
reasonable steps can be taken to make sure the wood furnace will not
be a nuisance.
H. Following the issuance of a notice of intent to cease and desist, the
homeowner shall have five days to file for a hearing before the Borough
Council to determine if a cease and desist order should be enforced. If
the homeowner fails to file an appeal or fails to have the Code
Enforcement Officer lift the intent to issue a cease and desist order, the
homeowner shall stop using the furnace.
I. In the event that the Borough issues a cease and desist order as
outlined above, the owner shall be allowed to make modifications to the
unit that eliminate the nuisance: for example, extending the chimney or
relocating the outdoor furnace.
J. Outdoor furnaces shall not be operated during the months of June, July,
August and September, unless specifically authorized by resolution of
Borough Council adopted in light of emergency situations.
K. All existing outdoor furnaces which are located within East Greenville
Borough on the effective date of this article shall, upon application, be
granted a permit. The permit shall be issued without fee and shall be
proof that the outdoor furnace predated this article. Owners and/or
operators of existing outdoor furnaces shall not be required to abide by
the provisions of this article concerning installation and location. All
existing outdoor furnaces shall, however, comply with the same terms
and conditions imposed upon new installations in regard to the type of
fuel used or prohibited, seasons of operation and quality of operation as
it effects the community.
§ 58-17 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 58-17
56:166
§ 58-18. Installation.
Any person desiring to install an outdoor wood-fired burner/furnace within
East Greenville Borough shall obtain a permit from the Code Enforcement
Officer. The applicant for such a permit shall meet the following conditions:
L. In the event that an outdoor furnace, a wood furnace or existing
outdoor furnace is determined to be 50% torn down, physically
deteriorated, rusted or decayed, the appliance must be removed and/or
replaced with a new unit. In the event that such a unit is replaced, all
the requirements of § 58-18 must be followed.
A. Present a plan showing all property lines, the locations and distances of
all dwellings or occupied buildings on adjoining properties, and the
proposed locations of the outdoor wood-fired burner/furnace.
B. Present evidence that the applicant has obtained a PA UCC Mechanical
Uniform Construction Code permit for the installation of the outdoor
wood-fired burner/furnace and its connection to the mechanical system
of the structure it will serve.
C. Provide a copy of the manufacturer's specification and instructions,
which the applicant agrees to comply with and not alter at any time.
D. Provide evidence that the outdoor wood-fired burner/furnace has been
laboratory tested and found to comply with appropriate safety
standards such as UL (Underwriters Laboratories) or ANSI (American
National Standard Institute) standards.
E. All outdoor wood-fired burners/furnaces shall be equipped with
properly functioning spark arrestors.
F. The permittee shall not be permitted to have more than two cords of
firewood at any one time on the property. Any cutting and splitting of
firewood shall comply with those provisions of the Code of Ordinances
of the Borough of East Greenville, as amended, which deal with noise
control.30 All firewood shall be stacked neatly in a pile in the rear of the
principle structure only. No firewood shall be stacked within the
accessory yard setbacks of the property.
G. The application shall be signed by all owners of the lot on which the
outdoor wood-fired burner/furnace will be located and the contractor
installing the outdoor wood-fired burner/furnace.
H. Fuel burned in any new or existing outdoor furnace shall be only
natural untreated wood, wood pellets, coal, corn products, biomass
pellets or other listed fuels specifically permitted by the manufacturer's
instruction.
30.Editor's Note: See Ch. 42, Disorderly Conduct, Art. I, Noise.
§ 58-17 NUISANCES § 58-18
56:167
I. The following fuels are strictly prohibited in new or existing outdoor
furnaces:
(1) Wood that has been painted, varnished or coated with similar
materials and/or has been pressure treated with preservatives and
contains resins or glues as in plywood or other composite wood
products, including, but not limited to, particleboard.
(2) Rubbish or garbage, including, but not limited to, food wastes, food
packaging and food wraps.
(3) Any plastic materials, including, but not limited to, nylon, PVC,
ABS, polystyrene or urethane foam and synthetic fabrics, plastic
films and plastic containers. This provision is in addition to all other
provisions of this section.
(4) Rubber, including tires or other synthetic rubber-like products.
(5) Newspapers, cardboard or any paper with ink or dye products.
(6) Paints or paint solvents.
J. Setbacks for new outdoor furnaces (models not EPA OWHH Phase 1
Program Qualified):
(1) All outdoor furnaces shall have a chimney that extends at least nine
feet above ground level. An outdoor furnace in existence on the
effective date of this article shall, within 120 days of the adoption of
this article, install a chimney that extends at least nine feet in
height above the ground surface. The chimney heights of new
outdoor furnaces shall be determined by the distance from the
nearest residence. The outdoor furnace shall be located with due
consideration to the prevailing wind direction.
(2) Outdoor furnaces shall be located no less than 100 feet from any
residence that is not served by the outdoor furnace and no less than
75 feet from any vacant lot property lines.
(3) If the outdoor furnace is located between 100 feet and 300 feet of
any residence not served by it, the stack shall be at least two feet
higher than the peak of the residence not being served by the
outdoor furnace.
(4) All outdoor furnaces shall be equipped with properly functioning
spark arresters to be in conformity with manufacturers'
specifications with regard to the release of sparks.
(5) Installation shall be in accordance with specifications attached
hereto as Exhibit A31 and incorporated by reference thereto.
31.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 58-18 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 58-19
56:168
§ 58-19. Permits required for replacements.
If an outdoor wood-fired burner/furnace is replaced or upgraded, a permit
shall be required pursuant to § 58-14 of this article.
§ 58-20. Operation and maintenance.
A. The only substance that may be burned in an outdoor wood-fired
burner/furnace is clean wood. (See definition in § 58-13 of this article.)
B. No person shall burn any of the following in an outdoor wood-fired
burner/furnace:
(1) Any wood that does not meet the definition of "clean wood."
(2) Tires.
(3) Lawn clippings and yard waste.
(4) Rubbish or garbage, including, but not limited to, food waste, food
packaging or food wraps.
(5) Materials containing plastic.
(6) Materials containing rubber.
(7) Waste petroleum products.
(8) Paint and paint thinners.
(9) Any type of paper/cardboard.
(10) Construction and demolition debris (such as shingles).
(11) Plywood or other composite wood products.
(12) Particleboard.
(13) Manure.
(14) Animal carcasses.
(15) Asphalt products.
(16) Used cooking oils.
C. The outdoor wood-fired burner/furnace shall at all times be operated
and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications.
D. The outdoor wood-fired burner/furnace shall be maintained and
operated in compliance with all emissions and air quality standards
promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency,
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection or other
relevant state or federal agencies.
§ 58-19 NUISANCES § 58-20
56:169
§ 58-21. Operation schedule.
Outdoor wood-fired burners/furnaces shall be operated only between
October 1 and June 1, except that an outdoor wood-fired burner/furnace
located on a lot 20 acres or more in size may be operated throughout the
calendar year.
§ 58-22. Appeals and variances.
§ 58-23. Permit fees; inspections; enforcement; violations and
penalties; notice of violation; emergency and emission orders;
permit reinstatement; hearings.
E. Any ash or other byproducts from the operation of the outdoor woodfired
burner/furnace shall be disposed of in accordance with all
applicable laws.
A. Any decision of the Code Enforcement Officer in regard to the
enforcement of the provisions of this article, which shall include, but
not be limited to, the denial of a permit to install an outdoor furnace,
may be appealed to Borough Council by the filing of a notice of appeal
with the Borough Secretary. Appeals must be filed within 30 days of
notice of violation or decision of the Code Enforcement Officer, except
for appeals of a cease and desist order, which must be appealed within
five days pursuant to § 58-17. No such appeal shall be considered as
having been made unless and until the appellant has paid the appeal fee
as established by resolution of Borough Council.
B. If a decision of the Code Enforcement Officer is appealed to Borough
Council, the Borough Council shall schedule a hearing as soon as
practically possible and render a decision. A hearing before Borough
Council shall be governed by the Local Agency Act.32 A ruling of the
Borough Council may be appealed to the Court of Common Pleas within
30 days after the grieved party has received a copy of a decision
pursuant to the Local Agency Act.
C. In the event that a party appeals to the Court of Common Pleas, the
Court of Common Pleas shall have jurisdiction over the use of the
outdoor furnace during the pendency of the appeal. The Court may
allow the homeowner to utilize the outdoor furnace or set restrictions
or prohibit its use during the pendency of the appeal.
A. No person shall cause, allow or maintain the use of an outdoor furnace
within East Greenville Borough without first having obtained a permit
from the Code Enforcement Officer, excepting, however, that all
operators or owners with outdoor furnaces shall have 90 days from the
effective date of this article to obtain a permit conforming to the
regulations herein stated. Permit fees shall be established by Borough
Council.
32.Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 551 et seq.
§ 58-20 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 58-23
56:170
B. The Borough Manager, Police Chief and Code Enforcement Officer may,
upon presentation of his credentials, inspect any property for the
purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this article.
C. Enforcement and penalties:
(1) The Borough Manager, Police Chief and/or Code Enforcement
Officer are authorized to enforce this article.
(2) Any person, firm, association, partnership or corporate or
governmental entity who violates any of the provisions of this
article or fails to comply with a duly authorized order issued
pursuant hereto shall be deemed to have committed a municipal
civil infraction, which shall be punishable by civil fines determined
in accordance with the following schedule:
Offense Minimum Fine Maximum Fine
First offense within threeyear
period
$75 $500
Second offense within threeyear
period
$150 $500
Third offense within threeyear
period
$325 $500
Fourth (or more) offense
within three-year period
$500 $500
(3) The violator shall pay costs, which may include all expenses, direct
and/or indirect, which the Borough has incurred in connection with
the infraction. In no case, however, shall costs of less than $10 nor
more than $500 be ordered. In addition, the Borough shall have the
right to proceed in any court of competent jurisdiction for the
purpose of obtaining an injunction, restraining order or other
appropriate remedy to compel compliance with the provisions of
this article. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate
violation.
D. Notice of violation. Whenever an inspection discloses that a violation of
this article exists, the Code Enforcement Officer shall, upon
authorization from Borough Council, issue a notice of violation to the
owner and/or occupant of the premises. The notice shall:
(1) Be in writing.
(2) Include a statement of the reasons why the notice is being issued.
(3) Contain a copy of the Code Enforcement Officer's inspection report
detailing the conditions constituting the violation, contain an
outline of the remedial action required to come into compliance
with all the provisions of this article and set forth a reasonable time
to rectify the violation.
§ 58-23 NUISANCES § 58-23
56:171
(4) Inform the owner of his or her right to request a hearing before the
Borough Council as set forth in § 58-23H.
(5) Inform the owner/occupant that should there be a failure to comply
with the notice or request a hearing, he/she will be subject to the
penalties set forth in § 58-23C of this article and the costs and
expenses, including attorney's fees, of enforcing the terms hereof.
Except in emergency cases, the notice shall be sent by registered
mail or by certificate of mailing, or personally delivered to the
owner and/or occupant of the premises upon which the alleged
violation exists. If the owner is absent from the Borough, all notices
shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy of the notice is sent
by registered mail or by certificate of mailing to the last known
address of the owner, regardless of proof of receipt, and is posted
in a conspicuous place on or about the premises affected by the
notice, or the owner is served with such notice by any other method
authorized by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
E. Emergency cases. Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer finds that
an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the
public health, safety and welfare, he may, without notice or hearing,
issue an order reciting such emergency and requiring that such action
as is necessary be taken to correct the violation and eliminate the
emergency. Notwithstanding any other provision hereof, such order
shall be effective immediately.
F. Emissions. A permit issued pursuant to this article may be suspended as
the Borough Manager, Chief of Police or Code Enforcement Officer may
determine necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare of
the residents of East Greenville Borough, if any of the following
conditions occur:
(1) The emissions from the outdoor furnace interfere with the
reasonable enjoyment of life, safety or property.
(2) The emissions from the outdoor furnace cause damage to
vegetation or property.
(3) The emissions from the outdoor furnace are unreasonably
malodorous.
G. Reinstatement of permit. A suspended permit may be reinstated once
the condition that resulted in suspension is remedied and reasonable
assurances are given that such condition will not recur. Recurrence of a
condition which has previously resulted in suspension of a permit shall
be considered a violation subject to the penalties provided herein.
H. Hearings.
(1) Right to hearing. Any person affected by any notice issued in
accordance with the enforcement of any provision of this article
may request and shall be granted a hearing before Borough
§ 58-23 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 58-23
56:172
§ 58-24. Liability.
East Greenville Borough, its agents, officers, employees and representatives
shall not, under any circumstances, be liable or responsible for damages
caused to any person or property by reason of the issuance of any permit
under the provisions of this article, or by reason of the conduct of any
burning activity in compliance with the terms and provisions of this article.
The person or party responsible for any such burning activity shall bear sole
liability for any damages caused thereby.
Council, provided that such person file a written request for the
hearing within 10 days of service of the notice. The request shall
contain a brief statement of the reasons for the request.
(2) Scheduling and conduct of hearing. Upon receipt of a request for a
hearing, a time and place for the hearing shall be scheduled and
advertised in accordance with applicable municipal requirements.
The hearing shall be scheduled no later than 60 days after the day
on which the request was received. At the hearing, the person
requesting the hearing shall be given the opportunity to be heard
and show cause why the violation described in the notice should
not be abated.
(3) Borough Council action. After such a hearing, the Borough Council
shall issue a written decision sustaining the notice, modifying the
notice and attaching conditions or withdrawing the notice. If
Borough Council sustains the notice, it shall be deemed a final
order effective immediately.
(4) Right to appeal. Any aggrieved party may appeal the final order to
the Court of Common Pleas of Montgomery County in accordance
with the provisions of the Local Agency Act.33 Such appeal shall not
constitute a stay from the requirements of the final order unless an
order to that effect issues from the Court.
(5) Fees. The person requesting a hearing shall pay the fee for such
hearing as established by resolution of Borough Council.
33.Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 551 et seq.
§ 58-23 NUISANCES § 58-24
56:173
Chapter 60
PARADES AND MOTORCADES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 91.
§ 60-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOTORCADE — An organized procession containing 25 or more vehicles,
except funeral processions, upon any public street, sidewalk or alley.
PARADE — Any march or procession consisting of people, animals or
vehicles or a combination thereof, except funeral processions, upon any
street, sidewalk or alley, which does not comply with normal and usual
traffic regulations or controls.
§ 60-2. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a parade or motorcade in or
upon any public street, sidewalk or alley in the borough or to knowingly
participate in any such parade or motorcade unless and until a permit
to conduct such parade or motorcade has been obtained from the Mayor
or, as hereinafter provided, from the Borough Council; said permits for
parades and/or motorcades shall be issued, following compliance with all
other sections of this chapter, by the Mayor.
§ 60-3. Conduct for commercial purposes prohibited.
No permit shall be issued authorizing the conduct of a parade or motorcade
which the Mayor finds is proposed to be held for the sole purpose of
advertising any product, goods, wares, merchandise or event and is
designed to be held purely for private profit.
§ 60-4. Interference prohibited.
No person shall knowingly join or participate in any parade or motorcade
conducted under permit from the Mayor in violation of any of the terms of
said permit, nor knowingly join or participate in any permitted parade or
motorcade without the consent and over the objection of the permittee, nor
in any manner interfere with its progress or orderly conduct.
§ 60-5. Application for permit; fee.
Any person who wants to conduct a parade or motorcade shall apply to
the Mayor for a permit at least 10 days in advance of the date of the
§ 58-24 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 60-5
60:174
proposed parade or motorcade. The Mayor may, in his discretion, consider
any application for a permit to conduct a parade or motorcade which is
filed less than 10 days prior to the date such parade or motorcade is to be
conducted. The application for such permit shall be made in writing and
shall contain or include the following:
§ 60-6. Issuance of permit.
The Mayor shall issue a parade or motorcade permit conditioned upon the
applicant's written agreement to comply with the terms of such permit,
unless the Mayor finds that:
§ 60-7. Denial of permit.
The Mayor shall deny an application for a parade or motorcade permit and
notify the applicant of such denial where:
§ 60-8. Contents of permit; compliance required.
A. The name of the applicant, the sponsoring organization, the parade or
motorcade chairman and the address and telephone number of each.
B. The purpose of the parade or motorcade, the date when it is proposed
to be conducted, the location of the assembly area, the location of the
disbanding area, route to be traveled and the approximate time when
the parade or motorcade will assemble, start and terminate.
C. A description of the individual floats, marching units, vehicles and
bands.
D. A filing fee of $1.
A. The time, route and size of the parade or motorcade will disrupt to an
unreasonable extent the movement of other traffic.
B. The parade or motorcade is of a size or nature that requires the
diversion of so great a number of police officers of the borough to
properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto
that allowing the parade or motorcade would deny reasonable police
protection to the borough in general.
C. Such parade or motorcade will interfere with another parade or
motorcade for which a permit has been issued.
A. The Mayor makes any finding contrary to the findings required to be
made for the issuance of a permit.
B. The information contained in the application is found to be false or
nonexistent in any material detail.
C. The applicant refuses to agree to abide by or comply with all conditions
of the permit and any and all other sections of this chapter.
§ 60-5 PARADES AND MOTORCADES § 60-8
60:175
§ 60-9. Appeals.
A. In each permit the Mayor shall specify:
(1) The assembly area and time therefor.
(2) The starting time.
(3) The minimum and maximum speeds.
(4) The route of the parade or motorcade.
(5) What portions of streets to be traversed may be occupied by such
parade or motorcade.
(6) The maximum number of divisions or units and the maximum and
minimum intervals of space to be maintained between the units of
such parade or motorcade.
(7) The maximum length of such parade or motorcade in miles or
fractions thereof.
(8) The disbanding area and disbanding time.
(9) The number of persons required to monitor the parade or
motorcade.
(10) The number and type of vehicles, if any.
(11) The material and maximum size of any sign, banner, placard or
carrying device therefor.
(12) That the materials used in the construction of floats to be used in
such parade shall be fire-retardant materials and shall be subject to
such requirements concerning firesafety as may be determined by
the Fire Chief.
(13) That the permittee advise all participants in the parade or
motorcade, either orally or by written notice, of the terms and
conditions of the permit prior to the commencement of such parade
or motorcade.
(14) That the parade or motorcade continue to move at a fixed rate of
speed and that any willful delay or willful stopping of said parade or
motorcade, except when reasonably required for the safe and
orderly conduct of the parade or motorcade, shall constitute a
violation of the permit.
(15) Such other requirements as are found by the Mayor to be
reasonably necessary for the protection of persons or property.
B. All conditions of the permit shall be complied with.
A. Upon a denial by the Mayor of an application made pursuant to § 60-5 of
this chapter, the applicant may appeal from the determination of the
§ 60-8 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 60-9
60:176
§ 60-10. Officials to be notified.
Immediately upon the granting of a permit for a parade or motorcade, the
Mayor shall send a copy thereof to the Chief of Police and the Fire Chief.
§ 60-11. Revocation of permit.
Any permit for a parade or motorcade issued pursuant to this chapter may
be summarily revoked by the Mayor at any time when by reason of disaster,
public calamity, riot or other emergency the Mayor determines that the
safety of the public or property requires such revocation. Notice of such
action revoking a permit shall be delivered in writing to the permittee
by personal service or by certified mail at the address given in regard to
§ 60-5A of this chapter.
Chapter 62
PARKS AND RECREATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and Recreation Board — See Ch. 13. Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 30.
Mayor within five days thereafter to the Borough Council by filing a
written notice of appeal for hearing by the Borough Council at its next
meeting. Upon such appeal, the Borough Council may reverse, affirm or
modify in any regard the determination of the Mayor.
B. In the event an application is not filed within the required time as
specified in § 60-5 the applicant may request a waiver of such
requirement by the Borough Council at its next regular meeting or at a
special meeting which may be called prior thereto by said Borough
Council to consider such matter, and the Borough Council, if it finds
unusual circumstances and in the exercise of its sound discretion, may
waive such requirement.
§ 60-9 PARKS AND RECREATION § 60-11
62:177

ARTICLE I
Playground Rules
[Adopted 7-3-2000 by Ord. No. 00-5]
§ 62-1. Borough playground.
§ 62-2. Violations and penalties.
A. The following rules and regulations are applicable to the East
Greenville Borough Playground:
(1) The playground shall be open from sunrise to sunset throughout
the year except for special events authorized by the Borough
Council.
(2) All users of the playground shall wear appropriate footwear. No
bare feet shall be allowed.
(3) No pets shall be allowed.
(4) No food or drink should be consumed on the playground, and no
smoking is allowed except in designated areas.
(5) The use of roller blades, bicycles, tricycles or skateboards is
prohibited except in designated areas.
(6) The operation of a motorized vehicle of any kind is prohibited
except as required by any handicapped person.
(7) Use of the playground by organized groups consisting of 10 or
more persons shall be by permit only.
(8) Playing or practicing of golf shall be prohibited.
(9) Children using the Tot-Lot shall be supervised by an adult at all
times.
B. These rules and regulations are in addition to the other rules and
regulations concerning the use of the Borough Parks and Open Space
facilities as set forth in the East Greenville Borough Code.
A. Any violation of these rules shall be subject to the penalties set forth in
the East Greenville Borough Code.
B. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction before any District Justice, be subject to a fine of not less
than $25 nor more than $300, together with costs of prosecution for the
violation, or, in default of payment thereof, to suffer imprisonment for
not more than 30 days.
C. A police officer may restrict or eject any individual or group of
individuals from park property for violation of this article or for
§ 62-1 PARKS AND RECREATION § 62-2
62:179
concealing or harboring or for attempting to conceal or harbor any
person violating this article.
§ 62-2 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 62-2
62:180
Chapter 64
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
§ 62-2 PARKS AND RECREATION § 62-2
62:181

ARTICLE I
House-to-House Solicitation
[Adopted 4-2-1990 by Ord. No. 3-90;34 amended in its entirety
7-2-1990 by Ord. No. 8-90]
§ 64-1. Permit required. [Amended 10-24-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-04]
§ 64-2. Application.
Each person applying for a permit under the terms of the preceding
paragraph shall state to the Chief of Police or his designee his or her name,
address, telephone number and the name, address and telephone number
of the organization or other legal or quasi-legal entity which he or she
represents, and the same shall be entered in a log book which the Chief of
Police or his designee shall maintain for that purpose.
§ 64-3. Issuance of permit.
When such person has furnished to the Chief of Police or his designee
the information required under the preceding paragraph and has paid the
required fee for a permit the Chief of Police or his designee shall notify
forthwith the Borough Secretary of said application and, after 24 hours,
shall issue to such a person the permit requested with all portions thereof
completed.
§ 64-4. Fees. [Amended 10-24-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-04]
The amount of the fees or fee to be paid to the Borough Treasurer for the
privilege of engaging in any of the businesses aforesaid shall be established
by resolution of the Borough Council.
A. No person, corporation, unincorporated association, organization or
group of persons shall solicit funds, contributions, subscriptions or
sales from house to house or upon any public road or sidewalk or in any
Borough park or any public place maintained by the Borough or shall
sell, vend, peddle or otherwise attempt to merchandise products of any
kind from house to house or upon any public road or sidewalk or in any
Borough park or any public place maintained by the Borough without
first applying for and obtaining the permit required under Subsection B
below.
B. Each person who shall solicit funds, contributions, subscriptions or
sales or shall sell, vend, peddle or otherwise attempt to merchandise
products of any kind shall first apply for and obtain a thirty-day
soliciting permit from the Chief of Police or his designee.
34.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Ch. 64, Peddlers, Hucksters and
Solicitors, adopted 11-3-1975 by Ord. No. 7-75.
§ 64-1 PARKS AND RECREATION § 64-5
62:183
§ 64-5. Identification card or button.
As evidence of the issuance of such license or licenses, the Chief of Police or
his designee shall provide the licensee or licensees with suitable means of
identification in the form of either an identification card or a button, which
shall be carried and displayed by each person mentioned in the preceding
paragraph. Such identification shall be valid only between the hours of 9:00
am. and 8:00 p.m. on Monday through Saturday.
§ 64-6. Nontransferability of permit.
No permit issued to any person under the provisions hereof shall be
transferable, and it shall be a violation of this article to carry on any of
the activities covered by the provisions hereof displaying a permit issued to
some person other than the person displaying such permit.
§ 64-7. Exemptions.
Churches, schools, fire companies, lodges, societies or civic organizations
serving the Borough of East Greenville and its residents shall make
application for and procure a permit in the manner provided for herein
but shall not be required to pay any fee therefor. In the instance that such
a charitable organization makes application for a permit, the organization
alone need make such application, with the permit issued in response to
such application being regarded as having been issued to each individual
member of that organization. The members of such churches, schools, fire
companies, lodges, societies or civic organizations are further exempted
from the requirement, set forth in § 64-5 hereof, that they receive and carry
an identification card or button evidencing the fact that a permit has been
issued to them.
§ 64-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this article shall be
guilty of a summary offense and, upon conviction thereof before a District
Justice, shall be sentenced to pay a fine or penalty not exceeding $600 and
the cost of prosecution and, in default of payment of said fine or penalty
and/or costs, shall be sentenced to imprisonment for a period not in excess
of 90 days.
§ 64-5 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 64-8
62:184
Chapter 67
(RESERVED)
Chapter 69
POLES, LICENSING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cable television franchise — See Ch. A98.
§ 69-1. License required; application; fee.
It shall be the duty of every owner or owners, corporation, firm or individual
who has erected in the Borough of East Greenville any telegraph or
telephone poles to make application to the Borough Treasurer on or before
the first Monday of April in each and every year for a license to maintain
the poles heretofore erected for the ensuing year, specifying the poles so
to be maintained, and the Borough Treasurer shall issue a license to such
applicants which shall authorize the maintenance of the poles designated
in the application only for the period of one year from the first Monday in
April next ensuing the date of said application and no longer. The charge for
issuing such license shall be the sum of $0.50 per year for each and every
pole authorized to be maintained thereby and shall be paid to the Borough
Treasurer for the use of said borough.
§ 69-2. Maintenance without license unlawful.
No telegraph or telephone poles shall be maintained within the corporate
limits of the Borough of East Greenville unless an annual license for the
maintenance thereof shall have been previously granted for the same in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 69-3. Liability for damages; maintenance; Inspector of Poles
designated.
Any corporation, firm or individual who is now enjoying or may hereafter
enjoy the privileges of erecting and maintaining poles within the limits of
this borough for the purpose provided for in this chapter shall be liable for
all damages caused to public or private property by reason of said privileges
and shall at all times keep and maintain said poles in good repair at all
places where the same are now or may hereafter be erected and shall have
all poles painted eight feet high and repainted to the satisfaction of the
Chief of Police, who is hereby constituted the Inspector of Poles.
§ 64-8 (RESERVED) § 69-4
67:185
§ 69-4. Inspections; notice to replace defective poles; penalty.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police, as the Inspector of Poles, to cause
a thorough and careful inspection to be made at least once in every year of
all telegraph and telephone poles erected within the corporate limits of the
Borough of East Greenville; and if any pole shall be found to be defective or
dangerous from any cause, said Chief of Police shall notify the corporation,
firm or individual owning such pole, who shall forthwith replace the same
with a sound pole, and if the said owner neglects or refuses to replace such
defective pole within 48 hours after receiving such notification, he or they
shall be liable to a fine of $5 for each and every day during which said
neglect or refusal shall continue, said fine to be collected as debts of like
amount are now by law recoverable.
§ 69-5. Right to revoke privileges.
Upon complying with the provisions and requirements of this chapter, the
privileges heretofore granted to such corporations, firms or individuals by
ordinance shall not be in any way affected. The Council of the Borough of
East Greenville, however, reserves the right to revoke by ordinance any of
the privileges mentioned in this chapter or any other ordinance.
Chapter 71
POSTERS AND HANDBILLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage and refuse disposal — See Ch. 47.
Nuisances — See Ch. 56.
Peddlers, hucksters and solicitors — See Ch.
64.
§ 71-1. Littering prohibited.
No person shall cast, throw or in any manner deposit handbills, dodgers,
posters, circulars, cards, wastepaper, nails, the sweepings from stores, offal
from fruit stands, fruit skins, bones or other rubbish upon the streets,
pavements, alleys or sidewalks of the borough.35
§ 71-2. Placement of distributed material.
All persons distributing handbills, dodgers, posters, loose circulars and/
or other printed matter are required to place the same under doors, in
vestibules, on doorsteps or front porches or around doorknobs of residences
or other buildings.
35.Editor's Note: Original Section 2, which immediately followed this section and which
regulated the riding of bicycles in the borough, was omitted during codification as being
obsolete.
§ 69-4 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 71-3
69:186
§ 71-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-24-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-04]
Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating or causing to be
violated any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof
before any District Justice, be fined in a sum not less than $25 and not
exceeding $300 plus costs of prosecution for each and every violation of
the same, and in default of the payment of said fine and costs, shall be
imprisoned in the borough lockup or the county prison for a period not
exceeding 20 days.
Chapter 73
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 35. Nuisances — See Ch. 56.
§ 73-1. Adoption of International Property Maintenance Code.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Secretary of the Borough of East Greenville, being marked and designated
as the "International Code Council International Property Maintenance
Code," 2009 edition, as published by the International Code Council, be
and is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the Borough
of East Greenville, in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, for regulating
and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings
and structures by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities
and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures
are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use, and the condemnation
of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the
demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of
the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property
Maintenance Code on file in the office of the Borough of East Greenville are
hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in
this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in § 73-3 of this article.
§ 73-2. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
Ordinance No. 2007-03 of the Borough of East Greenville, entitled "Property
Maintenance," and all other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict
herewith are hereby repealed.
§ 71-3 POLES, LICENSING OF § 73-3
69:187
§ 73-3. Additions, insertions and changes. [Amended 10-15-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-04]
The following sections of the International Property Maintenance Code,
2015 edition, are hereby amended for purposes of enforcement of the Code
in the Borough of East Greenville:
A. Section 101.1 is hereby amended by inserting "Borough of East
Greenville" as the municipality.
B. Section 102.11 is hereby inserted to read as follows:
102.11 Transfer of ownership. No person shall occupy or use a
building or structure, the ownership of which is hereafter transferred,
absent a certificate of occupancy, certifying that the property conveyed
complies with all provisions of this code. Upon written application of
the owner of an existing building or structure, the Code Official shall
issue a certificate of occupancy, provided there are no violations of the
code or orders of the Code Official pending, and further provided that
the fee accompanies such application imposed by the Borough for its
inspection of the premises.
C. Section 103.5 is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced as follows:
103.5 The fees for activities and services performed by the department
in carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall be as from time
to time approved by Borough Council resolution.
D. Section 106.4 is hereby amended to read as follows:
106.4 Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of
this code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements
thereof, shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $1,000, at the discretion of the court. Each
day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be
deemed a separate offense.
E. Section 112.4, is amended to read as follows:
112.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work
after having been served with a stop work order, except such work
as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than $100 or more than
$1,000.
F. Section 302.3 is amended to read as follows:
302.3 Public areas. All sidewalks, steps, driveways, parking spaces,
and similar paved areas for public use shall be maintained free of all
mud, overhanging trees and shrubs that obstruct walkways and other
debris, be kept in a proper state of repair, and maintained free from
hazardous conditions. All sidewalks, curbs, and similar paved areas
and walkways for public use shall be maintained free of obstruction
§ 73-3 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 73-3
69:188
from all vehicles, including, but not limited to, conventional motor
vehicles, commercial motor vehicles and trucks, trailers, motorcycles,
and recreational vehicles. Whenever the Code Official determines that
a walkway obstruction, as set forth herein, exists, he shall serve, in the
fashion and upon the persons set forth in Section 107.3, hereof, a notice
of such violation in the form established by Section 107 hereof, with 72
hours from the time of such service being, in all instances, the period
within which the violation must be corrected.
In addition to those legal remedies vested in the Borough by Sections
106 hereof for failure of any person to comply with a violation order,
the Borough may, through its Code Official, cause the trimming of
overhanging trees and shrubs and/or the removal of such mud or debris
which is obstructing a walkway within the Borough and collect the
expenses thereof, with any additional amount allowed by law, from the
owner of the property upon which such violation exists, such collection
to be by means of an action at law for quantum meruit as established by
the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure or by way of the recordation
of a municipal lien against the subject property as such liens are
provided for by act of Assembly.
All such areas as are above set forth shall be kept in a proper state of
repair, sidewalks shall be maintained in accordance with the provisions
contained in Chapter 83 of the Code of the Borough of East Greenville.
Sidewalks shall also be maintained free from ice and snow in
accordance with the requirements set forth in § 83-14 of the Code of
the Borough of East Greenville.
G. Section 302.4 is hereby amended to read as follows:
302.4 Weeds. Premises and exterior property shall be maintained free
from weeds or plant growth in excess of ten inches. Noxious weeds
shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants
and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided; however, this term
shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens. Whenever the Code
Official determines that a violation of this section exists, he shall serve,
in the fashion and upon the persons set forth in Section 107 hereof, a
notice of such violation in the form established by Section 107 hereof,
with 72 hours from the time of such service being, in all instances, the
period within which the violation must be corrected.
Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property to
cut and destroy weeds after service of a notice of violation, they shall
be subject to prosecution in accordance with Section 106.3 and as
prescribed by the authority having jurisdiction. Upon failure to comply
with the notice of violation, any duly authorized employee of the
jurisdiction or contractor hired by the jurisdiction shall be authorized
to enter upon the property in violation and cut and destroy the weeds
growing thereon, and the costs of such removal shall be paid by the
owner or agent responsible for the property.
§ 73-3 POLES, LICENSING OF § 73-3
69:189
H. Section 304.14 is hereby amended to read as follows:
304.14 Insect screens. During the period from May 1 to October 1,
every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation
of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any
areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human
consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall
be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of minimum 16 mesh
per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm), and every screen door used for insect
control shall have a self-closing device in good working condition.
Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved means,
such as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed.
I. Section 304.18.1 is hereby amended to read as follows:
304.18.1 Doors. Doors providing access to a dwelling unit, rooming
unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped
with a lock designed to be readily openable from the side from which
egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or
effort and shall tightly secure the door. Such lock shall be installed
according to the manufacturer's specifications and maintained in good
working order.
J. Section 602.3 is hereby amended to read as follows:
602.3 Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who
rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on
terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants
thereof shall supply heat during the period from October 1 to May 1
to maintain a minimum temperature of 68° F. (20° C.) in all habitable
rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms.
Exceptions:
1. When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design
temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room
temperature shall not be required provided that the heating system
is operating at its full design capacity. The winter outdoor design
temperature for the locality shall be as indicated in Appendix D of the
International Plumbing Code.
2. In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30° F. (-1°
C.), a minimum temperature of 65° F. (18° C.) shall be maintained.
K. Section 602.4 is hereby amended to read as follows:
602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall
be supplied with heat during the period from October 1 to May 1 to
maintain a minimum temperature of 65° F. (18° C.) during the period
the spaces are occupied.
Exceptions:
§ 73-3 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 73-3
69:190
Chapter 75
RENTAL UNIT INSPECTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 73.
§ 75-1. Permits required.
No person shall let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit,
and no person shall operate a rooming house or let to other for occupancy
any room in a rooming house unless he shall first apply for and obtain a
permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer. Permits for rental dwellings
and dwelling units shall require renewal every three years, and rooming
house permits shall require annual renewal.
§ 75-2. Fees.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall charge to every person, firm or
corporation owning a rental unit within the Borough of East Greenville,
before making such inspection as will be necessary for the issuance or
renewal of a permit, the following fees, which shall defray the expenses of
and compensate the Code Enforcement Officer for his time in conducting
such inspections:
Permit Category Permit Fee
Each rented dwelling or dwelling
unit
$25.00 (every 3 years)
Each rented room in a rooming
house
$5.00 (annually)
§ 75-3. Exemptions.
No permit shall be required of an owner or operator who is one of the
following:
1. Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or
special temperature conditions.
2. Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical
activities.
A. The United States government, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the
Borough of East Greenville or any agency thereof.
B. The owner of rooms, motel units, dwelling units or efficiency
apartments utilized by transients, who, for the purpose of this chapter,
shall be defined as any person who occupies or is entitled to occupy a
§ 73-3 RENTAL UNIT INSPECTIONS § 75-3
75:191
§ 75-4. Applicability of other standards.
The exemptions set forth in the previous section shall, nevertheless, not
exempt such owner's or operators from compliance with the provisions
of the BOCA National Existing Structures Code, Second Edition, 1987,
adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of East Greenville by
Ordinance No. 8-88 on December 5, 1988, and all other rules and
regulations issued in connection therewith.36
§ 75-5. Duration of permits.
§ 75-6. Maintenance and posting of permit.
Every permit issued hereunder shall be maintained upon the premises, and
every permit issued hereunder pertaining to multiple dwelling units and
rooming houses shall be posted in a conspicuous place where it may be seen
at all times.
§ 75-7. Transfer of property; proration of fees.
Any permit issued under the provisions hereof shall terminate upon the
transfer of ownership of the property, and the new owner or owners shall
apply for a renewal thereof within 30 days of such transfer of ownership.
Such renewal period shall run only until the date upon which the permit
issued to the previous owner would have terminated. In the instance of a
rental dwelling or dwelling unit permit, should the renewal period be for a
term of less than 18 months, the fee for such permit shall be $12.50, while
in the instance of a room permit, should the renewal period be for a term of
less than six months, the fee for such permit shall be $2.50 per room. Any
owner of a dwelling house, dwelling unit or rooming house who transfers
dwelling unit for a period of less than 15 consecutive calendar days or a
room in a rooming house for less than seven consecutive calendar days.
A. Rental dwelling and dwelling unit permits shall be issued according to
the inspection schedule of the Code Enforcement Officer and shall
continue in effect for 3 calendar years after the date of inspection or
until the date of reinspection by the Code Enforcement Officer,
whichever such date shall last occur. Upon the expiration of any
dwelling unit permit, a new permit shall be required for the further
period of three years.
B. Rooming house permits shall be issued according to the inspection
schedule of the Code Enforcement Officer and shall continue in effect
for one calendar year after the date of inspection or until the date of
reinspection by the Code Enforcement Officer, whichever such date
shall last occur. Upon the expiration of any rooming house permit, a
new permit shall be required for a further period of one year.
36.Editor's Note: See Ch. 73, Property Maintenance.
§ 75-3 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 75-7
75:192
his interest therein to a new owner shall have no right to a reimbursement
from the borough of all or any part of his last paid permit fee upon transfer.
§ 75-8. Authorization for inspections.
The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized and directed to make
inspections to determine the condition of the dwelling, dwelling unit,
rooming house or rooming unit and premises offered for rent located within
the Borough of East Greenville in order to safeguard the health and safety
of the occupants thereof and the general public. He or she is further
authorized to enter, for the purpose of examining and surveying, all areas
of the habitable premises at reasonable time. Every occupant of any such
premises or operator in charge thereof shall extend to the Code
Enforcement Officer access to such premises for the purpose of making any
inspection, examination or survey.
§ 75-9. Issuance of search warrant; probable cause.
If permission to enter any premises for the purpose of inspection is denied,
the inspecting officer may apply for a search warrant to the District
Magistrate serving the district within which the Borough of East Greenville
is located. He shall supply all necessary affidavits containing personal
knowledge of probable cause for the issuance of a search warrant.
"Probable cause" shall mean:
§ 75-10. Warrant not required.
Warrants shall not be required for entry:
A. That inspection of said dwelling unit is part of a routine area inspection
being conducted as a part of a systematic or concentrated codes
enforcement program;
B. That the affiant has knowledge of a violation of borough codes that may
endanger or otherwise affect the health and safety of the citizens of the
Borough of East Greenville; or
C. That said entry is for the purpose of reinspecting a previous violation
where no prior warrant was issued.
A. When entry is by permission or at the request of the occupant.
B. Where an imminent danger to health and safety exists.
C. Following an accident or inherent condition where immediate
inspection is required to determine if an imminent danger to health or
safety exists.
§ 75-7 RENTAL UNIT INSPECTIONS § 75-11
75:193
§ 75-11. Reinspection during term of permit.
The Code Enforcement Officer may reinspect any property for which a
permit has been issued upon receiving complaints from the tenants thereof
or from third parties.
§ 75-12. Violations and penalties.
Should an inspection, as provided for herein, reveal the existence of a
violation of The BOCA National Existing Structures Code, Second Edition,
1987, adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of East Greenville
by Ordinance No. 8-88 on December 5, 1988,37 then the Code Enforcement
Officer shall serve upon the owner or operator a violation notice in the form
set forth in Section 107.2 of that code. He shall also schedule a reinspection
for a date and at a time subsequent to the expiration of the reasonable
compliance time set forth in the violation notice. If the violation existing
at the time of the initial inspection remains outstanding at the time of the
reinspection, the owner or operator shall, upon conviction, become liable to
those fines and penalties set forth in Section 110.2 of the code.
Chapter 78
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer Authority — See Ch. 20.
Building construction — See Ch. 35.
Plumbing — See Ch. 67.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 83.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
85.
37.Editor's Note: See Ch. 73, Property Maintenance.
§ 75-11 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 75-12
78:194
ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 78-1. Terms defined.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY — Upper Montgomery Joint Authority,38 a Pennsylvania
municipality authority.
BOROUGH — The Borough of East Greenville, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania, a Pennsylvania municipal corporation, acting by and through
its Council or, in appropriate cases, acting by and through its authorized
representatives.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the sewage drainage system of
any structure to the lateral of a sewer.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within this borough upon which
there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation,
occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which structure
sewage and/or industrial wastes shall be or may be discharged.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or form of
energy rejected or escaping in the course of any industrial manufacturing,
trade or business process or in the course of the development, recovery
or processing of natural resources, as distinct from sewage, including such
ground, surface or storm water as may be present.
LATERAL — That part of the sewer system extending from a sewer to the
curbline or, if there shall be no curbline, to the property line, or if no such
"lateral" shall be provided, then "lateral" shall mean that portion of or place
in, a sewer which is provided for connection of any building sewer.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any property located in this borough.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, society,
corporation or other group or entity.
SEWAGE — Normal water-carried household and toilet wastes from any
improved property.[Amended 6-6-1960 by Ord. No. 8-60; 9-6-1977 by
Ord. No. 3-77]
SEWER — Any pipe or conduit constituting a part of the sewer system, used
or usable for sewage collection purposes.
SEWER SYSTEM — All facilities, as of any particular time, for collecting,
pumping, treating and disposing of sewage and industrial wastes, situate
in or adjacent to this borough and owned, maintained and operated by the
Authority.
STREET — Includes any street, road, lane, court, alley and public square.
38.Editor's Note: See Ch. 20, Sewer Authority.
§ 78-1 SEWERS § 78-1
78:195

ARTICLE II
Use of Public Sewers Required
§ 78-2. Connection to sewers required.
§ 78-3. Prohibited deposits and discharges.
§ 78-4. Private sewage disposal systems prohibited; abandonment;
connection prohibited.
A. The owner of any improved property abutting on or adjoining any street
in which there is a sewer shall connect such improved property
therewith, in such manner as this borough and the Authority may
require, within 60 days after notice to such owner from this borough to
make such connection, for the purpose of discharge of all sewage and
industrial wastes from such improved property, subject to such
limitations and restrictions as shall be established herein or otherwise
shall be established by this borough or the Authority from time to time.
B. All sewage and industrial wastes from any improved property, after
connection of such improved property with a sewer as required under
Subsection A, shall be conducted into a sewer, subject to such
limitations and restrictions as shall be established herein or otherwise
shall be established by this borough or the Authority from time to time.
A. No person shall place or deposit or permit to be placed or deposited
upon public or private property within this borough any sewage or
industrial wastes in violation of § 78-2A.
B. No person shall discharge or permit to be discharged to any natural
outlet within this borough any sewage or industrial wastes in violation
of § 78-2A, except where suitable treatment has been provided which is
satisfactory to this borough.
C. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling
water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any public sanitary
sewer. [Added 6-5-1972 by Ord. No. 4-72]
A. No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle
shall be used and maintained at any time upon any improved property
which has been connected to a sewer or which shall be required under
§ 78-2A to be connected to a sewer.
B. Every such privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic or similar receptacle
in existence shall be abandoned and, at the discretion of this borough,
shall be cleansed and filled under the direction and supervision of this
borough; and any such privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or
similar receptacle not so abandoned and, if required by this borough,
cleansed and filled, shall constitute a nuisance and such nuisance may
§ 78-2 SEWERS § 78-4
78:197
§ 78-5. Notice to connect.
The notice by the borough to make a connection to a sewer, referred to in
§ 78-2A, shall consist of a copy of this chapter, including any amendments
at the time in effect, and a written or printed document requiring the
connection, and may be given at any time after a sewer is in place which can
receive and convey sewage and industrial wastes for treatment and disposal
from the particular improved property.
be abated as provided by law, at the expense of the owner of such
improved property.
C. No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle
shall at any time be connected with a sewer.
§ 78-4 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 78-5
78:198
ARTICLE III
Building Sewers and Connections
§ 78-6. Separate connections required; exception.
Except as otherwise provided in this section, each improved property shall
be connected separately and independently with a sewer through a building
sewer. Grouping of more than one improved property on one building sewer
shall not be permitted except under special circumstances and for good
sanitary reasons or other good cause shown, but then only after special
permission of this borough and the Authority, in writing, shall have been
secured.
§ 78-7. Costs; indemnification of borough and Authority.
All costs and expenses of construction of a building sewer and all costs
and expenses of connection of a building sewer to a sewer shall be borne
by the owner of the improved property to be connected. Such owner shall
indemnify and save harmless this borough and the Authority from all loss
or damage that may be occasioned directly or indirectly as a result of
construction of a building sewer or of connection of a building sewer to a
sewer.
§ 78-8. Location of connection and lateral. [Amended 6-6-1960 by
Ord. No. 8-60]
§ 78-9. Connection by borough; collection of costs.
If the owner of any improved property abutting on or adjoining any street
in which there is a sewer, after 60 days' notice from this borough in
accordance with § 78-2A, shall fail to connect such improved property as
required, this borough may make such connection and may collect from
such owner the costs and expenses thereof by a municipal claim, an action
in assumpsit or such other legal proceeding as may be permitted by law.
A. A building sewer shall be connected to a sewer at the place designated
by the Authority and where the lateral is provided.
B. The lateral shall be provided at the place designated by the owner of
each improved property if such owner shall designate to the Authority
such place prior to the time construction is begun in front of the
particular improved property and such place designated by the owner is
feasible; otherwise, the lateral shall be provided at a place designated
by the Authority.
C. The invert of a building sewer at the point of connection shall be at the
same or a higher elevation than the invert of the sewer. A smooth, neat
joint shall be made and the connection of a building sewer to the lateral
shall be made secure and watertight.
§ 78-6 SEWERS § 78-10
78:199
§ 78-10. Certain connections to sanitary sewers prohibited. [Added
6-5-1972 by Ord. No. 4-72]
No person shall connect or cause to be connected or permit the continuance
of a connection of a cellar drain, perimeter drain, dry well or sump pump to
the public sanitary sewer for the purpose of pumping water from basements
or foundation drains.
§ 78-10 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 78-10
78:200
ARTICLE IV
Building Sewer and Sewer Connection Regulations
§ 78-11. Modification and use of existing sewer line.
Where an improved property at the time connection to a sewer is required
shall be served by its own sewage disposal system or device, the existing
structure sewer line shall be broken at the structure line and attachment
shall be made with proper fittings to continue such existing structure sewer
line as a building sewer.
§ 78-12. Inspection of work prior to covering.
No building sewer shall be covered until it has been inspected and approved
by this borough and the Authority. If any part of a building sewer is covered
before so being inspected and approved, it shall be uncovered for inspection
at the cost and expense of the owner of the improved property to be
connected to a sewer.
§ 78-13. Maintenance of building sewer.
Every building sewer of any improved property shall be maintained in
a sanitary and safe operating condition by the owner of such improved
property.
§ 78-14. Guarding and restoration of excavations.
Every excavation for a building sewer shall be guarded adequately with
barricades and lights to protect all persons from damage and injury. Streets,
sidewalks and other public property disturbed in the course of installation
of a building sewer shall be restored at the cost and expense of the owner
of the improved property being connected, in a manner satisfactory to the
borough.
§ 78-15. Failure to remedy unsatisfactory conditions upon notice.
If any person shall fail or refuse, upon receipt of a notice from this borough
or the Authority, in writing, to remedy any unsatisfactory condition with
respect to a building sewer within 60 days of receipt of such notice, the
borough or the Authority may refuse to permit such person to discharge
sewage and industrial wastes into the sewer system until such
unsatisfactory condition shall have been remedied to the satisfaction of the
borough and the Authority.
§ 78-16. Promulgation of additional rules and regulations.
The borough reserves the right to adopt, from time to time, additional
rules and regulations as it shall deem necessary and proper relating to
connections with a sewer and the sewer system, which additional rules and
regulations, to the extent appropriate shall be and shall be construed as
part of this chapter.
§ 78-11 SEWERS § 78-16
78:201

ARTICLE V
Enforcement
§ 78-17. Right of entry. [Added 6-5-1972 by Ord. No. 4-72]
Any duly authorized representative of the borough or Upper Montgomery
Joint Sewer Authority,39 bearing the proper credentials and identification, is
hereby empowered to enter and inspect at all reasonable times all buildings
and premises for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement,
testing or otherwise ascertaining whether the provisions of this chapter are
being violated.
§ 78-18. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person who shall violate this chapter shall be liable, upon summary
conviction for a first offense and upon summary conviction for each
subsequent offense, to a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $50,
together with costs of prosecution in each case. Each day that a
violation shall continue shall be deemed and shall be taken to be a
separate offense and shall be punishable as such. [Amended 9-6-1977
by Ord. No. 3-77]
B. Fines and costs imposed under the provisions of this chapter shall be
enforceable and recoverable in the manner at the time provided by
applicable law.
39.Editor's Note: See Ch. 20, Sewer Authority.
§ 78-17 SEWERS § 78-18
78:203
Chapter 80
(RESERVED)
Chapter 81
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 35.
Sewers — See Ch. 78.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
85.
Zoning — See Ch. 95.
§ 78-18 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 78-18
80:204
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 81-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of East
Greenville MS4 Stormwater Management Ordinance."
§ 81-2. Statement of findings.
The governing body of the municipality finds that:
§ 81-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety and welfare within
the municipality and its watershed by minimizing the harms and maximizing
the benefits described in § 81-2 of this chapter, through provisions designed
to:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated runoff of stormwater resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases flows and
velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the
carrying capacity of streams and storm sewers, greatly increases the
cost of public facilities to carry and control stormwater, undermines
floodplain management and flood-control efforts in downstream
communities, reduces groundwater recharge, threatens public health
and safety, and increases nonpoint source pollution of water resources.
B. A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including
reasonable regulation of development and activities causing
accelerated runoff, is fundamental to the public health, safety, and
welfare and the protection of people of the commonwealth, their
resources, and the environment.
C. Stormwater is an important water resource, which provides
groundwater recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams,
which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
D. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are
required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their
separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES).
A. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93 to protect, maintain, reclaim, and
restore the existing and designated uses of the waters of this
commonwealth.
B. Preserve the natural drainage systems as much as possible.
C. Manage stormwater runoff close to the source.
§ 81-1 (RESERVED) § 81-3
80:205
§ 81-4. Statutory authority.
The municipality is also empowered to regulate land use activities that
affect runoff by the authority of the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247,
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.40
§ 81-5. Applicability.
All regulated activities and all activities that may affect stormwater runoff,
including land development and earth disturbance activity, are subject to
regulation by this chapter.
§ 81-6. Repealer.
Any other ordinance provision(s) or regulation of the municipality
inconsistent with any of the provisions of this chapter is hereby repealed to
the extent of the inconsistency only.
§ 81-7. Severability.
In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction declares any section or
provision of this chapter invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of
any of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
§ 81-8. Compatibility with other requirements.
Approvals issued and actions taken under this chapter do not relieve the
applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for
activities regulated by any other code, law, regulation, or ordinance.
§ 81-9. Erroneous permit.
Any permit or authorization issued or approved based on false, misleading
or erroneous information provided by an applicant is void without the
necessity of any proceedings for revocation. Any work undertaken or use
established pursuant to such permit or other authorization is unlawful. No
D. Provide procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning and management.
E. Maintain groundwater recharge to prevent degradation of surface
water and groundwater quality and to otherwise protect water
resources.
F. Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.
G. Provide proper operation and maintenance of all SWM BMPs that are
implemented within the municipality.
H. Provide standards to meet NPDES permit requirements.
40.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 81-3 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 81-9
80:206
action may be taken by a board, agency or employee of the municipality
purporting to validate such a violation.
§ 81-9 (RESERVED) § 81-9
80:207

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 81-10. Interpretation.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
§ 81-11. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — Activities associated with agriculture such
as agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation, and animal heavy-use
areas. This includes the work of producing crops, including tillage, land
clearing, plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting crops, or the
pasturing and raising of livestock and installation of conservation measures.
Construction of new buildings or impervious area is not considered an
agricultural activity.
APPLICANT — A landowner, developer, or other person who has filed an
application to the municipality for approval to engage in any regulated
activity at a project site in the municipality.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — Activities, facilities, designs,
measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from
regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to promote
groundwater recharge, and to otherwise meet the purposes of this chapter.
Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one of two board categories
or measures: "structural" or "nonstructural." In this chapter, nonstructural
BMPs or measures refer to operational and/or behavior-related practices
that attempt to minimize the contact of pollutants with stormwater runoff,
whereas structural BMPs or measures are those that consist of a physical
device or practice that is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff.
Structural BMPs include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices
and devices, from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands
to small-scale underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter
strips, low-impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving,
grassed swales, riprarian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins,
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender, and
words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
§ 81-10 (RESERVED) § 81-11
80:209
and manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the project site.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — A conservation district, as defined in Section
3(c) of the Conservation District Law [3 P.S. § 851(c)], that has the authority
under a delegation agreement executed with DEP to administer and enforce
all or a portion of the regulations promulgated under 25 Pa. Code Chapter
102.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours) used in the design and
evaluation of stormwater management systems. Also see "return period."
DETENTION VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is captured and
released into the waters of this commonwealth at a controlled rate.
DEVELOPMENT SITE (SITE) — See "project site."
DISTURBED AREA — An unstabilized land area where an earth disturbance
activity is occurring or has occurred.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human activity
which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited to, clearing
and grubbing, grading, excavations, embankments, road maintenance,
building construction, and the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of
soil, rock, or earth materials.
EROSION — The natural process by which the surface of the land is worn
away by water, wind, or chemical action.
EXISTING CONDITION — The dominant land cover during the five-year
period immediately preceding a proposed regulated activity.
FEMA — The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from any
natural source or delineated by applicable FEMA maps and studies as being
a special flood hazard area. Also includes areas that comprise Group 13
soils, as listed in Appendix A of the Pennsylvania DEP Technical Manual for
Sewage Enforcement Officers (as amended or replaced from time to time by
DEP).
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the
adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and discharge
the one-hundred-year flood. Unless otherwise specified, the boundary of
the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance studies provided
by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies have defined the
boundary of the one-hundred-year floodway, it is assumed, absent evidence
to the contrary, that the floodway extends from the stream to 50 feet from
the top of the bank of the stream.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and activities
necessary for the management of forestland. These include conducting
§ 81-11 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 81-11
80:210
a timber inventory, preparation of forest management plans, silvicultural
treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and construction, timber
harvesting, site preparation, and reforestation.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) — Infiltration rates of soils vary widely
and are affected by subsurface permeability as well as surface intake rates.
Soils are classified into four HSGs (A, B, C, and D) according to their
minimum infiltration rate, which is obtained for bare soil after prolonged
wetting. The NRCS defines the four groups and provides a list of most of the
soils in the United States and their group classification. The soils in the area
of the development site may be identified from a soil survey report that can
be obtained from local NRCS offices or conservation district offices. Soils
become less pervious as the HSG varies from A to D (NRCS [NOTE: See the
references in § 81-36C and D.]).
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS AREA) — A surface that prevents
the infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious surfaces (or areas)
shall include, but not be limited to, roofs; additional indoor living spaces,
patios, garages, storage sheds and similar structures; and any new streets
or sidewalks. Decks, parking areas, and driveway areas are not counted as
impervious areas if they do not prevent infiltration.
KARST — A type of topography or landscape characterized by surface
depressions, sinkholes, rock pinnacles/uneven bedrock surface,
underground drainage, and caves. Karst is formed on carbonate rocks, such
as limestone or dolomite.
LAND DEVELOPMENT (DEVELOPMENT) — Inclusive of any or all of the
following meanings:
MUNICIPALITY — Borough of East Greenville, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania.
NRCS — USDA Natural Resources Conservation Services (previously SCS).
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
(1) A group of two or more buildings; or
The division or allocation of land or space between or among
two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of or for
the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums,
building groups, or other features;
(2)
A.
B. Any subdivision of land;
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.41
C.
41.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
§ 81-11 (RESERVED) § 81-11
80:211
PERVIOUS AREA — Any area not defined as impervious.
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated activities in
the municipality are planned, conducted, or maintained.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — Any person licensed by the Pennsylvania
Department of State or otherwise qualified by law to perform the work
required by this chapter.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Any earth disturbance activities or any
activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner that
may affect stormwater runoff.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Activity involving earth
disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code 92,42 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 102, or the Clean Streams Law.
RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF — The volume of runoff that
is captured and not released directly into the surface waters of this
commonwealth during or after a storm event.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a storm
event of a given magnitude can be expected to occur one time. For example,
the twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be expected to occur on
average once every 25 years, or stated in another way, the probability of a
twenty-five-year storm occurring in any one year is 0.04 (i.e., a four-percent
chance).
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land.
SEDIMENT — Soils or other materials transported by surface water as a
product of erosion.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory requirements
to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality under Title 25 of the
Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law.
STORMWATER — Drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting
from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES — Is
abbreviated as BMPs or SWM BMPs throughout this chapter.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any structure, natural or manmade,
that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys, stores
or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater management
facilities include, but are not limited to, detention and retention basins;
open channels, storm sewers, pipes; and infiltration facilities.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN — The plan prepared by the
developer or his representative indicating how stormwater runoff will be
managed at the development site in accordance with this chapter.
Stormwater management site plan will be designated as SWM site plan
throughout this chapter.
42.Editor's Note: Chapter 92 of the Pa. Code was reserved 10-8-2010. See now 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 92a.
§ 81-11 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 81-11
80:212
SUBDIVISION — As defined in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247.
USDA — The United States Department of Agriculture.
WATERSHED — Region or area drained by a river, watercourse, or other
surface water of this commonwealth.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams, creeks,
rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels
of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether
natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this commonwealth.
WETLAND — Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
§ 81-11 (RESERVED) § 81-11
80:213

ARTICLE III
Standards
§ 81-12. General requirements.
A. For all regulated activities, unless preparation of an SWM site plan is
specifically exempted in § 81-13:
(1) Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM site plan is
required.
(2) No regulated activities shall commence until the municipality
issues written approval of an SWM site plan, which demonstrates
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
B. SWM site plans approved by the municipality, in accordance with
§ 81-21, shall be on site throughout the duration of the regulated
activity.
C. The municipality may, after consultation with DEP, approve measures
for meeting the state water quality requirements other than those in
this chapter, provided that they meet the minimum requirements of,
and do not conflict with, state law, including, but not limited to, the
Clean Streams Law.
D. For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment
control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and
maintained during the regulated earth disturbance activities (e.g.,
during construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this
chapter and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania
Code and the Clean Streams Law. Various BMPs and their design
standards are listed in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Program Manual (E&S Manual) [NOTE: See the reference in § 81-36B.],
No. 363-2134-008 (March 31, 2012), as amended and updated.
E. Impervious areas:
(1) The measurement of impervious areas shall include all of the
impervious areas in the total proposed development, even if
development is to take place in stages.
(2) For development taking place in stages, the entire development
plan must be used in determining conformance with this chapter.
(3) For projects that add impervious area to a parcel, the total
impervious area on the parcel is subject to the requirements of this
chapter, except that the volume controls in § 81-14 and the peak
rate controls of § 81-15 do not need to be retrofitted to existing
impervious areas that are not being altered by the proposed
regulated activity.
F. Stormwater flows onto adjacent property shall not be created,
increased, decreased, relocated, or otherwise altered without written
§ 81-12 (RESERVED) § 81-12
80:215
notification of the adjacent property owner(s) by the developer. Such
stormwater flows shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter.
G. All regulated activities shall include such measures as necessary to:
(1) Protect health, safety and property.
(2) Meet the water quality goals of this chapter by implementing
measures to:
(a) Minimize disturbance to floodplains, wetlands, and wooded
areas.
(b) Maintain or extend riparian buffers.
(c) Avoid erosive flow conditions in natural flow pathways.
(d) Minimize thermal impacts to waters of this commonwealth.
(e) Disconnect impervious surfaces by directing runoff to pervious
areas, wherever possible.
(3) To the maximum extent practicable, incorporate the techniques for
low-impact development practices described in the Pennsylvania
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual (BMP Manual)
[NOTE: See the reference in § 81-36A.].
H. The design of all facilities over karst shall include an evaluation of
measures to minimize adverse effects.
I. Infiltration BMPs should be spread out, made as shallow as practicable,
and located to maximize use of natural on-site infiltration features while
still meeting the other requirements of this chapter.
J. Normally dry, open-top storage facilities should completely drain both
the volume control and rate control capacities over a period of time not
less than 24 hours and not more than 72 hours from the end of the
design storm.
K. The design storm volumes to be used in the analysis of peak rates of
discharge should be obtained from the Precipitation-Frequency Atlas to
the United States, Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 3.0, U.S. Department of
Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA),
National Weather Service, Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center,
Silver Spring, Maryland. NOAA's Atlas 14 [NOTE: See the reference in
§ 81-36E.] can be accessed at http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.
L. For all regulated activities, SWM BMPs shall be designed,
implemented, operated and maintained to meet the purposes and
requirements of this chapter and to meet all requirements under Title
25 of the Pennsylvania Code, the Clean Streams Law, and the Storm
Water Management Act.
§ 81-12 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 81-12
80:216
§ 81-13. Exemptions.
§ 81-14. Volume controls.
The low impact development practices provided in the BMP Manual [NOTE:
See the reference in § 81-36A.] shall be utilized for all regulated activities
to the maximum extent practicable. Water volume controls shall be
implemented using the Design Storm Method in Subsection A or the
Simplified Method in Subsection B below. For regulated activity areas equal
to or less than one acre that do not require hydrologic routing to design
the stormwater facilities, this chapter establishes no preference for either
methodology; therefore, the applicant may select either methodology on the
basis of economic considerations, the intrinsic limitations on applicability
of the analytical procedures associated with each methodology, and other
factors.
M. Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the BMP Manual
[NOTE: See the reference in § 81-36A.].
A. Regulated activities that result in cumulative earth disturbances less
than one acre maximum are exempt from the requirements in § 81-14,
§ 81-15 and Article IV of this chapter.
B. Agricultural activity is exempt from the SWM site plan preparation
requirements of this chapter, provided that the activities are performed
according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
C. Forest management and timber operations are exempt from the SWM
site plan preparation requirements of this chapter, provided that the
activities are performed according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code
102.
D. Exemptions from any provisions of this chapter shall not relieve the
applicant from the requirements in § 81-12D through K.
E. The municipality may deny or revoke any exemption pursuant to this
section at any time for any project that the municipality believes may
pose a threat to public health and safety or the environment.
A. The Design Storm Method (CG-1 in the BMP Manual [NOTE: See the
reference in § 81-36A.]) is applicable to any size of regulated activity.
This method requires detailed modeling based on site conditions.
(1) Do not increase the post-development total runoff volume for all
storms equal to or less than the two-year twenty-four-hour-duration
precipitation.
(2) For modeling purposes:
(a) Existing (pre-development) nonforested pervious areas must
be considered meadow in good condition.
§ 81-12 (RESERVED) § 81-14
80:217
§ 81-15. Rate controls.
(b) Twenty percent of existing impervious area, when present,
shall be considered meadow in good condition in the model for
existing conditions.
B. The Simplified Method (CG-2 in the BMP Manual [NOTE: See the
reference in § 81-36A.]) provided below is independent of site
conditions and should be used if the Design Storm Method is not
followed. This method is not applicable to regulated activities greater
than one acre or for projects that require design of stormwater storage
facilities. For new impervious surfaces:
(1) Stormwater facilities shall capture at least the first two inches of
runoff from all new impervious surfaces.
(2) At least the first one inch of runoff from new impervious surfaces
shall be permanently removed from the runoff flow, that is, it shall
not be released into the surface waters of this commonwealth.
Removal options include reuse, evaporation, transpiration, and
infiltration.
(3) Wherever possible, infiltration facilities should be designed to
accommodate infiltration of the entire permanently removed
runoff; however, in all cases at least the first 0.5 inch of the
permanently removed runoff should be infiltrated.
(4) This method is exempt from the requirements of § 81-15, Rate
controls.
A. Areas not covered by a release rate map from an approved Act 167
stormwater management plan: Post-development discharge rates shall
not exceed the predevelopment discharge rates for the one-, two-, five-,
ten-, twenty-five-, fifty- and one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour storms.
If it is shown that the peak rates of discharge identified by the postdevelopment
analysis are less than or equal to the peak rates of
discharge indicated by the pre-development analysis for one-, two-, five-
, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty- and one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour
storms, then the requirements of this section have been met.
Otherwise, the applicant shall provide additional controls as necessary
to satisfy the peak rate of discharge requirement.
B. Areas covered by a release rate map from an approved Act 167
Stormwater Management Plan: For the one-, two-, five-, ten-, twentyfive-,
fifty- and one-hundred-year storms, the post-development peak
discharge rates will follow the applicable approved release rate maps.
For any areas not shown on the release rate maps, the postdevelopment
discharge rates shall not exceed the predevelopment
discharge rates.
§ 81-14 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 81-15
80:218
ARTICLE IV
Stormwater Management (SWM) Site Plan Requirements
§ 81-16. Plan requirements.
The following items shall be included in the SWM site plan:
A. Appropriate sections from the municipality's Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance,43 and other applicable local ordinances, shall
be followed in preparing the SWM site plans. In instances where the
municipality lacks subdivision and land development regulations, the
content of the SWM site plans shall follow the county's Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance.
B. The municipality shall not approve any SWM site plan that is deficient
in meeting the requirements of this chapter. At its sole discretion and in
accordance with this article, when a SWM site plan is found to be
deficient, the municipality may either disapprove the submission and
require a resubmission or, in the case of minor deficiencies, the
municipality may accept submission of modifications.
C. Provisions for permanent access or maintenance easements for all
physical SWM BMPs, such as ponds and infiltration structures, as
necessary to implement the operation and maintenance (O&M) plan
discussed in Subsection E(9) below.
D. The following signature block for the municipality:
"(Municipal official or designee), on this date (date of signature), has
reviewed and hereby certifies that the SWM site plan meets all design
standards and criteria of the Municipal Ordinance No. (number
assigned to the Ordinance)."
E. The SWM site plan shall provide the following information:
(1) The overall stormwater management concept for the project.
(2) A determination of site conditions in accordance with the BMP
Manual. [NOTE: See the reference in § 81-36A.] A detailed site
evaluation shall be completed for projects proposed in areas of
carbonate geology or karst topography, and other environmentally
sensitive areas, such as brownfields.
(3) Stormwater runoff design computations, and documentation as
specified in this chapter, or as otherwise necessary to demonstrate
that the maximum practicable measures have been taken to meet
the requirements of this chapter, including the recommendations
and general requirements in § 81-12.
(4) Expected project time schedule.
43.Editor's Note: See Ch. 85, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 81-16 (RESERVED) § 81-16
80:219
§ 81-17. Plan submission.
§ 81-18. Plan review.
(5) A soil erosion and sediment control plan, where applicable, as
prepared for and submitted to the approval authority.
(6) The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes, water quality
and peak flows) on surrounding properties and aquatic features
and on any existing stormwater conveyance system that may be
affected by the project.
(7) Plan and profile drawings of all SWM BMPs, including drainage
structures, pipes, open channels, and swales.
(8) The SWM site plan shall show the locations of existing and
proposed on-lot wastewater facilities and water supply wells.
(9) The SWM site plan shall include an O&M plan for all existing and
proposed physical stormwater management facilities. This plan
shall address long-term ownership and responsibilities for O&M as
well as schedules and costs for O&M activities.
A. ? Typically 5 copies of the SWM site plan shall be submitted as follows:
(1) ? Typically 2 copies to the municipality.
(2) ? Typically 1 copy to the Municipal Engineer (when applicable).
(3) ? Typically 1 copy to the County Conservation District.
(4) ? Typically 1 copy to the County Planning Commission/Office.
B. Additional copies shall be submitted as requested by the municipality or
DEP.
A. SWM site plans shall be reviewed by the municipality for consistency
with the provisions of this chapter.
B. The municipality shall notify the applicant in writing within 45 days
whether the SWM site plan is approved or disapproved. If the SWM site
plan involves a subdivision and land development plan, the notification
shall occur within the time period allowed by the Municipalities
Planning Code (90 days). If a longer notification period is provided by
other statute, regulation or ordinance, the applicant will be so notified
by the municipality.
C. If the municipality disapproves the SWM site plan, the municipality will
state the reasons for the disapproval in writing. The municipality may
also approve the SWM site plan with conditions and, if so, shall provide
the acceptable conditions for approval in writing.
§ 81-16 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 81-19
80:220
§ 81-19. Modification of plans.
A modification to a submitted SWM site plan that involves a change in SWM
BMPs or techniques, or that involves the relocation or redesign of SWM
BMPs, or that is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated
on the SWM site plan as determined by the municipality, shall require a
resubmission of the modified SWM site plan in accordance with this article.
§ 81-20. Resubmission of disapproved SWM site plans.
A disapproved SWM site plan may be resubmitted, with the revisions
addressing the municipality's concerns, to the municipality in accordance
with this article. The applicable review fee must accompany a resubmission
of a disapproved SWM site plan.
§ 81-21. Authorization to construct and term of validity.
The municipality's approval of an SWM site plan authorizes the regulated
activities contained in the SWM site plan for a maximum term of validity
of five years following the date of approval. The municipality may specify a
term of validity shorter than five years in the approval for any specific SWM
site plan. Terms of validity shall commence on the date the municipality
signs the approval for an SWM site plan. If an approved SWM site plan is
not completed according to Section 407 within the term of validity, then the
municipality may consider the SWM site plan disapproved and may revoke
any and all permits. SWM site plans that are considered disapproved by the
municipality shall be resubmitted in accordance with § 81-20 of this chapter.
§ 81-22. As-built plans; completion certificate; final inspection.
A. The developer shall be responsible for providing as-built plans of all
SWM BMPs included in the approved SWM site plan. The as-built plans
and an explanation of any discrepancies with the construction plans
shall be submitted to the municipality.
B. The as-built submission shall include a certification of completion
signed by a qualified professional verifying that all permanent SWM
BMPs have been constructed according to the approved plans and
specifications. If any licensed qualified professionals contributed to the
construction plans, then a licensed qualified professional must sign the
completion certificate.
C. After receipt of the completion certification by the municipality, the
municipality may conduct a final inspection.
§ 81-19 (RESERVED) § 81-22
80:221

ARTICLE V
Operation and Maintenance
§ 81-23. Responsibilities of developers and landowners.
§ 81-24. Operation and maintenance agreements.
A. The municipality shall make the final determination on the continuing
maintenance responsibilities prior to final approval of the SWM site
plan. The municipality may require a dedication of such facilities as part
of the requirements for approval of the SWM site plan. Such a
requirement is not an indication that the municipality will accept the
facilities. The municipality reserves the right to accept or reject the
ownership and operating responsibility for any portion of the
stormwater management controls.
B. Facilities, areas, or structures used as Stormwater Management BMPs
shall be enumerated as permanent real estate appurtenances and
recorded as deed restrictions or conservation easements that run with
the land.
C. The O&M plan shall be recorded as a restrictive deed covenant that
runs with the land.
D. The municipality may take enforcement actions against an owner for
any failure to satisfy the provisions of this article.
A. Prior to final approval of the SWM site plan, the property owner shall
sign and record an operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement (see
Appendix A)44 covering all stormwater control facilities which are to be
privately owned.
(1) The owner, successor and assigns shall maintain all facilities in
accordance with the approved maintenance schedule in the O&M
plan.
(2) The owner shall convey to the municipality conservation easements
to assure access for periodic inspections by the municipality and
maintenance, as necessary.
(3) The owner shall keep on file with the municipality the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or company
responsible for maintenance activities; in the event of a change,
new information shall be submitted by the owner to the
municipality within 10 working days of the change.
B. The owner is responsible for operation and maintenance (O&M) of the
SWM BMPs. If the owner fails to adhere to the O&M agreement, the
municipality may perform the services required and charge the owner
44.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 81-23 (RESERVED) § 81-24
80:223
§ 81-25. Performance guarantee.
For SWM site plans that involve subdivision and land development, the
applicant shall provide a financial guarantee to the municipality for the
timely installation and proper construction of all stormwater management
controls as required by the approved SWM site plan and this chapter
in accordance with the provisions of Sections 509, 510 and 511 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.45
appropriate fees. Nonpayment of fees may result in a lien against the
property.
45.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10509, 10510 and 10511.
§ 81-24 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 81-25
80:224
ARTICLE VI
Fees and Expenses
§ 81-26. Review fee.
The municipality may include all costs incurred in the review fee charged to
an applicant. The review fee may include, but not be limited to, costs for the
following:
A. Administrative/clerical processing.
B. Review of the SWM site plan.
C. Attendance at meetings.
D. Inspections.
§ 81-26 (RESERVED) § 81-26
80:225

ARTICLE VII
Prohibitions
§ 81-27. Prohibited discharges and connections.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that
allows any nonstormwater discharge, including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water, to enter a regulated small MS4 or to enter
the waters of this commonwealth is prohibited.
B. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into a regulated
small MS4, or discharges into waters of this commonwealth, which are
not composed entirely of stormwater, except:
(1) As provided in Subsection C below; and
(2) Discharges allowed under a state or federal permit.
C. The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to
be significant contributors to pollution to a regulated MS4 or to the
waters of this commonwealth:
(1) Discharges from firefighting activities.
(2) Potable water sources, including waterline flushing.
(3) Irrigation drainage.
(4) Air-conditioning condensate.
(5) Springs.
(6) Water from crawl space pumps.
(7) Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used.
(8) Diverted stream flows.
(9) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(10) Uncontaminated water from foundations or from footing drains.
(11) Lawn watering.
(12) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
(13) Uncontaminated groundwater.
(14)Water for individual residential car washing.
(15) Routine external building washdown (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
§ 81-27 (RESERVED) § 81-27
80:227
§ 81-28. Roof drains and sump pumps.
Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration or vegetative
BMPs.
§ 81-29. Alteration of SWM BMPs.
No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any SWM BMPs,
facilities, areas, or structures without the written approval of the
municipality.
D. In the event that the municipality or DEP determines that any of the
discharges identified in Subsection C significantly contribute pollutants
to a regulated small MS4 or to the waters of this commonwealth, the
municipality or DEP will notify the responsible person(s) to cease the
discharge.
§ 81-27 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 81-29
80:228
ARTICLE VIII
Enforcement; Violations and Penalties
§ 81-30. Right of entry.
Upon presentation of proper credentials, the municipality may enter at
reasonable times upon any property within the municipality to inspect the
condition of the stormwater structures and facilities in regard to any aspect
regulated by this chapter.
§ 81-31. Inspection.
SWM BMPs should be inspected by the landowner, or the owner's designee
(including the municipality for dedicated and owned facilities), according to
the following list of minimum frequencies:
§ 81-32. Enforcement.
§ 81-33. Suspension and revocation.
A. Annually for the first five years.
B. Once every three years thereafter.
C. During or immediately after the cessation of a ten-year or greater
storm.
A. It shall be unlawful for a person to undertake any regulated activity
except as provided in an approved SWM site plan, unless specifically
exempted in § 81-13.
B. It shall be unlawful to violate § 81-29 of this chapter.
C. Inspections regarding compliance with the SWM site plan are a
responsibility of the municipality.
A. Any approval or permit issued by the municipality pursuant to this
chapter may be suspended or revoked for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
approved SWM site plan or O&M agreement.
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable
law, ordinance, rule, or regulation relating to the regulated activity.
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
the regulated activity which constitutes or creates a hazard,
nuisance, or pollution or endangers the life or property of others.
B. A suspended approval may be reinstated by the municipality when:
(1) The municipality has inspected and approved the corrections to the
violations that caused the suspension.
§ 81-30 (RESERVED) § 81-33
80:229
§ 81-34. Violations and penalties.
§ 81-35. Appeals.
(2) The municipality is satisfied that the violation has been corrected.
C. An approval that has been revoked by the municipality cannot be
reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new approval under the
provisions of this chapter.
D. If a violation causes no immediate danger to life, public health, or
property, at its sole discretion, the municipality may provide a limited
time period for the owner to correct the violation. In these cases, the
municipality will provide the owner, or the owner's designee, with a
written notice of the violation and the time period allowed for the owner
to correct the violation. If the owner does not correct the violation
within the allowed time period, the municipality may revoke or suspend
any or all applicable approvals and permits pertaining to any provision
of this chapter.
A. Anyone violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
summary offense and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $1,000 for each violation, recoverable with costs. Each day
that the violation continues shall be a separate offense, and penalties
shall be cumulative.
B. In addition, the municipality may institute injunctive, mandamus, or any
other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for the
enforcement of this chapter. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall
have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent
injunctions, mandamus, or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of the municipality or its designee,
relevant to the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the
municipality within 30 days of that action.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the municipality, relevant to
the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the County Court of
Common Pleas in the county where the activity has taken place within
30 days of the municipality's decision.
§ 81-33 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 81-35
80:230
ARTICLE IX
References
§ 81-36. Reference material.
A. Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. Pennsylvania
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. No. 363-0300-002
(December 2006), as amended and updated. Harrisburg, PA.
B. Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. Erosion and
Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual. No. 363-2134-008 (March
31, 2012), as amended and updated. Harrisburg, PA.
C. U.S. Department of Agriculture, National Resources Conservation
Service (NRCS). National Engineering Handbook. Part 630: Hydrology,
1969-2001. Originally published as the National Engineering
Handbook, Section 4: Hydrology. Available from the NRCS online at
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/.
D. U.S. Department of Agriculture, National Resources Conservation
Service. 1986. Technical Release 55: Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, 2nd Edition. Washington, D.C.
E. U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, National Weather Service, Hydrometeorological Design
Studies Center. 2004-2006. Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United
States, Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 3.0, Silver Spring, Maryland.
Internet address: http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.
§ 81-36 (RESERVED) § 81-36
80:231
Chapter 83
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 78.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
85.
Zoning — See Ch. 95.
§ 81-36 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 81-36
83:232
ARTICLE I
Curbing and Paving Regulations
[Adopted 4-2-1928]
§ 83-1. Abutting owners to lay sidewalks and curbs.
As soon as the streets of the rough of East Greenville have been brought
to the duly established grade, the owners of the abutting land shall lay
sidewalks and curbs as hereinafter provided and keep them in repair.
§ 83-2. Sidewalk grade.
The sidewalks shall be graded with a pitch of one-fourth-inch per foot from
property line to curb level, to be given by the Borough Engineer.
§ 83-3. Performance of work by borough; lien for costs. [Amended
8-7-1989 by Ord. No. 9-89]
In case of failure to grade and lay sidewalks and set curbs (or any of these
as may be ordered) for 30 days after notice from the Borough Secretary to
the owners of the abutting land, the borough may do or cause the same to
be done and assess the costs thereof upon the land of said owner or owners
in front of or along which said work may be done and materials furnished
and shall secure payment thereof by filing a lien against said land or by suit
against the owners thereof as provided by law.
§ 83-4. Material; dimensions; foundation. [Amended 8-7-1989 by
Ord. No. 9-89]
Pavement and curbs shall be of standard cement composition, pavement to
be not less than four feet wide and curb not less than four inches thick.
The cement pavement and curb must have a substantial foundation. In no
instance shall the owner of property plant or allow to have planted any tree
or trees within the line of any sidewalk fronting his property.
§ 83-5. Expenses; approval of work.
All expenses shall be paid by lot owners and all work done shall be subject
to the approval of the Street Committee.
§ 83-6. Permit for repairs to brick pavement.
Hereafter, no repairs are to be made to existing brick pavements unless a
permit is obtained from the Street Committee.
§ 83-1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 83-6
83:233

ARTICLE II
Construction and Repair of Curbs and Sidewalks
[Adopted 9-21-1964 by Ord. No. 7-64]
§ 83-7. Compliance required.
From and after the effective date of this article, it shall be and is hereby
required of every owner or owners and their respective agents, employees
or contractors who or which construct, reconstruct or repair any curb or
sidewalk within the Borough of East Greenville, to comply with and follow
the regulations and requirements hereinafter set forth.
§ 83-8. Curb specifications.
The regulations pertaining to curbs are as follows:
A. Foundation. The foundation for the base of the concrete curb shall be on
firm subsoil. All soft and yielding materials shall be removed and
replaced with materials to give a firm bearing or curb shall be extended
to such depth as will give firm bearing.
B. Materials. The curbs shall be constructed of three-thousand-pound
concrete and shall be placed in accordance with the prescribed
standards of the Pennsylvania Department of Highways.
C. Dimensions.
(1) The width of the curb at the top shall be a minimum of seven inches
and the base eight inches and the curb shall have a depth of 24
inches or to a firm bearing, whichever is greater.
(2) It shall be poured in alternate blocks of maximum length of 10 feet,
with expansion joints at least every 30 feet.
(3) The taper shall be on the street side of the curb, except that where
existing adjacent curbs in then excellent condition have a vertical
face on the street side, then the taper may be on the pavement side
of the curb.
D. Curb returns. The minimum curb radius at street intersections shall be
20 feet; provided, however, where buildings or other existing conditions
shall make it impracticable, the radius may be reduced, at the
discretion of the Borough Council or its authorized representative, to a
radius of not less than 10 feet.
E. Depressed curbs for driveways.
(1) Where the curb is to be depressed for driveways or other type of
private cartways, there shall be a maximum depression on the
street face of the curb of 5 1/2 inches based on the overall height of
seven inches from gutter to top of curb, and when being depressed
along a state highway where the standard height from gutter to top
§ 83-7 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 83-8
83:235
§ 83-9. Sidewalk specifications.
The regulations pertaining to sidewalks are as follows:
of curb is eight inches, the maximum depression shall be not more
than 6 1/2 inches. The depression on the rear face of the curb, shall
be 1 1/2 inches less than that on the street face of the curb.
(2) The width of the depressed portion of curbing shall be governed by
the approval of the Council of the borough or its authorized
representative, in conformity with building and zoning regulations.
However, no curb may be depressed at a curb return or at street or
alley intersections, nor may the length of the depressed curb
exceed 35 feet.
A. Foundation. The foundation for the bed of the sidewalks shall consist of
two inches of compacted stone, wetted as directed. All soft and yielding
or other unsuitable material shall be removed and replaced with
suitable materials, thoroughly compacted. [Amended 10-3-1977 by
Ord. No. 4-77]
B. Materials. The sidewalks shall be constructed of three-thousand-pound
concrete and shall be placed according to acceptable Pennsylvania
Department of Highways standards, using standard materials.
C. Drainage. Satisfactory outlets for drainage of abutting structures or
subsoil conditions shall be provided, but under no conditions shall
depressed gutters be constructed transversely to the concrete walk.
D. Joints. The sidewalk shall be constructed in separate slabs of not more
than 30 feet. The slabs between the expansion joints shall be divided
into blocks five feet in length by scoring transversely. The minimum
width of the slab shall be four feet, and, further, all projects on the same
block shall be of uniform width and location with respect to the existing
curbline, but in no case shall the width be less than four feet.
E. Elevations.
(1) All curbs and sidewalks to be constructed, reconstructed or
repaired shall be constructed in accordance with grades and
elevations approved by the Borough Engineer, and not otherwise.
(2) The surface of the sidewalk shall be pitched toward the curb on a
gradient of 1/4 inch to the foot, with the plane of the curb juncture
to the curbline.
(3) At such places on the points where an existing adjacent sidewalk
was poured as an integral part of the curb, the plane of the walk
shall be made to conform to such existing walks if in good
condition.
F. Finish. The concrete surface shall be given a granular finish by rubbing
with a wood float without the addition of cement to the surface. An
§ 83-8 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 83-9
83:236
§ 83-10. General regulations for construction and repairs.
General regulations pertaining to construction or repair of sidewalks and
curbs are as follows:
edger having a one-fourth-inch radius shall be used for edging all joints.
The depth of the sidewalk concrete shall be a minimum of four inches.
A. Forms.
(1) The forms for curbs shall be of an approved metal type, except that
wood forms consisting of one-and-one-half-inch surface planks may
be used, with the approval of the Borough Engineer, on sharp
curves and short tangent sections. Forms for sidewalks shall be of
metal or of wood consisting of two-inch planks surfaced on the
inside and top. All forms shall be cleaned thoroughly and treated
with approved material to prevent the concrete from adhering
thereto. Material which will adhere to or discolor exposed face of
concrete shall not be used. All forms shall extend for the entire
depth of the concrete and shall be set accurately to grade in such a
manner as to prevent settlement, displacement or springing due to
pressure of the concrete. Forms that have become worn, bent or
otherwise damaged shall not be used. Any written determination by
the Borough Engineer that any such forms are unsuitable shall be
final, and any use of such forms subsequent to such designation for
construction of curbing or sidewalks within the borough shall be
considered a separate offense and punishable after summary
conviction as hereinafter provided.
(2) Forms shall remain in place for a minimum of 24 hours after the
concrete has been placed. Brush finishing or plastering will not be
permitted and all such concrete sections shall be removed and
replaced. Minor defects, upon approval of the Borough Engineer,
may be filled with mortar composed of one part cement and two
parts sand.
B. Structures. Where existing structures such as utility poles, light or sign
standards and fire hydrants are within sidewalk area, the concrete shall
be scored in a block eight inches wider than maximum dimension at
sidewalk elevation around such structures. Expansion joint material
shall be placed around all structures within or adjacent to the sidewalk
area prior to placing of the concrete. Where expansion joint material is
required by this and other sections of this article, it is understood to be
a premolded expansion joint 1/4 inch in thickness and is to extend the
entire length of the concrete.
C. Curb returns and inlets. Where a curved curb joins a tangent curb and
where an inlet joins other curb, two reinforcing bars 1/2 inch in
diameter and 24 inches in length shall be placed in the center of the
concrete curb and three inches and nine inches below the top,
§ 83-9 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 83-10
83:237
§ 83-11. Permit required; fee. [Amended 8-7-1989 by Ord. No. 9-89]
Before any curb or sidewalk shall be constructed or reconstructed, the
owner shall apply to the Code Official for a permit. Permits shall not be
required for repairs only. The fee for such permit shall be $10, to be paid to
the borough at the time of application.
§ 83-12. Variances.
A variance from the provisions of this article may be granted, in the
discretion of Borough Council, in those cases where, because of the grade,
elevation or location of streets, adjoining land or other improvements,
unnecessary and substantial expense or inconvenience to the public or to
owners or tenants will result from a strict and literal application of the
terms of this article.
§ 83-13. Violations and penalties.
Any persons, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
article, upon summary conviction before any District Justice having
jurisdiction, shall be subject to a fine or penalty for the use of the borough
of not less than $50 and not more than $300 and costs, as in other cases
of summary conviction. The failure to obtain a permit before commencing
construction or reconstruction and the violation of each regulation set
forth above shall be construed as a separate offense, subjecting the person
responsible to the fine and penalty herein provided.
respectively, in such a manner as to extend equal distances on each side
of the joint.
D. Fixing elevations and locations by Borough Engineer. The initial fixing
of elevation and location of curbing shall be by the Borough Engineer
without expense to the owner; but upon repair or reconstruction
whenever fixing of elevation or location may be required, the same shall
be fixed by the Borough Engineer at the property owner's expense.
§ 83-10 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 83-13
83:238
ARTICLE III
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 11-3-1975 by Ord. No. 8-75]
§ 83-14. Removal by abutting owners. [Amended 1-15-1979 by Ord.
No. 2-79; 5-4-1981 by Ord. No. 3-81; 8-7-1989 by Ord. No. 9-89]
§ 83-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-7-1989 by Ord. No.
9-89]
Any person, firm or corporation owning or occupying a lot or lots who shall
neglect to remove such snow, hail, sleet or ice from the pavements adjoining
his, her or their lot or lots as set forth in § 83-14 hereof within the time
limitation therein set forth shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a
fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a term
not to exceed 30 days, or both, at the discretion of the Court.
A. The owner of every property fronting upon or alongside of any of the
streets or alleys in the borough is hereby required to remove or cause to
be removed from all of the sidewalks in front of or alongside of such
property sufficient snow, ice, hail and sleet thereon fallen or formed to
provide a path clear of and free from such snow, ice, hail or sleet for a
width of three feet, within 24 hours after the same shall have ceased to
fall or to form.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, shovel, cast or otherwise
move, place, pile, deposit or dump snow or ice removed from sidewalks,
driveways or other areas into the streets or public highways or for any
person, when the cartway of the street or highway shall be cleared or
partially cleared, to throw or place any snow or any other accumulation
in the cleared cartway or passageway area. [Amended 12-2-1996 by
Ord. No. 9-96]
§ 83-14 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 83-15
83:239

ARTICLE IV
Street Openings and Excavations
[Adopted 9-5-1995 by Ord. No. 4-95]
§ 83-16. Definitions; word usage.
§ 83-17. Permit required to make opening or excavation.
It shall be unlawful for any person to open or to make any excavation of
any kind in any of the streets in the borough without first securing a permit
therefor, as hereinafter provided.
§ 83-18. Application for permit.
Any person who shall desire to make any opening or excavation in any of the
streets in the borough shall make application to the Borough Secretary or
in the absence thereof to such other person as designated by the Borough
Council, pursuant to a resolution in writing for that purpose. Such
application shall be made upon forms to be furnished by the borough and
shall set forth the name of the applicant, the exact location of the proposed
opening or excavation and the approximate size and depth thereof and shall
contain an agreement on the part of the applicant that the work shall be
done in full compliance with the ordinances of the borough and the laws
of the commonwealth in relation thereto and that the applicant shall well
and truly save, defend and keep harmless the borough from and indemnify
it against any and all actions, suits, demands, payments, costs and charges
for or by reason of the proposed opening or excavation and all damages
to persons or property resulting in any manner therefrom or occurring in
the prosecution of the work connected therewith or from any other matter,
cause or thing relating thereto.
A. The following words, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the
context clearly indicates otherwise:
EXCAVATION — Any activity within the right-of-way of any street, alley
or cartway which involves cutting, breaking or disturbing the surface
thereof. In this article, the term "opening" shall have essentially the
same meaning as excavation.
STREET — Any public street, avenue, road, square, alley, highway
or other public place located in the Borough of East Greenville and
established for the use of vehicles, but shall not include state highways.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, firm, association,
corporation or municipal authority.
BOROUGH — The Borough of East Greenville, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
§ 83-16 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 83-19
83:241
§ 83-19. Permit fee.
Before any permit shall be issued to open or excavate any street in the
borough, the applicant shall pay a permit fee in the amount fixed according
to a schedule established pursuant to a resolution.
§ 83-20. Issuance of permits restricted.
Permits shall be issued only to persons furnishing public utility services or
the owner or owners of the real property adjoining the location where such
opening or excavation is to be made or within reasonable proximity thereto.
§ 83-21. Information contained on permit.
Any permit issued hereunder shall specify the exact location where the
opening or excavation is to be made, the approximate permitted size and
depth thereof and the time within which the work for which the permit is
granted to be completed.
§ 83-22. Permit approval/disapproval.
A permit may be issued to the applicant after all the requirements therefor
have been satisfied. If the application is disapproved, written notice of
disapproval together with reasons therefor shall be given to the applicant.
§ 83-23. Responsibility to contact utilities.
The work authorized by the permit is subject to all the provisions of the Act
of December 10, 1974, P.L. 852, No. 287, Section 1 et seq., as amended or
supplemented from time to time.46 It shall be the permittee's responsibility
to contact the utilities that have recorded their facilities in compliance with
said Act. A partial list of utilities providing services in the borough and their
office addresses may be obtained from the County Recorder of Deeds.
§ 83-24. Refilling and restoration of surface; responsibility for
defects.
Any person who shall open or excavate any street in the borough shall
thoroughly and completely refill the opening or excavation in such a manner
as to prevent any settling thereafter and shall restore the surface to the
same condition as it was before the opening or excavation and such
restoration shall be in accordance with the specifications of the borough for
the restoration of faces of streets in the borough. As restored, the surface
shall conform to the proper grade and be of the same surface covering as
the part of the thoroughfare immediately adjoining the opening. If within
two years after the restoration of the surface, as herein provided, defects
shall appear therein resulting from defective backfilling by the applicant,
the applicant shall reimburse the borough for the cost of all necessary
repairs to the permanent paving.
46.Editor's Note: See 73 P.S. § 176 et seq.
§ 83-19 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 83-25
83:242
§ 83-25. Responsibility of permit holder; right of borough; charges.
All other work in connection with openings in any street, including
excavation, protection, refilling and temporary paving, shall be done by
or for the person to whom the permit has been issued at his or her or
its expense, and all such work shall be subject to the provisions of this
article and to the supervision and approval of the Road Master or, in the
absence thereof, to such other person as designated by Borough Council,
provided that the Road Master may, if he deems it necessary to the proper
performance of the work, require that cutting of the surface of streets and
the backfilling of all excavations therein shall be actual cost of the work
performed by the borough.
§ 83-26. Requirements for work; correction of unsatisfactory work;
completion of incomplete work.
A. No opening or excavation in any street shall extend from the curbline
into the highway a distance greater than one foot beyond the center line
of the street before being refilled and the surface of the highway
restored to a condition safe and convenient for travel.
B. No more than 500 feet longitudinally shall be opened in any street at
any one time.
C. The work of excavation shall be so conducted as not to interfere with
the water mains, sewers or their connections with the houses or any
other subsurfaces, lines or constructions, until permission of the proper
authorities in connection with such subsurface lines or constructions
shall have been obtained.
D. No tunneling shall be allowed without the express approval of the Road
Master or, in the absence thereof, such other person as designated by
the Borough Council and permission therefor endorsed upon the
permit.
E. All openings or excavations shall be backfilled promptly with modified
2A stones and thoroughly compacted in layers, each of which layers
shall not exceed eight inches in depth. Backfilling shall be placed to
within 10 inches of the surface.
F. A temporary paving of coldpatch premix, thoroughly bound and
compacted, shall be installed flush with the surface of the adjoining
paving and maintained for a period of 90 days.
G. During the making of any excavation in the street, every necessary and
reasonable precaution shall be taken by the applicant and the parties
making the same to keep the street in a safe and passable condition
both day and night by guards, barriers, lanterns and other devices, and
all excavating permits granted hereunder are granted under and
subject to the express condition that the person to whom the same is
issued shall indemnify, save and keep harmless the borough from any
loss in damages or otherwise whatsoever which may or shall be
§ 83-25 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 83-26
83:243
occasioned at any time by the excavation or by any leak, explosion
or other injury from any pipe, apparatus, conduit or any other matter
placed in the excavation.
H. The applicant shall notify the Road Master or, in the absence thereof,
such other person as designated by the Borough Council when the
opening or excavation is ready for backfill before any backfilling is
done, when backfilling work is completed, when the temporary paving
has been installed and when the street has been permanently restored
so that inspections may be made.
I. In the event that any work performed by or for a permit holder shall, in
the opinion of the Road Master or, in the absence thereof, such other
person as designated by Borough Council, be unsatisfactory and the
same shall not be corrected in accordance with his instructions within
the time fixed by him or in the event that the work for which the permit
was granted is not completed within the time fixed by the Road Master
or, in the absence thereof, such other person as designated by the
Borough Council, the borough may proceed to correct such
unsatisfactory work cost thereof, plus 20% to the applicant.
J. Monuments of concrete, iron or other lasting material set for the
purpose of locating or preserving the lines of any street of property,
subdivision or a precise survey reference point or a permanent survey
bench mark within the borough shall not be removed or disturbed or
caused to be removed or disturbed unless permission to do so is first
obtained in writing from the Road Master or, in the absence thereof,
such other person as designated by the Borough Council. Permission
shall be granted only upon condition that the applicant shall pay all
expenses incident to the proper replacement of the monument.
K. When the work performed by the applicant interferes with the
established drainage system of any street, provision shall be made by
the applicant to provide proper drainage to the satisfaction of the Road
Master or, in the absence thereof, to such other person as designated by
the Borough Council.
L. When any earth, gravel or other excavated material is caused to roll,
flow or wash upon any street, the applicant shall cause the same to be
removed from the street within 24 hours after deposit. In the event that
the earth, gravel or other excavated material so deposited is not
removed, the borough shall cause such removal and the cost incurred
shall be paid by the applicant.
M. Access to private driveways shall be provided except during working
hours when construction operations prohibit provision of such access.
Free access must be provided at all times to fire hydrants.
§ 83-26 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 83-27
83:244
§ 83-27. Emergency openings.
In the case of any leak, explosion or other accident in any subsurface pipe,
line, construction or apparatus, it shall be lawful for the person owning
or responsible for such pipe, line, construction or apparatus to commence
an excavation to remedy such condition before securing a permit, provided
that application for a permit shall be made immediately and not later than
the next business day thereafter and that such person complies with all
other provisions of this article. If any such emergency condition shall not be
immediately attended to by the owner or person responsible for such pipe,
line, construction or apparatus, the Road Master or, in the absence thereof,
such other person as designated by the Borough Council, after such notice
as he shall deem necessary under the circumstance of the particular case,
shall proceed to cause to be done the work necessary and required by such
emergency and charge the same on the basis of cost plus 20% to such owner
or person.
§ 83-28. Restrictions regarding trees and shrubbery.
The permission herein granted does not confer upon the permittee or its
contractors the right to cut, remove or destroy trees or shrubbery within the
legal right-of-way except under specifications, regulations and conditions as
the borough may prescribe.
§ 83-29. Work necessitating opening or excavation to be done prior
to street improvement and not until five years thereafter; exception.
The Road Master or, in the absence thereof, such other person as
designated by the Borough Council shall give timely notice to all persons
owning property abutting on any street with the borough about to be paved
or improved and to all public utility companies operating in the borough,
and all such persons and utility companies shall make all water, gas or
sewer connections as well as any repairs thereto which would necessitate
excavation of the street within 30 days from the giving of such notice,
unless such time is extended in writing for cause shown by the Road
Master or, in the absence thereof, such other person as designated by the
Borough Council. New paving shall not be opened or excavated for a period
of five years after the completion thereof, except in case of emergency,
and the necessity for the opening or excavating of such paving is to be
determined by the Road Master or, in the absence thereof, such other
person as designated by the Borough Council. If it is sought to excavate
upon or open a sewer within five years after the completion of the paving,
the applicant shall make written application to the Borough Secretary and
a permit for such opening shall be issued only after express approval of the
Borough Council.
§ 83-30. Conditions for laying and extending utility lines.
No new water, sewer, steam or gas main or electric, telephone or other
utility line shall hereafter be laid or constructed and no such existing main
§ 83-27 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 83-30
83:245
or line shall be extended in any of the streets of the borough until the plan
therefor shall have been first filed with the Road Master or, in the absence
thereof, such other person as designated by the Borough Council and such
plan and the exact location of such main or line approved by him. The Road
Master or, in the absence thereof, such other person as designated by the
Borough Council shall not approve the location of any such main or line at
a depth of less than 30 inches from the surface of the street unless he shall
be convinced that locating the same at a depth of more than 30 inches from
the surface is impossible or impractical.
§ 83-31. Payment for work done by borough.
Payment for all work done by the borough under the provision of this article
shall be made by the person made liable for such work by the terms of this
article. The borough shall send a bill for any such work to the person liable
to pay for such work by certified mail to the last known mailing address of
such person. The person liable for payment of such bill shall make payment
to the borough within 30 days of that person's receipt of the bill. In the
event that the person fails to make full payment of the bill within 30 days,
the borough may proceed to collect the amount due in the manner provided
by the terms of this article or other applicable law.
§ 83-32. Fee exemption.
The Upper Montgomery Joint Authority shall be exempt from permit fees
only; however, it shall be subject to all administrative costs.
§ 83-33. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any provision of
this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $600 and, in default of payment, to imprisonment for a term not
to exceed 90 days. Every day that a violation of this article continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 83-34. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to laying sidewalks or curbs.
§ 83-30 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 83-34
83:246
Chapter 85
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Upper Montgomery Joint Authority — See Ch.
20.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 12.
Building construction — See Ch. 35.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 83.
Zoning — See Ch. 95.
§ 83-34 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 83-34
85:247

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 85-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of East
Greenville Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 1992, as
amended."
§ 85-2. Conformity with state law.
This chapter has been enacted in conformance with the provisions of Act
247 of 1968, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.47
§ 85-3. Content of chapter.
This chapter contains regulations which include, but are not limited to, the
following:
§ 85-4. Purposes.
The following are the purposes of this chapter:
A. Provisions for the submittal and processing of plats for subdivisions and
land developments and specifications for such plats, including
provisions for tentative sketch, preliminary and final plan processing
and approvals and for processing of final approval by stages or sections
of development.
B. Provisions governing the standard by which streets shall be graded and
improved and walkways, curbs, gutters, streetlights, fire hydrants,
water, sewage and storm drainage facilities and other improvements
shall be installed as conditions precedent to formal approval of plats.
A. To ensure that development within the borough will be orderly,
efficient, integrated and harmonious in order to protect, promote and
create conditions favorable to the health, safety and general welfare of
the citizens by assuring sites suitable for building purposes and human
habitation.
B. To ensure that the layout and arrangement of subdivisions or land
developments shall conform to the Borough of East Greenville
Comprehensive Plan and to any regulations, maps, studies and reports
adopted in furtherance thereof.
C. To ensure that streets in and bordering a subdivision or land
development shall be coordinated and be of such design and in such
locations as deemed necessary to accommodate prospective traffic and
parking and to facilitate fire protection.
47.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 85-1 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 85-4
85:249
§ 85-5. Construal of provisions.
The provisions of this chapter shall be the minimum requirements to meet
the above-stated purposes. Where the provisions of this chapter impose
greater restrictions than those of any other statute, ordinance or
regulations, then the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. Where the
provisions of any other statute, ordinance or regulations impose greater
restrictions than those of this chapter, the provisions of such statute,
ordinance or regulations shall take precedence.
§ 85-6. Subdivision and land development control.
D. To require adequate, appropriately located easements or rights-of-way
for utilities and storm drainage facilities.
E. To ensure that any lands offered for dedication or otherwise reserved
for use as public or common grounds shall be of suitable size,
configuration and topographical character for their designated uses.
F. To ensure conformance of subdivision and land development proposals
with the availability of municipal services and public facilities and the
coordination of intermunicipal programs.
G. To preserve lands subject to inundation or flooding from subdivision or
land development which would endanger life or property or further
aggravate or increase the existing flooding or inundation conditions.
H. To encourage and promote flexibility, economy and ingenuity in the
layout and design of subdivisions and land developments, including
provisions authorizing the borough to modify the requirements of this
chapter in accordance with concepts and practices consistent with the
modern and evolving generally accepted principles of site planning and
land development.
I. To provide equitable handling of all subdivision and land development
proposals by providing uniform procedures and standards.
J. To encourage subdivision and land development in accordance with
principles and practices which conserve energy, both during and after
construction, and which encourage the use of alternative energy
sources by the layout of the proposal and the siting of buildings.
A. Subdivision of a lot or construction, opening or dedication of a street.
No subdivision or land development of any lot, tract or parcel of land
shall be made and no street, alley, sanitary sewer, storm drain, water
main, gas, oil or electric line or other improvements in connection
therewith shall be laid out, constructed or dedicated for public use or
travel or for the common use of occupants of a building abutting
thereon, except in strict accordance with this chapter.
B. Sale of lots, issuance of building permits or erection of buildings. No lot
in a subdivision or land development may be sold and no permit to
§ 85-4 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 85-6
85:250
erect, alter or repair any building upon land in a subdivision or land
development will be issued, unless and until a subdivision and/or land
development plan has been approved and, where required, recorded
and until the required improvements in connection therewith have
either been constructed or guaranteed for construction in the form of a
bond, escrow or other means approved by the Borough Council under
the advice of the Borough Engineer and Solicitor, in accordance with
the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
C. Condominiums. No provision of this chapter shall be construed to
prohibit condominium ownership as permitted by the applicable
enabling legislation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 85-6 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 85-6
85:251

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 85-7. Word usage.
For purposes of this chapter, certain words shall be interpreted as follows:
§ 85-8. Definitions.48
Words and terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings given in this
article. Unless expressly stated otherwise, any pertinent word or term not
a part of this listing but vital to the interpretation of this chapter shall be
construed to have its legal definition or, in absence of a legal definition, its
meaning as commonly accepted by practitioners, including civil engineers,
surveyors, architects, landscape architects and planners.
A. Words used in the present tense include the future.
B. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the
singular.
C. The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "designed for," "intended
for," "maintained for" and "occupied for."
D. The word "person" includes an individual, corporation, partnership,
incorporated association and/or any other similar entity.
E. The words "include" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specified examples but are intended to extend the meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
F. The word "building" shall always be construed as if followed by the
words "or part thereof."
G. The word "may" is permissive, and the words "shall" and "will" are
always mandatory.
A. Floodplain-related terms. As used in this chapter, the following terms
shall have the meanings indicated:
BASE FLOOD — The flood which has been selected to serve as the basis
upon which the floodplain management provisions of this and other
ordinances have been prepared. For the purposes of this chapter, it
shall be the one-hundred-year-flood as referenced in the current Flood
Insurance Study and delineated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of the
Federal Insurance Administration.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year-flood elevation as
referenced in the Flood Insurance Study. Within the approximated
floodplain alluvial soils floodplain or other similarly documented areas,
the one-hundred-year-flood elevation shall be established as a point
48.Editor's Note: See also § 85-64, Mobile home definitions.
§ 85-7 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 85-8
85:253
on the boundary of the floodplain nearest to the construction site in
question.
FEMA AND FIA — The Federal Emergency Management Agency and
the Federal Insurance Administration, respectively, who have
jurisdiction over the National Flood Insurance Program and its related
studies and regulations. FEMA is the parent agency of the FIA.
FLOOD — A temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP — The official FIA map which shows
special hazard zones and risk areas for insurance rating purposes. For
the purposes of this chapter, it also delineates floodplain areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — The examination and determination of
flood hazards by the FIA. The flood elevations contained in this study
are used for floodplain management purposes as related to this chapter
and other ordinances.
FLOODPLAIN — A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a stream,
river or watercourse, which is subject to partial or complete inundation
during a one-hundred-year flood, or any area subject to the unusual and
rapid accumulation of surface water from any source; also referred to
as "flood-prone area."
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT — The application of a program or
activities which may consist of both corrective and preventive measures
for reducing flood damages.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. Such measures
are set forth in Flood Proofing Regulations, published by the Office
of the Chief Engineers, United States Army, publication number EP
1165 2 314 (June 1972, and as subsequently amended). Floodproofing
measures for all new construction and substantial improvements of
structures shall satisfy the requirements of the Completely Dry Spaces
(W1) and Essentially Dry Spaces (W2) classes referenced in these
regulations. In said publication where reference is made to below (or
above) the BFD (base flood datum), it shall be interpreted as meaning
below (or above) the base flood elevation.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that has one chance in 100 or
a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any one year. For
the purposes of this chapter, the one-hundred-year flood shall be the
one-hundred-year flood (base flood) as defined by the Federal Insurance
Administration in the Flood Insurance Study.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year-flood
elevation plus a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50%
§ 85-8 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 85-8
85:254
of the market value of the structure either before the improvement or
repair is started or, if the structure has been damaged and is being
restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this
definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the
building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either
any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are
solely necessary to assure safe living conditions or any alteration of
a structure listed on a National Register of Historic Places or a State
Inventory of Historic Places.
ACCEPTED ENGINEERING PRACTICE — That which conforms to
accepted principles, tests or standards of nationally recognized
technical, scientific and/or engineering authorities.
ALLEY — A public or privately owned right-of-way, on which no new
dwellings, stores or other principal buildings are intended to front,
serving as the secondary means of access to two or more properties.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who
has filed an application for development, including his heirs, successors
and assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary, tentative or final, required to be filed and approved prior
to start of construction or development, including but not limited to an
application for a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plan
or for the approval of development plan.
BASE FLOOD — See definition under "floodplain."
BLOCK — An area bounded by streets or by streets and natural or manmade
features.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The elected governing body of the Borough of
East Greenville; also referred to as "Council."
BUFFER — An area designed to separate the uses of land which abut
it and which functions to ease the transition between them. Unless
otherwise specified, buffers may be included as part of the required
setbacks and yard areas. Buffers may be divided into two or more types
as explained in the design standards of this chapter.49
BUILDER — See "applicant."
BUILDING — Any structure, whether built conventionally or in a
manner generally referred to as "mobile," "modular" or
"manufactured," and having a roof and being enclosed by walls,
Terms defined. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
(1)
49.Editor's Note: See Article IV, Design Standards.
§ 85-8 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 85-8
85:255
permanently located on the land, the ordinary use of which requires
people to enter the structure.
BUILDING ENVELOPE — The area of a lot within which a principal
building may be erected. This area is defined by the limits of the
minimum front, side and rear yard areas and encompasses the area of
the lot not found in the yard areas and rights-of-way.
CARTWAY — The portion of a street, alley or driveway intended for
vehicular use.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of
water or a combination of land and water within a development site
and designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a
development, not including streets, off-street parking areas and areas
set aside for public facilities; also referred to as "open space"; may be
public or private.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The current, officially adopted
Comprehensive Plan for the Borough of East Greenville, and all
amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION — The construction, reconstruction, renovation,
repair, extension, expansion, alteration or relocation of a building or
structure, including the placement of mobile homes.
CURBLINE — The outermost edge of a cartway, equivalent to the edge
of paving where curbs are not utilized.
CUT — An excavation; the difference between a point on the original
ground and a designated point of lower elevation on the final grade;
also, the material removed in an excavation.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with
the permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
the placement of mobile homes, streets and other paving, utilities,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation or drilling operations.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development, including a
planned residential development, a plan of subdivision, all covenants
relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures,
intensity of use or density of development, streets, parking facilities,
ways, common open space and public facilities. The phrase "provisions
of the development plan" shall mean the written and graphic materials
referred to in this definition.
DRAINAGE — The natural or man-made features of land that are
specifically designed to store or carry surface water runoff.
DRIVEWAY — A private way providing for vehicular and pedestrian
access between a public street and a parking area within a lot or
property.
§ 85-8 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 85-8
85:256
EASEMENT — A right-of-way or other right granted by a property
owner for the use of a designated part of his/her property for public,
quasi-public or private purposes, including utilities, drainageways and
access.
ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and competent in the fields
encompassed by these regulations.
EXCAVATION — Any act by which natural materials are dug into, cut,
quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated or bulldozed, as
well as the conditions resulting therefrom.
FILL — Any act by which natural materials are placed, pushed, dumped,
pulled, transported or moved to a new location above the natural
surface of the ground or on top of the stripped surface, as well as the
conditions resulting therefrom.
FRONTAGE — The length of the lot line abutting a street right-of-way.
GRADE — The slope of a street, parcel of land, utility lines,
drainageways, etc., specified in percent (%) and shown on plans as
required herein.
GROUND COVER — Low-growing plant materials planted in a manner
to provide continuous plant cover of the ground surface; lawn, ivy and
other low plant materials are included. Nonplant ground cover may also
include bark or wood chips, gravel and stone, provided that they are
maintained as a continuous impervious cover.
HEIGHT OF BUILDING — The vertical distance measured from the
average elevation of the existing grade at the location of the building to
the highest point of the roof as further defined below:
IMPROVEMENTS — The physical additions, installations and changes
required to render land suitable for the use proposed, including but not
limited to streets, curbs, sidewalks, utilities and drainage facilities.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
(1) Flat: highest point measurable.
(2) Mansard: deckline.
(3) Gable, hip, gambrel: mean height between the eaves and ridge.
(4) For a building with two or more roof heights, to the higher roof.
Chimneys, spires, towers, mechanical penthouses, tanks and
similar projections not intended for human occupancy shall be
excluded.
(5)
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
(1)
§ 85-8 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 85-8
85:257
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land,
including the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or
not such option or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is
authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or
other person having proprietary interest in land.
LOT —
LOT AREA — The horizontal land area of a lot, further defined as
follows:
LOT, REAR — A lot which conforms in all respects to the dimensional
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located, except that
the only road frontage and access is limited to an access strip. This
definition does not include the commonly used wedge-shaped lots
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the
number of occupants or tenants; or
(a)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of or for the purpose of
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features.
(b)
(2) A subdivision of land.
Development in accordance with Section 503 (1.1) of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.50
(3)
A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built
upon as a unit.
(1)
A contiguous tract, parcel or unit of land held by a landowner and/
or intended for use, development, lease or transfer of ownership
and for which a deed description is recorded or is intended to be
recorded at the office of the Recorder of Deeds for Montgomery
County.
(2)
GROSS LOT AREA — The total horizontal land area lying within the
lot or tract boundaries.
(1)
NET LOT AREA — Gross lot area minus:
The area lying between the street center line and the ultimate
right-of-way or equivalent right-of-way line.
(a)
(b) The land area of the access strip to rear, flag or interior lots.
(2)
50.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
§ 85-8 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 85-8
85:258
located on a cul-de-sac turnaround; also known as a "flag" or "interior"
lot.
OPEN SPACE — See "common open space."
PLAN — A graphic representation of a proposal for subdivision and/or
land development, including necessary written notes.
PLANNING COMMISSION, BOROUGH — The planning agency created
by the Borough Council in accordance with Article II, Planning
Agencies, of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.51
RESERVE STRIP — A parcel of land whose primary function is to
separate a street from adjacent properties while not being used or
capable of being used as a building lot, open space or recreation area
or legitimate environmental protection purposes.
REVERSE FRONTAGE LOTTING — Lotting which extends between two
streets of differing classifications, with vehicular access provided from
the lesser street, in order to promote traffic flow and safety on the
greater street.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land over which are provided rights for
various purposes including vehicular access and travel, storm drainage
and utilities; also see "street rights-of-way."
SIGHT DISTANCE — The distance of unobstructed view along the
center line of a street from the driver's eye-height of 3.5 feet to the
furthest visible point six inches above the street surface.
SOIL SURVEY — The Montgomery County Soil Survey of 1967,
prepared by the Soil Conservation Service of the United States
Department of Agriculture.
STREET OR ROAD — A public or private right-of-way serving primarily
as a means of vehicular and pedestrian travel, furnishing access to
abutting properties, and which may also be used for utilities, shade
trees and stormwater control; includes street, avenue, boulevard, road,
highway, freeway, parkway, lane, alley, viaduct and any other ways used
or intended to be used by vehicular traffic or pedestrians.
STREET LINE — The dividing line between a lot and a street, identical
to the ultimate right-of-way line.
STREET RIGHTS-OF-WAY — Rights-of-way for street purposes are
defined as follows:
LEGAL RIGHT-OF-WAY — The street right-of-way legally in the
public domain at the time a development plan is submitted.
(1)
ULTIMATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The street right-of-way projected as
necessary for adequate handling of anticipated maximum traffic
volumes. The ultimate right-of-way is the legal right-of-way where
it has been offered for dedication and accepted by the borough.
(2)
51.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10201 et seq.
§ 85-8 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 85-8
85:259
STRUCTURE —
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel
of the land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or
other divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the
purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court
for distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building
or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by lease
of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres,
not involving any new street or easement of access or any residential
dwelling, shall be exempted.
SURVEYOR — A land surveyor licensed as such in the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania and competent in the skills needed to conduct the
surveys, lay out the subdivision plans and install all markers required
by the terms of this chapter.
ULTIMATE RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE — The dividing line between a lot and
the outside limit of a street ultimate right-of-way.
VISUAL SCREEN — A barrier whose purpose is to obscure a view,
generally comprised of plant materials suitable for the purpose.
WATERCOURSE — A place intended or used for the directed surface
flow of water, including permanent and intermittent streams, brooks,
creeks, channels, ditches, swales and rivers.
YARD — An open, generally unoccupied area of a lot which must remain
free of buildings but which may contain lawn or planted areas, parking
and/or driveways, walks, walls, fences and similar appurtenances.
EQUIVALENT RIGHT-OF-WAY — A street right-of-way required to
be reserved where private streets are permitted. The width shall be
determined by the street's function, in accordance with the street
classifications contained in this chapter.
(3)
Any man-made objective having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
(1)
Any form or arrangement of building material involving the
necessity of providing proper support, bracing, tieing, anchoring
or other protection against the forces of the elements; also see
"building" definition.
(2)
§ 85-8 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 85-8
85:260
ARTICLE III
Plan Submission Requirements; Processing Procedures
§ 85-9. Applicability.
The standards, requirements and procedures contained in this article shall
govern the submission and processing of all applications for subdivisions
and/or land developments in the borough, as defined in this chapter, which
applications shall be subject to review by the Borough Council and Borough
Planning Commission, as defined in Article II herein.
§ 85-10. Types of plans.
All applications for subdivision and/or land development shall be classified
as tentative sketch plans, preliminary plans, final plans or minor plans, as
further regulated herein.
§ 85-11. Tentative sketch plan submission requirements.
A. Tentative sketch plans.
(1) Optional. Applicants are strongly encouraged to submit tentative
sketch plans for any subdivision or land development proposal, in
accordance with the requirements of § 85-11, Tentative sketch plan
submission requirements, and § 85-12, Tentative sketch plan
submission and review procedure.
(2) Required. Applicants are required to submit tentative sketch plans
as a part of the preliminary plan submission where only a portion of
a property is proposed as a currently active proposal. The tentative
sketch plan shall show how the immediate proposal can fit logically
into an overall plan for the entire site.
B. Preliminary plans. A preliminary plan is required to be submitted for all
proposals for subdivision and/or land development, except for those
which qualify as minor plans, in accordance with the requirements of
§ 85-13, Preliminary plan submission requirements, and § 85-14,
Preliminary plan submission and review procedure.
C. Final plans. A final plan is required to be submitted for all proposals for
subdivision and/or land development, except for those which qualify as
minor plans, in accordance with the requirements of § 85-15, Final plan
submission requirements, and § 85-16, Final plan submission and
review procedure.
D. Minor plans. Applications which qualify as minor plans may be
submitted for concurrent preliminary and final plan processing and
approval, in accordance with the standards and requirements of
§ 85-18, Minor plan submission requirements and review procedure.
A. Purposes. The purposes served by a tentative sketch plan are as
follows:
§ 85-9 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 85-11
85:261
(1) To inform the borough of an applicant's intent to subdivide and/or
develop a property and graphically show the concepts and extent of
the proposal.
(2) For the borough to provide advice and guidance to an applicant so
that:
(a) Major issues can be resolved prior to preparation of
preliminary plans.
(b) The preliminary plan approval process may then be able to
proceed faster and more efficiently.
(3) To show how a tract of land may be further subdivided or developed
in cases where only a portion of a property is currently under an
active proposal.
(a) This plan shall show a logical and efficient pattern of roads,
lots and/or buildings, as appropriate for the type of plan
proposed, and shall not be acceptable if it proposes lotting or
development which is obviously impractical or questionable for
reasons of floodplains, steep slopes, relationships to other
properties or other site planning constraints.
(b) This plan shall be shown on the preliminary plan for the subject
site in the form of a reduced-scale inset drawing, although
larger scale drawings are encouraged for review and
discussion purposes.
(c) This plan shall have no legal standing with regard to future
plan approvals but shall be considered as a guide for future
development.
B. It is to the applicant's advantage to show as much of the requested
information as possible. Although the Borough Planning Commission
will discuss any plan presented, a lack of significant information may
result in little useful guidance to the applicant.
C. Tentative sketch plan information. A tentative sketch plan should be
drawn legibly and to scale, but it need not be a precisely surveyed or
engineered plan, and it should show the following information:
(1) The entire tract boundary and total acreage.
(2) Existing and proposed streets, lots and buildings.
(3) Approximate building envelopes.
(4) Significant physical features such as floodplains, steep slopes,
woodlands and existing structures.
(5) Contour lines at five-foot to ten-foot intervals.
(6) Approximate locations for stormwater control basins, if necessary.
§ 85-11 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 85-11
85:262
§ 85-12. Tentative sketch plan submission and review procedure.
This review procedure is intended to facilitate a cooperative effort between
the borough and the applicant to resolve significant subdivision and/or land
development issues prior to the preparation of preliminary plans.
(7) Location plan showing the relationship of the subject tract to the
surrounding road network and major physical features.
(8) The North point and scale.
(9) The name and address of the owner.
(10) The name and address of the engineer, surveyor or architect, as
applicable.
(11) Any additional information which the applicant believes will help
explain the proposal.
A. The applicant shall make a request to the Borough Code Enforcement
Officer at least seven days prior to next regularly scheduled meeting to
be scheduled on the meeting agenda of the Borough Planning
Commission for an informal discussion of the tentative sketch plan.
B. The applicant or his representatives shall appear as scheduled at the
meeting to explain the plan and to discuss the issues identified by the
Planning Commission. The applicant should be prepared to discuss
significant issues including, but not limited to:
(1) The land use proposed (i.e., residential, commercial, industrial).
(2) The density or intensity of proposal.
(3) Access to the subject site:
(a) Intersection locations.
(b) Road realignments.
(4) Site plan design:
(a) Lotting.
(b) Roads.
(c) Buildings.
(d) Common areas.
C. The Borough Planning Commission may make suggestions and
recommendations to the applicant during the meeting at which the plan
is discussed. These need not be presented in writing to the applicant;
however, they should be summarized in the minutes of the Borough
Planning Commission for reference.
§ 85-11 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 85-12
85:263
§ 85-13. Preliminary plan submission requirements.
This section contains the requirements for preliminary plans for
subdivisions and/or land developments in terms of drafting standards, basic
information, existing features and proposed features and is written in a
checklist format.
(1) Recommendations regarding noncompliance with borough
ordinance requirements and/or planning policies must be
implemented by the applicant in the form of plan revisions.
(2) Recommendations and suggestions in the form of preferences or
alternatives should be seriously evaluated by the applicant prior to
further plan processing.
D. If a proposal is large or complex, the Borough Planning Commission
may defer completing its comments and recommendations until it has
consulted its technical advisers. However, the Planning Commission
will try to expedite this informal review process.
E. Applicants may present alternative tentative sketch plans at one
meeting or may present alternatives at subsequent meetings, provided
that appropriate agenda time has been scheduled in advance.
F. When the borough and applicant have resolved the major concepts
involved in the proposal, the applicant should proceed to preliminary
plan submission.
A. Checklist format. This section or copies of it may be used as a checklist
by the applicant and/or the municipality to ensure completeness of plan
submissions. The following standard responses should be marked for
each required item:
(1) "_" means the required item has been satisfactorily provided for
plan submission purposes. It does not signify compliance with any
other requirement of this chapter.
(2) "X" means the required item has been omitted or is incorrectly or
inadequately represented on the plan. These items must be added
to the plan in order to qualify the plan for submission.
(3) "NA" means the required item is not applicable to the subject plan
and need not be shown. This response is intended for features
which are not found on the subject site, not proposed as part of the
improvements or which specify more detail than is necessary for
review of the plan. The governing body shall have final authority to
determine whether or not the NA response is appropriate in any
particular case.
B. Drafting standards. Plans shall be professionally prepared in
compliance with the following:
§ 85-12 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 85-13
85:264
(1) The plan shall be drawn to a standard engineering scale not
exceeding 100 feet to the inch.
(2) Sheet size shall be 15 inches by 18 inches, 18 inches by 30 inches
or 24 inches by 36 inches, appropriately related to the scale of the
drawing.
(3) All sheets shall be the same size and be numbered relative to the
total number of sheets (i.e., "1 of 5," etc.).
(4) Reduced scale.
(a) Where two or more sheets are needed to show the entire tract,
a reduced scale key plan shall be provided to show how the
sheets fit together.
(b) A reduced scale plan of the entire site at a scale greater than
100 feet to the inch may be required in cases where it would
facilitate the review and approval process. Applicants are
encouraged to submit such plans in cases where they are not
required.
(5) Property lines shall be established in conformance with the Act of
May 23, 1945 (P.L. 913, No. 367), known as the "Professional
Engineers Registration Law,"52 and accepted surveying and civil
engineering practices, including dimensions shown in feet and
decimals and bearings shown in degrees, minutes and seconds.
Property lines shall be drawn and labeled as follows:
(a) Tract boundary lines shall be the heaviest property lines.
(b) Proposed lot lines shall be the next heaviest.
(c) Possible future lots, if shown, shall be the lightest line weight
and may be shown as dashed lines.
C. Basic information. All preliminary plans shall show the following basic
information:
(1) The name of the subdivision or land development.
(2) The name of applicant.
(3) The name, address and professional seal of the individual or firm
which prepared the plan.
(4) The date of preparation of the plan and a descriptive list of
revisions to the plan and the revision dates.
(5) The North point and scale.
52.Editor's Note: See 63 P.S. § 148 et seq.
§ 85-13 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 85-13
85:265
(6) A location plan showing the relationship of the subject tract to the
surrounding road network and major physical features.
(7) The entire tract boundary with bearings and distances and total
tract acreage.
(8) A list of the basic dimensional and intensity requirements of the
applicable zoning district compared to the applicant's proposal.
(9) Zoning classification(s) of all lands abutting the proposal.
(10) The names of all current owners of immediately adjacent lands.
(11) A statement showing:
(a) The number of acres under proposal.
(b) The number of lots and/or dwelling units, or gross leasable
area.
(c) The linear feet of new streets.
(d) The linear feet of streets to be widened.
(12) The description of variances or special exceptions and the dates
they were granted, if any.
(13) The description of any deed restrictions or other covenants
affecting development of the tract.
(14) The requirements of any other local ordinance which may affect the
proposal.
(15) A legend sufficient to indicate clearly between existing and
proposed conditions.
D. Existing features. Within the tract proposed for subdivision and/or land
development and within 100 feet of the tract boundaries, the following
information shall be shown on the preliminary plan:
(1) Streets bordering or crossing the tract, including:
(a) Locations.
(b) Names.
(c) Rights-of-way:
[1] Legal.
[2] Ultimate.
(d) Cartway widths.
(e) Surface conditions.
§ 85-13 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 85-13
85:266
(2) Sanitary sewers, including:
(a) Pipe locations.
(b) Pipe sizes.
(c) Direction of flow.
(d) Gradient of flow.
(e) Manholes.
(f) Invert elevations.
(3) Storm sewers, including:
(a) Pipe locations.
(b) Pipe sizes.
(c) Direction of flow.
(d) Gradient of flow.
(e) Inlets, catch basins and manholes.
(f) Invert elevations.
(4) Other existing stormwater and/or erosion control facilities,
including:
(a) Basins.
(b) Swales.
(c) Diffusion devices.
(d) Velocity controls.
(e) Related technical data for those facilities.
(5) Water-related features, including:
(a) Lakes, ponds.
(b) Wetlands including swamps or marshes.
(c) Watercourses, springs.
(d) Flood-prone or floodplain areas (data from FEMA Studies and/
or supporting hydrologic and hydraulic data for one-hundredyear-
flood limits when provided independent of FEMA data,
and/or Montgomery County Soil Survey when applicable).
(6) Other natural features, including:
§ 85-13 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 85-13
85:267
(a) The location, size, species and condition of trees six inches in
diameter or greater, when standing alone or in small groups
where affected by proposed construction or use of the land.
(b) The outer limits of tree masses and a general description of
their types, sizes and conditions.
(c) The locations and limits of natural features which may affect
the locations of proposed streets or buildings, including:
[1] Rock outcroppings.
[2] Quarries.
[3] Ravines.
[4] Sink holes.
(7) Soil types, including:
(a) Mapped limits.
(b) Names.
(c) Significant limitations, such as a high water table or shallow
bedrock.
(8) Slope information, including:
(a) Contours at a vertical interval of two feet, accurately drawn
from photogrammetric or on-site survey data.
(b) Areas with slopes of 15% or greater, as shown in the
Montgomery County Soil Survey or determined from the
contours shown on the plan.
(9) Other man-made features, including:
(a) Location, size, character and configuration of existing
buildings, labeled "To Remain" or "To Be Removed," as
applicable.
(b) Location and description of existing buildings and other
structures less than 50 feet beyond the tract boundaries.
(c) Location, size and ownership of utilities, both above and below
ground, with a note added to describe additional setback or
development restrictions in their regard.
E. Proposed features. Within the tract proposed for subdivision and/or
land development, the following information shall be shown on the
preliminary plan:
(1) Subdivision and/or land development layout.
§ 85-13 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 85-13
85:268
(a) Proposed streets, alleys, driveways and parking areas,
including:
[1] Names or other identification.
[2] Right-of-way widths and lines.
[3] Cartway widths.
[4] Center-line courses, distances and curve data.
[5] Curb lines.
[6] Radii at intersections.
[7] Street location tie-ins by courses and distances.
[8] Capacity of parking areas.
(b) Layout and dimensions of all lots, including the net lot area.
(c) All building setback lines.
(d) All parking setback lines where applicable.
(e) Proposed sidewalk or other walkway locations.
(f) Proposed buildings in land developments, including:
[1] Locations.
[2] Configurations.
[3] Sizes (ground level floor area, total floor area and height).
[4] Total building coverage (square feet and percentage of
site).
[5] Locations and types of accessory structures.
(g) Common use areas, including:
[1] Open space areas:
[a] Locations.
[b] Configurations.
[c] Size.
[2] Recreation facilities:
[a] Locations.
[b] Types of facilities.
[3] Parking, driveway or road areas when privately owned for
common use.
§ 85-13 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 85-13
85:269
[4] Notes regarding offers of dedication or retention in private
ownership, as applicable.
(h) Areas for future uses, including:
[1] Road extensions.
[2] Stormwater management facilities.
[3] Additional subdivision or land development in tentative
sketch form, in accordance with the requirements of
§ 85-11, Tentative sketch plan submission requirements,
and in accordance with the intent of § 85-12, Tentative
sketch plan submission and review procedure.
[4] Explanatory notes for such future uses.
(i) Proposed landscaping, including:
[1] Street trees.
[2] Planting screens.
[3] Buffer areas.
[4] Other related landscape features such as mounding and
water features.
(2) Grading, drainage and utilities. The following information for the
facilities as proposed shall be shown on the preliminary plan:
(a) Proposed contours for the entire site, including road centerline
elevations, at the contour interval of the plan.
(b) Approximate limits of site disturbance, including a clear
delineation of existing vegetation:
[1] To be removed.
[2] To be preserved.
(c) Stormwater management and erosion control and
sedimentation facilities, including:
[1] Basins.
[2] Swales.
[3] Diffusion devices.
[4] Velocity controls.
[5] Pipe locations.
[6] Pipe sizes.
§ 85-13 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 85-13
85:270
[7] Direction of flow.
[8] Gradient of flow.
[9] Inlets, catch basins and manholes.
[10] Invert elevations.
[11] Related technical data for these facilities (may be
submitted in report form if a note on the plan references
the report).
(d) Sewage disposal facilities, including:
[1] Sanitary water line locations.
[2] Pipe sizes.
[3] Direction of flow.
[4] Gradient of flow.
[5] Manholes.
[6] Invert elevations.
[7] Pumping stations.
[8] Approved on-site disposal locations.
(e) Water supply facilities, including:
[1] Central water supply lines.
[2] Pipe sizes.
[3] Fire hydrant locations.
[4] Well locations when on lot.
(f) Finished floor elevations of proposed buildings.
(3) Cross sections, profiles, structural designs. The following shall be
provided:
(a) Cross section and center-line profile for each proposed or
widened cartway shown on the preliminary plan, including:
[1] Road center-line grades and vertical curvature.
[2] Profiles for sanitary sewers, water mains, storm drains,
including locations of manholes, inlets and catch basins.
(b) Preliminary design of any bridges, culverts or other structures
and appurtenances which may be required.
§ 85-13 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 85-14
85:271
§ 85-14. Preliminary plan submission and review procedure.
The procedure contained in this section shall regulate the submission and
review of preliminary plans for subdivision and land development.
A. Twelve copies of the preliminary plan shall be submitted to the Code
Enforcement Officer, in person, by the applicant or applicant's agent at
the Borough Office during normal borough business hours.
B. Plans must be accompanied by:
(1) The borough filing fee.
(2) The Montgomery County Planning Commission review fee.
(3) Completed borough application and administrative forms.
C. The plan submission date will be stamped on the plan, following a
cursory review of the plan, only if the plan shows basic compliance with
the requirements of this article.
D. The Borough Secretary or Code Enforcement Officer shall distribute
copies of the plan to the following for review and recommendations:
(1) Borough Planning Commission: five copies.
(2) Borough Council: one copy.
(3) Borough Engineer: one copy.
(4) Montgomery County Planning Commission, along with the required
review fee and request for review: one copy.
(5) Borough Solicitor: one copy.
(6) Borough Code Enforcement Officer: one copy.
(7) Other technical consultants as needed: two copies.
E. The application for approval of the preliminary plan shall be submitted
at least seven days prior to next regularly scheduled meeting of
Borough Planning Commission following the plan submission date.
F. Upon completion of its review of the preliminary plan, which should
include consideration of the timely recommendations of the Borough
Engineer, Montgomery County Planning Commission, and other
technical advisers, when requested, the Borough Planning Commission
shall communicate its recommendations to the Borough Council.
G. The Borough Council shall have a ninety-day time period to act on the
plan unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of the
time period.
§ 85-14 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 85-14
85:272
(1) The ninety-day time period shall be measured from the date of the
next regularly scheduled Borough Planning Commission meeting
following the plan submission date.
(2) If the next regularly scheduled Borough Planning Commission
meeting occurs more than 30 days following the plan submission
date, then the ninety-day time period shall be measured from the
30th day following the plan submission date.
(3) If an extension of the ninety-day time period is applied, it shall be
measured from the expiration of the original ninety-day period. A
time extension shall postpone the deadline and effects of the
ninety-day time period for the additional number of days agreed to
in writing.
H. The Borough Council shall consider the preliminary plan application at
one or more of its public meetings during the ninety-day time period
and/or extension thereof, if applicable, and shall render a decision on
the plan following receipt of the recommendations of the Borough
Planning Commission, Borough Engineer, Montgomery County
Planning Commission, and/or other technical advisers as requested.
(1) Provided that, in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code,53 the Borough Council shall not approve an
application until the Montgomery County Planning Commission
report of its recommendations is received or until the expiration of
30 days from the date the application was forwarded to the county.
(2) In accordance with the policies of the Montgomery County
Planning Commission, the date the application was forwarded to
the county shall be considered to be:
(a) The date noted on the borough's request for review; or
(b) Two days prior to the county's receipt of the request if no date
is noted on the request; except that
(c) In no instance will the date be earlier than five days prior to the
county's receipt of the request.
I. Procedure following Council's decision.
(1) When the Borough Council makes a decision on a preliminary plan,
one of the following procedures will be followed, depending on the
type of decision:
(a) Denial. If the Council denies approval of a preliminary plan in
terms as filed by the applicant, then the written notification to
the applicant shall specify the defects found in the application
and describe the requirements which have not been met and
shall cite the provisions of the statute or ordinance relied upon.
53.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 85-14 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 85-14
85:273
(b) Approval. If the Council approves a preliminary plan in terms
as filed by the applicant, then the Borough Secretary will so
certify thereon, and two copies of the approved plan will be
forwarded to the applicant. The applicant shall then submit
four paper copies of the approved plan for borough seal and
signature.
(c) Approval subject to conditions. If the Council approves a
preliminary plan subject to specific conditions, then those
conditions shall be accepted in writing by the applicant;
otherwise the plan shall be denied approval. Therefore, the
written notification to the applicant shall:
[1] Specify the conditions of approval and request the
applicant's written agreement to the conditions.
[2] State that the application will be denied if the applicant
does not agree to the conditions; and specify the defects
found in the application, describe the requirements which
have not been met and cite the provisions of the statute or
ordinance relied upon for denial of the plan.
[3] State that the plan approval shall be rescinded
automatically upon the applicant's failure to accept or
reject the conditions within 30 days following the decision
by the Borough Council to grant conditional approval.
(2) Following submission of written agreement to the conditions
specified by Council, the applicant shall submit two paper copies
and two Mylar or linen copies of the preliminary plan, which show
compliance with the conditions, by plan revision or notation, for
borough seal and signatures.
J. Effective period of approval. Approval will be effective indefinitely from
the date of preliminary plan approval. However, changes to ordinances
may affect plan approvals after five years from the date of preliminary
plan approval, except as follows:
(1) No subsequent change or amendment in the zoning, subdivision or
other governing ordinance or plan shall be applied to affect
adversely the right of the applicant to commence and to complete
any aspect of the approved development in accordance with the
terms of approval within that five-year period.
(2) In the case where preliminary and final plan approval are
concurrent, the five-year period shall be measured from the date of
that concurrent approval.
(3) In a case of a preliminary plan calling for the installation of
improvements beyond the five-year period, a schedule shall be filed
by the applicant with the preliminary plan delineating all proposed
§ 85-14 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 85-14
85:274
§ 85-15. Final plan submission requirements.
All final plans for subdivisions and/or land developments shall consist of two
basic parts, the improvements construction plan and the record plan, and
shall comply with the requirements of this section.
sections as well as deadlines within which applications for final
plan approval of each section are intended to be filed.
(a) Such schedule shall be updated annually by the applicant on or
before the anniversary of the preliminary plan approval, until
final plan approval has been granted to the final section.
(b) Any modification in the aforesaid schedule shall be subject to
approval of the Borough Council in its discretion.
(c) Each section in any residential subdivision or land
development, except for the last section, shall contain a
minimum of 25% of the total number of dwelling units as
shown on the preliminary plan, unless a lesser percentage is
approved by the Borough Council in its discretion.
(d) For any section or sections, beyond the initial section, in which
the required improvements have not been substantially
completed within the initial five-year period, the protections of
this Subsection J above shall also apply to each subsequent
section for an additional term of three years from the date of
final plan approval of each section.
A. Improvements construction plan.
(1) Drafting standards. The same standards shall be required for an
improvements construction plan as for a preliminary plan, except
that the horizontal scale of the plan and profile shall not exceed 50
feet to the inch and the vertical scale of the plan shall be two, four,
five or 10 feet to the inch, whichever is most appropriate.
(2) Information to be shown. The plan shall contain sufficient
information to provide working plans for the construction of the
proposed streets or any portion thereof, including all
appurtenances, sewers and utilities, as shown on the approved
preliminary plan from one existing or approved street to another or,
in the case of a cul-de-sac, to its turnaround. This information shall
include:
(a) Horizontal plan. The horizontal plan shall show details of the
horizontal layout as follows:
[1] Information shown on the approved preliminary plan,
including all items required by § 85-13, Proposed features.
[2] The beginning and end of proposed immediate
construction.
§ 85-14 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 85-15
85:275
[3] Stations corresponding to those shown on the profiles.
[4] The curb elevation at tangent points of horizontal curves,
at road or alley intersections and at the projected
intersections of the curb lines.
[5] The location and size of sanitary sewers and lateral
connections and water mains, with distances between
manholes, gas, electric and other utility pipes or conduits
and of storm drains, inlets and manholes.
[6] The location, type and size of curbs and all paving widths.
[7] The location and type of fire hydrants and streetlights.
(b) Profiles. The profiles shall show details as follows:
[1] Profiles and elevations of the ground along the center lines
of proposed streets.
[2] Profiles of sanitary sewers with a profile over the sewer of
the existing and finished ground surface showing manhole
locations beginning at the lowest manhole.
[3] Profiles of storm drains showing catch basins, inlet and
manhole locations, swales, ditches, etc.
[4] Profiles of water mains.
(c) Cross sections. The cross section for each classification of
street shall comply with the borough's standards and
specifications as minimum requirements. It shall show a typical
cross section across the road with details of grading and
construction as follows:
[1] The ultimate right-of-way width and the location and width
of the cartway.
[2] The type, depth and crown of paving.
[3] The type and size of curb.
[4] When sidewalks are required, grading of the sidewalk area
should be carried to the full width of the ultimate right-ofway.
[5] The location, width, type and depth of sidewalks, when
required.
[6] The typical locations, size and depths of sewers and
utilities.
(d) Additional information. The following additional information
shall be submitted with the final plan:
§ 85-15 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 85-15
85:276
[1] All required local, state and federal permits shall be
submitted. These permits may include: Montgomery
County, Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PADOT) or borough permits, Department of
Environmental Resources permits for drainage, stream
alteration, dams, erosion and sedimentation control, air
pollution or sanitary sewage facilities.
[2] The following statements shall be required on the final
plan:
[a] "The Approved Improvement Construction Plan, a
copy of which may be inspected at the Borough Office,
has been made a part of the Approved Final Plan."
[b] "For access to a highway under the jurisdiction of the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, a
highway occupancy permit is required, pursuant to
Section 420 of the Act of June 1, 1945 (P.L. 1242, No.
428) known as the 'State Highway Law.'54 Access to
the state highway shall be only as authorized by the
highway occupancy permit."
[3] All engineering calculations which support the proposed
improvements, such as drainage calculations, sanitary
facility design calculations or structural calculations.
B. Record plan.
(1) Drafting standards. The same standards shall be required for a
record plan as for a preliminary plan, and in addition, for recording
purposes, the plans shall be placed on sheet sizes of 18 inches by
30 inches or 24 inches by 36 inches. All lettering and lines should
be drawn to be legible if the plan is reduced to half size.
(2) Information to be shown. The plan, which shall include all portions
of an approved preliminary plan, shall also show:
(a) Basic information, as required for a preliminary plan, § 85-13C.
(b) Courses and distances sufficient for the legal description of all
the lines shown on the plan. The error of closure shall not be
greater than one part in 10,000.
(c) Name or identification of the following:
[1] Abutting owners.
[2] All dimensional and technical descriptions of roads.
[3] Easements.
54.Editor's Note: See 36 P.S. § 670-1-1 et seq.
§ 85-15 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 85-15
85:277
§ 85-16. Final plan submission and review procedure.
Final plans shall be submitted and reviewed in accordance with the
procedure contained in this section.
[4] Rights-of-way.
[5] Open space, recreation and/or other common use areas.
[6] Other public improvements.
[7] For land development plans, all additional information
pertinent to the location of site improvements, including
buildings, walks, parking, driveways, etc.
(d) All lots deeded to the ultimate right-of-way, so that a single
deed may be drawn to the appropriate body having jurisdiction
for the dedication of streets by the applicant.
(e) Evidence that the plans are in conformance with Chapter 95,
Zoning, and other applicable borough ordinances and
regulations. In any instance where such plans do not conform,
evidence shall be presented that an exception, waiver or
variance has been officially authorized.
(f) The location, material and size of all monuments with
reference to them.
(g) Building setback lines with distances from the ultimate rightof-
way line.
C. Certifications. When approved, the record plan must show:
(1) The signature and seal of the registered engineer or surveyor
certifying that the plan represents his work, that the monuments
shown thereon exist as located and that the dimensional and
geodetic details are correct.
(2) The signature of the applicant, certifying his adoption of the plan.
(3) The signature of the Borough Secretary, certifying that the
Borough Council approved the final plan on the date shown:
(a) Spaces shall be provided for the signatures of the Council
members whose signatures are required.
(b) Space shall be provided for the signature of the Borough
Engineer.
(4) A blank space shall be provided for the stamp and seal of the
Montgomery County Planning Commission, located along the righthand
edge of the plan, four inches square.
§ 85-15 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 85-16
85:278
A. A final plan for an application that has been previously granted
preliminary plan approval shall be approved by the Borough Council
when it is assured that:
(1) The final plan conforms to the approved preliminary plan.
(2) All engineering and other technical details have been resolved to
the satisfaction of the Borough Engineer, as evidenced by a letter
from the Borough Engineer, and to the satisfaction of other
technical advisers, when requested by the Council.
(3) A signed recommendation is received from the Borough Planning
Commission.
(4) All financial security and legal agreements have been found
satisfactory by the Borough Council, under the review and advice of
the Borough Solicitor, all security has been posted and all
agreements have been executed.
(a) When requested by the developer, in order to facilitate
financing, the Borough Council shall furnish the applicant with
a signed copy of a resolution indicating approval of the final
plan contingent upon the applicant obtaining a satisfactory
financial security.
(b) The final plan shall not be signed nor recorded until the
financial improvements agreement is executed.
(c) The resolution of contingent approval shall expire and be
deemed to be revoked if the financial security agreement is not
executed within 90 days unless a written extension is granted
by the Borough Council.
(5) The plan complies in all respects with applicable borough
ordinances or that appropriate variances or waivers have been
granted for features that do not comply.
(6) All necessary permits have been obtained from the applicable
regulatory agencies, authorities or departments.
B. A final plan for an application that has not been previously granted
preliminary plan approval may be granted concurrent preliminary and
final plan approvals, in compliance with the following:
(1) The final plan complies with both the preliminary and final plan
submission requirements, §§ 85-13 and 85-15 herein.
(2) The final plan is submitted and processed in compliance with
§ 85-14, Preliminary plan submission and review procedure.
(3) The final plan complies with Subsection A(2), (3), (4), (5) and (6)
above.
C. Processing steps for applications with previous preliminary approval.
§ 85-16 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 85-16
85:279
§ 85-17. Recording the final plan.
(1) Five copies of the final plan shall be submitted to the Borough
Secretary or Code Enforcement Officer, accompanied by the
borough filing fee and required administrative forms.
(2) The plan submission date will be stamped on the plan and the
application for final plan approval shall be submitted at least seven
days prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Borough
Planning Commission following the plan submission date.
(3) The Borough Council shall have a ninety-day time period to act on
the plan unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension
of the time period.
(4) Copies of the plan will be distributed to the following:
(a) The Borough Engineer, Solicitor, Zoning Officer and Planning
Commission.
(b) Other borough boards or officials, sewer and/or water
authorities and/or other technical advisers as needed.
(5) The Borough Council shall consider the final plan at one or more of
its public meetings during the allocated ninety-day time period.
(6) The Borough Council shall grant final plan approval in compliance
with Subsection A above.
D. When the final plan is approved, the applicant shall present paper and
linen or Mylar copies of the plan to be signed by Council and the
Borough Secretary, together with the date of the approval and Official
Borough Seal.
A. Within 90 days following final plan approval, the applicant shall record
the final plan in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Montgomery
County.
B. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,55
whenever final plan approval is required by a municipality, the
Recorder of Deeds shall not accept any plan for recording unless it
contains the official approval of the municipal governing body and
certification of review by the County Planning Commission.
C. Prior to recording, the applicant should present the municipally
approved plan to the Montgomery County Planning Commission for its
stamp and seal, with one paper copy made available to the County
Planning Commission for its files.
55.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 85-16 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 85-18
85:280
§ 85-18. Minor plan submission requirements and review
procedure.
Minor plans may be submitted and processed only for lot line adjustments,
simple conveyances and minor subdivision, as characterized herein, in
accordance with the standards and requirements in this section.
A. Characteristics.
(1) Lot line adjustment.
(a) A lot line adjustment is a proposal between two abutting,
existing, legally approved and recorded lots.
(b) A common lot line is proposed to be adjusted in terms of its
location or configuration.
(c) The land area of each lot may be different after adjustment, but
the total lot area of the two lots will be unchanged.
(d) No alteration will occur to the perimeter boundary lines.
(e) Neither lot will violate the applicable dimensional
requirements of Chapter 95, Zoning, as a result of the lot line
adjustment.
(f) Possible reasons for lot line adjustments include, but are not
necessarily limited to:
[1] To correct errors regarding locations of existing
improvements (e.g., if the driveway for Lot No. 1 is located
on Lot No. 2).
[2] To relate the line to definitive physical characteristics
(e.g., to adjust the line to run along an existing hedgerow).
[3] Preferences of the landowners involved.
(2) Simple conveyance.
(a) A simple conveyance is a proposal between two abutting,
existing, legally approved and recorded lots.
(b) A portion of one lot is being divided off to be conveyed to the
owner of the abutting lot.
(c) The land area of each lot will be different after conveyance, but
the total lot area of the two lots will be unchanged.
(d) The lot from which the land is being conveyed must be suitable
in terms of the applicable dimensional requirements of
Chapter 95, Zoning, so that after conveyance it will remain in
compliance with those requirements.
§ 85-18 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 85-18
85:281
(e) The land area being conveyed need not satisfy any of the
dimensional requirements applicable to lotting in the district in
which it is located, nor the street frontage requirements of
Chapter 95, Zoning, provided that:
[1] It is combined in common deed with the abutting lot to
which it is being added; or
[2] If not combined in common deed, it shall be deed
restricted to the extent that it may not be transferred
independently, but must be transferred together with the
lot to which it is being functionally added by the process of
simple conveyance.
(3) Minor subdivision.
(a) A minor subdivision is a subdivision proposal which would
divide one existing lot into two lots, both of which will comply
with the applicable dimensional requirements of the zoning
district in which the existing lot is located.
(b) The existing lot has sufficient frontage on an existing,
improved public street to satisfy the applicable borough
requirements for lot frontage and/or access to a public street
for both proposed lots.
(c) The existing lot has not been a part of an approved subdivision
proposal during the five years previous to the current
application.
(d) The subdivision will not require new road construction, road
improvements or the extension of existing utility lines.
(e) The proposal will not involve significant stormwater and/or
erosion control issues, as determined by the Borough Engineer.
(f) Disqualification. The Borough Council may require standard
preliminary plan submission in place of a minor plan when
conditions warrant it, at the advice of the Borough Planning
Commission or Engineer.
B. Plans for lot line adjustment, simple conveyance and minor subdivision
shall comply with the following submission requirements:
(1) Drafting standards.
(a) The plan shall be drawn to a standard engineering scale not
exceeding 100 feet to the inch.
(b) Sheet size shall be 15 inches by 18 inches, 18 inches by 30
inches or 24 inches by 36 inches, appropriately related to the
scale of the drawing; only one sheet shall be permitted.
§ 85-18 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 85-18
85:282
(c) Property lines shall be drawn and labeled in conformance with
accepted surveying and civil engineering practices, including
dimensions shown in feet and decimals and bearings shown in
degrees, minutes and seconds.
(2) Basic information to be shown on the plan:
(a) The name and address of the applicant.
(b) The name and address of any other property owner involved in
the proposal.
(c) The name and address and professional seal of the individual
or firm that prepared the plan.
(d) The date of preparation of the plan and a descriptive list of
revisions to the plan and the revision dates.
(e) The North point and scale.
(f) A location plan showing the relationship of the subject tract to
the surrounding road network and major physical features.
(g) The entire boundary lines of all lots involved in the proposal,
with bearings and distances and lot areas.
(h) A list of the basic dimensional requirements of the applicable
zoning district.
(i) A legend sufficient to indicate clearly between existing and
proposed conditions.
(j) Notes sufficient to describe what is being proposed and which
land areas are to be transferred as a result of the proposal.
(3) Existing and proposed features to be shown on the plan.
(a) For lot line adjustments:
[1] The lot line proposed to be adjusted, as it currently exists,
shown as a dashed line labeled "Lot Line To Be Removed."
[2] The lot line as it is proposed to be after adjustment, drawn
using the standard lot line delineation at a heavier line
weight than the other lot lines, and labeled "Proposed New
Lot Line."
[3] Any existing physical features of the site which are
involved in the decision to adjust the line.
[4] Any existing and/or proposed features which will be
directly affected by the lot line adjustment.
(b) For simple conveyances:
§ 85-18 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 85-18
85:283
[1] The land area to be conveyed, drawn in a manner which
makes it readily identifiable:
[a] The lot lines defining this area shall be drawn using
the standard lot line delineation at a heavier line
weight than the other lot lines.
[b] Except that the lot line to be removed, when
combining into common deed, shall be shown as a
dashed line labeled "Lot Line To Be Removed."
[c] This area shall be labeled "This area to be conveyed to
(name)."
[2] The area of the parcel being conveyed.
[3] The areas of the previously existing lots and their areas
following conveyance.
[4] Any existing physical features of the site which may be
involved in determining the location, size and shape of the
area to be conveyed.
[5] Any existing and/or proposed site features which will be
directly affected by the conveyance.
(c) For minor subdivisions:
[1] Existing features:
[a] Streets bordering or crossing the tract, showing
names, right-of-way and cartway widths and surface
conditions.
[b] Approximate locations of sanitary and/or storm sewer
lines and water supply lines.
[c] Location of all watercourses and limits of any flood
prone areas (data from Soil Survey and/or FEMA
studies).
[d] Contours obtained from United States Geological
Survey maps.
[e] Location and description of existing buildings and
other structures, labeled "To Remain" or "To be
Removed," as applicable, and location and description
of existing buildings and other structures less than 50
feet beyond the tract boundaries.
[f] Outer limits of tree masses.
[g] Locations of any natural or man-made features which
may affect the developability of the land, such as
§ 85-18 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 85-18
85:284
quarries, marshlands, etc., within the property and up
to 50 feet beyond the tract boundaries.
[h] Locations and descriptions of major utilities, such as
pipelines and electric transmission lines, both above
and below ground, with a note describing additional
setback or development restrictions required in their
regard.
[i] Areas subject to deed restrictions or easements.
[2] Proposed features:
[a] Layout and dimensions of both lots, including net lot
areas.
[b] All building setback lines.
[c] Locations of on-site water supply and sewage disposal,
if applicable.
[d] Driveway locations.
C. Minor plan submission and review procedure.
(1) All minor plans shall be considered to be preliminary plans for the
purposes of submission for review and approval and shall comply
with the requirements of § 85-14, Preliminary plan submission and
review procedure.
(2) When a minor plan qualifies for approval in accordance with
§ 85-14I(1)(b) or (c) herein, the minor plan may be granted
concurrent preliminary and final plan approvals, provided that the
plan includes the final plan certifications required by § 85-15C
herein and complies with § 85-16A(2), (3), (4), (5) and (6) herein.
(3) A minor plan is not required to include an improvements
construction plan or a record plan as required by § 85-15A and B
herein.
(4) Approved minor plans shall be recorded in compliance with § 85-17
herein.
§ 85-18 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 85-18
85:285

ARTICLE IV
Design Standards
§ 85-19. General standards.
§ 85-20. Waiver of requirements.
The Borough Council may grant a modification of the requirements of this
chapter, through a waiver, if strict application of these requirements would
be unreasonable, provided that such modification will not be contrary to the
public interest and that the purpose and intent of this chapter are observed.
All requests for modifications shall:
A. The following shall apply to all subdivision and land development
proposals:
(1) All portions of a tract shall be designated as to their use, such as
lots, roads, open space, parking areas, etc.
(2) Whenever possible, applicants shall preserve scenic areas, historic
sites, other community assets and landmarks and natural amenities
such as trees and waterways.
(3) Plans shall be designed to avoid excessive cut or fill.
(4) Floodplain land areas shall be governed by additional standards
contained in this chapter, Chapter 95, Zoning, and the borough's
Building Code.56
(5) The applicant shall construct, install and guarantee, at no expense
to the borough, all improvements required as part of plan approval,
including but not limited to streets, curbs, sidewalks, water and
sewage facilities, stormwater management facilities, streetlights,
fire hydrants, road signs, monuments, lot pins, utilities and shade
trees.
B. The Borough Council may request that development features exceed
these standards if conditions so warrant.
A. Be in writing and be part of an application for subdivision and/or land
development.
B. State the grounds and facts of unreasonableness or hardship on which
the request is based.
C. List the provision(s) of the ordinance involved.
D. State the minimum modification necessary.
56.Editor's Note: See Ch. 35, Building Construction.
§ 85-19 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 85-21
85:287
§ 85-21. Requirements for new and existing streets.
All new streets and extensions and widenings of existing streets shall:
§ 85-22. Street classifications and requirements; street names.
A. Be offered for dedication to the authority having jurisdiction over the
street at the time of plan approval. The borough may accept dedication
of lands which are not accepted by other jurisdictions.
B. Conform to the circulation element of the Borough Comprehensive
Plan, as amended, the Borough Ultimate Right-of-Way Map and county
or state highway plans and be coordinated with existing streets.
C. Provide appropriate access between abutting tracts of land for
immediate or future use.
D. Create a road hierarchy among interior subdivision and land
development streets and exterior streets to ensure proper throughtraffic
flow, local access and internal traffic distribution and flow.
E. Be related closely to existing topography to assure reasonable grades,
alignment and drainage and appropriate access to lots and to minimize
regrading and removing of vegetation.
F. Be designed to continue existing streets at equal or greater right-of-way
and cartway width, as recommended by the Borough Engineer and
Planning Commission.
A. Every street within the borough shall be classified by its function as one
of the following and shall comply with the requirements for its
classification as contained herein.
(1) Principal arterial streets are the major traffic routes which carry
the highest volumes of traffic on an intercommunity, regional or
higher level. Route 29 (Main Street) is the only principal arterial
street in the borough.
(a) Minimum right-of-way: 70 feet.
(b) Minimum cartway width: 40 feet.
(c) Construction requirements: Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation (PADOT) standards. (See § 85-45.)
(2) Collector streets are those which collect, carry and feed medium
volumes of traffic and connect areas within and adjacent to the
borough. Fourth Street, Sixth Street, State Street, Third Street and
Washington Street are collector streets.
(a) Minimum right-of-way: 60 feet.
(b) Minimum cartway width: 40 feet.
§ 85-21 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 85-22
85:288
§ 85-23. Street alignment.
Sight distance, horizontal and vertical curvature, superelevation and
maximum and minimum street grades shall be determined by the Borough
Engineer in compliance with the standards contained in A Policy on
Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, published by the American
Association of State Highway Transportation Officials (AASHTO), most
recent edition, or PADOT standards and guidelines shall be complied with.
(c) Construction requirements: PADOT standards. (See § 85-45.)
(3) Local access streets are the minor streets which carry the lowest
volumes of traffic and serve primarily to provide vehicular access
and parking for adjacent land uses. All borough streets that are not
principal arterial or collector are local access streets.
(a) Minimum right-of-way: 50 feet.
(b) Minimum cartway width: 30 feet.
(c) Construction requirements: PADOT standards. (See § 85-45.)
B. All street names shall be subject to the approval of Borough Council.
A. Horizontal curvature for all local access streets shall be not less than
150 feet radius, measured along the street center line.
B. Long-radius, gentle curves are encouraged rather than shorter radius
curves connected by tangents.
C. Curve-tangent relationships shall follow accepted engineering
guidelines for safety and efficiency. For example, minimum-radius
curves shall not be used at the ends of long tangents.
D. Street grades shall be measured along the center line in accordance
with the following:
(1) Minimum for all streets shall be 1%.
(2) Maximum grades for local access streets shall be 10% for distances
less than 1,500 feet.
(3) Street grades in excess of 5% should be avoided wherever possible.
(4) Curve-grade combinations shall follow accepted engineering
guidelines for safety and efficiency. For example, minimum-radius
horizontal curves will not be permitted in combination with
maximum grades.
(5) At all approaches to intersections, street grades shall not exceed
4% for a minimum distance of 50 feet.
§ 85-22 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 85-24
85:289
§ 85-24. Street intersection design.
All street intersections shall be governed by the standards of this section.
A. Number of streets. Not more than two streets shall intersect at the
same point.
B. Three-way/four-way intersections. Three-way or T intersections should
be used instead of four-way intersections unless the four-way
intersection can be justified in terms of necessary and desirable traffic
movements.
C. Angle of intersections.
(1) All intersection approaches shall be designed at right angles unless
sufficient reason exists to justify a lesser angle. However, no angle
shall be less than 75° for intersections with principal arterial or
secondary streets or 60° for intersections between local access
streets, measured at the center-line intersections.
(2) Where angled intersections are used, it is preferable to design
them so that the heavier traffic flow will make the obliquely angled
turn rather than the acutely angled turn.
D. Corrective changes to existing intersections. When existing streets
intersect at odd angles or have more than four approaches, the
applicant shall contribute to corrective changes to bring the
intersections into compliance with this chapter, as required by the
Borough Council, who shall first seek the advice of the Borough
Engineer and Planning Commission and other technical advisers or
agencies, as appropriate. For state and county highways, corrective
changes shall comply with the requirements of the appropriate agency.
The extent of contribution shall depend on the proposal's use of the
intersection.
E. Waiver of corrective changes. The Borough Council may waive the
above requirements for corrective changes under one or more of the
following conditions:
(1) When changes made on the applicant's land will not improve the
intersection's deficiencies.
(2) When other road improvements are already planned which would
correct the problem without changes required of the applicant.
(3) When not required by PADOT on state roads.
F. Cul-de-sac streets.
(1) Unless future extension is clearly impractical or undesirable, culde-
sac streets are prohibited unless designed for future extension
to access adjoining properties.
§ 85-24 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 85-24
85:290
§ 85-25. Street intersection spacing.
Street intersection spacing shall be done in compliance with the regulations
contained in this section, measured from center line to center line.
§ 85-26. Single-access street regulations.
(2) Any temporarily dead-ended street shall be provided with an allweather
turnaround within the subdivision or land development,
and the use of such turnaround shall be guaranteed to the public
until such time as the street is extended.
(3) Unless future extension is clearly impractical or undesirable, the
turnaround right-of-way shall be placed adjacent to the tract
boundary with sufficient additional width provided along the
boundary line to permit extension of the street at full width.
G. Approaches to intersections. Approaches to intersections shall follow a
straight course for a minimum of 50 feet for local access streets. All
other streets shall follow a straight course in accordance with accepted
engineering standards, but in no case less than 50 feet.
A. The spacings listed in this section shall be considered minimum
spacings. Where greater spacing is required in compliance with
AASHTO or PADOT standards, the greater spacing distances shall be
applied, as determined by the Borough Engineer.
B. Principal arterial streets.
(1) The following intersection spacings shall apply wherever
practicable, whether on the same or opposite sides of the street:
(a) Principal arterial streets: 400 feet.
(b) Collector streets: 400 feet.
(c) Local access streets: 300 feet.
(2) For intersections that would have to be spaced a lesser distance
apart, first preference should be given to locating the streets
opposite one another as a four-way intersection; otherwise the best
solution should be sought in terms of accepted traffic safety
standards.
C. Offset intersections. In any case where the center lines of street
intersections are or would be within 150 feet of each other, they shall be
made to coincide by relocating the street within the applicant's land,
unless additional problems of sight distance or other safety-related
problems would be created. As an alternative, relocation further away
from the offset intersection may be done in compliance with the
intersection spacing requirements contained herein, when approved by
the Borough Council.
§ 85-24 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 85-26
85:291
A. Any street which is served by only one intersection with a through
street shall be considered a single-access street, regardless of the
street's configuration within the proposed subdivision or land
development. Included in this classification of streets are:
(1) Temporary cul-de-sac streets.
(2) Single-access streets (dead-end streets).
B. Single-access streets shall be subject to the requirements for their
classification of street, notwithstanding their single-access status.
C. Temporary cul-de-sac streets.
(1) Temporary cul-de-sac streets:
(a) May be temporarily closed at one end, with the intent to extend
the street onto the abutting tract upon its development.
(b) Shall be built to the tract boundary line at a location and grade
that are logical for extension onto the abutting tract with a
vehicular turnaround at the closed end with a right-of-way
radius of at least 60 feet and a paving radius of at least 48 feet
and shall not exceed 500 feet in length unless approved by the
Borough Council.
(c) Shall not be extended as a cul-de-sac street, but shall be
connected to another through street.
(d) Shall form a logical step in the circulation pattern of the
superblock or area in which it is located.
(e) Shall be served by an emergency accessway when required by
the Borough Council, in compliance with Subsection E herein.
(2) The developer responsible for extension of the street shall also be
responsible for the following:
(a) Removal of all curbing and paving of the temporary turnaround
beyond the width of the street's cartway.
(b) Installation of new sidewalk, curbing and cartway paving to
complete the street connection.
(c) Extension of utilities as necessary.
(d) Repair of any improvements damaged in this process.
(3) Temporary cul-de-sac streets shall be built to the standards for the
classification of streets they will have when extended.
D. Single-access loop streets:
(1) Are single-access streets which do not terminate in a vehicular
turnaround, but instead loop back to intersect with themselves.
§ 85-26 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 85-26
85:292
§ 85-27. Clear-sight triangles.
Clear-sight triangles shall be required to be maintained along all
approaches to all street intersections and all intersections of driveways with
streets, in compliance with the standards herein.
(2) Shall be discouraged but may be permitted when no alternatives
are determined to be feasible and preferable by the Borough
Planning Commission and Engineer.
(3) When permitted, shall meet the following requirements:
(a) Shall not under any circumstances exceed 2,000 feet in length,
measured from the intersection with the through street, along
the entire center line around to its intersection with itself.
(b) Shall not contain or serve more than 45 residential lots or
dwelling units.
(c) Shall be served by an emergency accessway when required by
the Borough Council, in compliance with Subsection E herein.
E. Emergency accessways:
(1) Shall be constructed in compliance with the borough's engineering
standards so that emergency vehicles shall have an alternative
access to a single-access street.
(2) Shall be constructed in a logical location in terms of:
(a) Topographic features.
(b) Relationship to normal access.
(c) Street, driveway or parking lot used to get to the emergency
accessway.
(3) Shall be marked by four-foot-high posts, spaced 50 feet apart along
one edge of the cartway.
A. Clear-sight triangles shall be measured along street and driveway
center lines from their point of intersection.
B. Where differing classifications of streets intersect, the higher
classification of street shall determine the dimensions used.
C. For driveways, the dimensions used shall be determined by the
classification of street being intersected.
D. The clear sight triangle legs shall each measure as follows:
(1) Principal arterial streets: 125 feet.
(2) Collector streets: 100 feet.
§ 85-26 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 85-27
85:293
§ 85-28. Driveway review and approvals.
(3) Local access streets: 75 feet.
E. Obstructions to visibility.
(1) Within the area of clear-sight triangles, obstructions to visibility
shall not be permitted within the following ranges of height:
(a) For all streets, between 2 1/2 feet and 12 feet above the edge
of paving.
(2) Any plant materials placed within clear-sight triangles shall be
properly maintained to continually comply with the height
restrictions herein. If not properly maintained, the borough
reserves the right to trim or remove the plant materials, upon due
notice to the property owner.
(3) Exceptions may be made by the Borough Council to permit the
following items in a clear-sight triangle:
(a) One private sign or lamp post, provided that the post does not
exceed one foot square or diameter and that the sign or lamp
itself is above the top height limitation.
(b) One shade tree, provided that as the tree matures, its lower
branches will be removed within the restricted height ranges.
(c) Existing shade trees, provided that the lower branches are
removed within the restricted height ranges and that the size,
number and arrangement does not impede adequate visibility.
The Borough Council may require removal of one or more trees
as necessary to provide adequate visibility.
(4) Grading within a clear-sight triangle shall not exceed a six-percent
increase measured from the elevation of the edge of paving.
Existing grades in excess of 6% shall be regraded into compliance.
(5) Where street or driveway grades drop off from an intersection, the
Borough Council may modify these requirements as necessary to
improve visibility at the intersection.
A. Applicants shall submit tentative sketch plans to the Borough Planning
Commission, for their evaluation and advice, in the following
circumstances:
(1) When five or more residential lots are proposed to be subdivided
along an existing principal arterial or collector street.
(2) For all nonresidential proposals which require a new driveway or
upgrading of an existing driveway to handle larger volumes of
traffic than that which exists at the time of plan submission.
§ 85-27 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 85-28
85:294
§ 85-29. Driveway intersections with streets.
Driveway intersections with streets shall be subject to the PADOT permit
process for state roads, the borough's permit process for borough roads and
the additional requirements of this chapter.
(3) For all proposals whose driveways would generate 25 or more
vehicular trips per day, based on I.T.E. trip generation standards.
B. The Borough Planning Commission shall review the proposal in
accordance with the procedures of Article III of this chapter.
C. Following evaluation by the Borough Planning Commission, the
applicant may submit plans to the state or borough for formal review
and, as appropriate, approval and issuance of permits.
D. No driveway location, classification or design shall be considered finally
approved by the borough unless permits have been granted by the state
and/or borough and preliminary plan approval has been granted by the
Borough Council for the subdivision and/or land development which the
driveway(s) will serve.
A. Driveway intersections with streets:
(1) Shall provide adequate sight distance in compliance with AASHTO
or PADOT standards.
(2) Shall not cause or contribute to:
(a) Hazards to the free movement of normal street traffic.
(b) Traffic congestion on the street.
(c) Interference with the design, maintenance and/or drainage of
the street.
(3) Shall be designed and constructed in compliance with PADOT
standards when intersecting a state street.
(4) Shall be designed and constructed in compliance with the
borough's engineering standards when intersecting a borough
street.
B. In order to facilitate safe and efficient access between streets and
driveways, the number of driveways permitted to serve individual
parcels of land shall be kept to the minimum needed to adequately
serve the parcel in question.
(1) Properties with frontages of 100 feet or less may be permitted not
more than one driveway intersection with a street.
(2) Not more than two driveway intersections with the same street may
be permitted for any parcel of land unless anticipated traffic
§ 85-28 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 85-29
85:295
volumes warrant more than two, and then only when supported by
a traffic study prepared by a qualified engineer.
C. Driveway intersections serving individual parcels of land may be
prohibited by the Borough Council where such intersections would
create congestion, interference and/or hazards to traffic flow and safety
by reason of street grades, land forms, vegetation, frequency of
driveway intersections, limited sight distances and/or high speed traffic
flow. In such cases, the Borough Council may permit reasonable
alternative forms of vehicular access to the parcel of land by means of:
(1) Marginal access streets or driveways.
(2) Shared driveways.
(3) Reverse frontage lotting.
(4) Other means which are legally and technically suitable in the
opinions of the Borough Solicitor and Engineer.
D. Where driveway intersections are prohibited by the Borough Council
and alternative forms of vehicular access would cause an undue burden
upon an applicant, the Borough Council may permit an alternative
interim access solution in compliance with the following:
(1) It is the safest feasible alternative, acceptable to the Borough
Engineer and/or PADOT.
(2) Suitable provisions are made for a preferable permanent access
solution, consistent with Subsection C above, including legal
agreements to enable implementation of the permanent solution.
E. Distance from street intersections. Driveways shall be located as far
from street intersections as is reasonably possible, but not less than the
following distances:
(1) Individual residential lots: 50 feet.
(2) Multifamily residential and nonresidential: 100 feet.
F. Choice of streets. When streets of different classes are involved, the
driveway shall provide access to the street of lesser classification unless
this requirement is waived by the Borough Council for reasons of sight
distance, incompatibility of traffic, grading, drainage or other major
reasons.
G. Stopping areas. Regardless of the driveway classification, all driveways
shall be provided with a stopping area within which the grade shall not
exceed 6%. The stopping area shall be measured as follows:
(1) The length of stopping area shall be a minimum of 20 feet or the
length of the longest vehicles anticipated to use the driveway,
whichever is greater.
§ 85-29 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 85-29
85:296
§ 85-30. Sidewalks, curbs and storm sewers.
Sidewalks, curbs and storm sewers shall be installed along all proposed
streets, common driveways and common parking areas except when this
requirement is waived at the discretion of the Borough Council upon
recommendation of the Borough Planning Commission and Engineer.
Engineering design and construction standards shall be those contained in
the borough's engineering standards.
(2) Stopping areas shall be measured from the ultimate right-of-way
line for principal arterial and collector streets and from the edge of
paving or curbline of local access streets.
H. Clear-sight triangles. Clear-sight triangles shall be provided where
driveways intersect streets, in compliance with the standards of
§ 85-27, Clear-sight triangles.
A. The Borough Council may waive the sidewalk requirement under one or
more of the following conditions:
(1) Where proposed residential lot widths will be 125 feet or greater.
(2) There is clearly no destination to be reached by pedestrians (e.g.,
shopping center, bus stop, employment, schools) or none
anticipated in the foreseeable future.
(3) The sidewalk(s) would not be an extension of an existing network
which provides neighborhood or village circulation.
(4) An alternative pedestrian circulation concept can be shown to be
more desirable, especially when using open space areas, provided
that appropriate walks are provided between the open space
walkways and the pedestrian origins and destinations.
(5) The character, density of the area and/or small size of the proposal
preclude the purposeful use of sidewalks.
B. The Borough Council may waive the curb and/or storm sewer
requirement under one or more of the following conditions:
(1) The curbs and storm sewer would not be an extension of existing
curbs and storm sewers.
(2) When an alternative system of protecting the pavement edge and
collecting and handling stormwater can be shown to be equal or
superior to the use of curbs and storm sewers.
(3) When topographic conditions and/or low intensity of development
do not require their use.
C. Regardless of the small size of a land development or subdivision
proposal, sidewalks, curbs and storm sewers shall be required
wherever they fill a gap in an existing network.
§ 85-29 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 85-30
85:297
§ 85-31. Parking and related internal driveways.
Parking and related internal driveways shall be governed by the following
regulations.
D. If for any reason an interim waiver of these requirements is made, a
sufficient guaranty shall be posted for the eventual installation of these
items, subject to approval by the Borough Council upon
recommendation of the Borough Engineer and Solicitor, in accordance
with § 85-50 of this chapter.
E. Sidewalks shall be not less than four feet in width, although the
Borough Council may require additional width in commercial,
industrial, office or higher density residential areas where higher
volumes of pedestrian traffic are anticipated.
F. The edge of sidewalks shall be located six inches from the right-of-way
line, toward the street, with the sidewalk extending toward the streets.
G. Sidewalks shall be provided in appropriate locations to provide safe and
efficient pedestrian access between parking areas and buildings.
H. Additional sidewalks shall be required, where deemed necessary by the
Borough Council, to provide access to schools, churches, parks,
community facilities and commercial or employment centers and to
provide necessary pedestrian circulation within land development and/
or subdivisions where otherwise required sidewalks would not be
sufficient for public safety and convenience. Such additional sidewalks
may be constructed of alternative materials, in compliance with the
borough's engineering standards.
I. Sidewalks shall be designed to facilitate access and use by the
handicapped, in compliance with the borough's engineering standards.
J. Driveway crossings shall be designed in compliance with the borough's
engineering standards.
A. General.
(1) Off-street parking facilities shall be provided in compliance with
the parking requirements of Chapter 95, Zoning, and the
regulations contained herein.
(2) Angled or perpendicular parking shall not be permitted along
public or private streets, except where specifically permitted by
this chapter or other ordinances.
(3) The terms "parking lot," "parking area" and "parking" are
interchangeable. "Parking" includes the driveway which provides
direct access to the parking spaces.
B. All parking lots.
§ 85-30 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 85-31
85:298
(1) Parking shall not be permitted along driveways which serve as the
entrance(s) or exit(s) to parking areas with a capacity of 50 cars or
more.
(2) Parking areas shall not be located closer than 20 feet from any tract
boundary line or less than 15 feet from any ultimate right-of-way
line. These setback areas shall be landscaped in accordance with
the requirements of § 85-39, General planting requirements.
(3) Where the edge of a parking area is located close to a street,
driveway or other parking area and the provisions of Subsection
B(2) above do not apply, a minimum separation of 10 feet shall be
provided between these features. This spacing shall consist of a
raised landscaped area, preferably curbed, with planting in
conformance with § 85-39C herein.
(4) Parking spaces shall not be located closer than 20 feet to a building
to provide potential access space for fire fighters and equipment.
Driveways providing access to parking spaces may be located
within that twenty-foot setback but shall not be closer than three
feet from the edge of the building.
(5) Dead-ended parking areas shall be discouraged when the required
parking capacity can be accommodated in a layout that permits
more convenient vehicular movements. However, extraneous
through-traffic flow should be avoided.
(a) Up to 30 parking spaces may be located in a dead-ended
parking area if there is not a more desirable alternative
feasible and sufficient backup areas are provided for the end
stalls.
(b) More than 30 parking spaces may be located in a dead-ended
parking area only if a turnaround area is provided at the closed
end, suitable for passenger car turning. The turnaround area
may be circular, T- or Y-shaped or other configuration
acceptable to the Borough Council.
C. Residential parking lots.
(1) Parallel rows of parking spaces, which are not separated by a
driveway, shall be separated by a raised and/or curbed planting
strip, a minimum of 10 feet wide, landscaped in accordance with
§ 85-39C herein.
(2) A single row of parking spaces located parallel to and between two
driveways, shall be separated from one of the driveways by a raised
and/or curbed planting strip, a minimum of five feet wide,
landscaped in accordance with § 85-39C herein.
(3) Parking lots shall be divided into sections of not more than 20 cars
each, with the sections separated by raised and/or curbed planting
§ 85-31 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 85-31
85:299
strips, a minimum of 10 feet wide, landscaped in accordance with
§ 85-39C herein.
(4) The entire parking lot perimeter shall be landscaped in compliance
with § 85-39C herein.
D. Nonresidential parking lots.
(1) Parking lots with a capacity of from 10 to 30 cars shall require a
raised and/or curbed planting strip, a minimum of 10 feet wide,
landscaping in accordance with § 85-39C herein, around the entire
perimeter.
(2) Parking lots with a capacity of from 31 to 100 cars shall require a
perimeter planting strip as in Subsection D(1) above, and, within
the perimeter of the lot, an additional planted area equal to 10% of
the parking lot area, landscaped in accordance with § 85-39C
herein. Minimum dimensions of any area used as part of the 10%
shall be 10 feet by 20 feet; however, larger areas are encouraged.
(3) Parking lots for more than 100 cars shall require a perimeter
planting strip as in Subsection D(1) above and shall be divided into
sections by raised and/or curbed planting strips, a minimum of 10
feet wide, landscaped in accordance with § 85-39C herein.
(a) Location.
[1] These planting strips shall be located parallel to the rows
of parking, to serve the following purposes:
[a] To separate main access (entrance-exit) driveways
from rows of parking spaces.
[b] To separate other major driveways from rows of
parking spaces (service drives, general internal
circulation).
[c] To separate large parking areas into smaller units at
intervals of not more than four rows of parking stalls
with each unit capacity not greater than 100 cars.
[d] To add visual character and improve the appearance
of large parking areas by reducing their massiveness
into smaller units.
[e] To provide shade for parked cars.
[f] To reduce random vehicular flow across parking area.
[g] To permit a high level of visibility for those uses
(stores, offices) for which visibility is an important
factor.
§ 85-31 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 85-31
85:300
§ 85-32. Driveways within sites proposed for development.
The following requirements apply to driveways within sites proposed for
land development as well as other sites proposed for development which
will provide parking capacity for 50 or more cars:
[h] To facilitate snow removal and storm drainage and to
conserve energy in construction and resurfacing
operations, by permitting relatively large units of
paving surface, not obstructed by numerous small
barrier island areas.
[2] Refer to Figure 1 for an illustration of appropriate
locations and use of these planting strips.57
(b) The ends of rows of parking shall be marked as islands by
means of painted lines or the use of different paving materials
such as paving blocks, bricks or round stones.
[1] Marked end islands shall be equal in size to one parking
space for each row of spaces.
[2] Parking shall be prohibited on these islands.
[3] The first parking space abutting the end of each island
shall be reserved and marked for handicapped parking at
the end of the row closest to the building. Ramps shall be
provided at convenient intervals for access between
parking surface and sidewalks.
A. A smooth transition in horizontal and vertical alignment shall be
provided between the driveway section required for access to a public
street and the driveway(s) required for internal site circulation.
B. Main access driveways (entrance-exit) and service driveways handling
large trucks shall be a minimum paved width of 30 feet, with one lane in
each direction.
C. Access driveways for cars and other small vehicles which are clearly
secondary in importance may be reduced to 26 feet in paved width.
D. Storefront driveway in shopping centers shall be a minimum paved
width of 35 feet, to allow one lane in each direction and a drop-off/
pickup lane along the sidewalks.
E. Driveways along other nonresidential buildings shall be a minimum
paved width of 26 feet, except that where a dropoff/pickup lane is
proposed, the width shall be 35 feet.
F. Parking access driveways (as defined) shall be a minimum of 22 feet
wide with two-way traffic flow for convenience and efficiency.
57.Editor's Note: Figure 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 85-31 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 85-32
85:301
§ 85-33. Parking space and lot dimensions.
Parking spaces shall be a minimum of 10 feet by 20 feet, except that where
vehicles may overhang a planting strip, a three-foot widening of the planting
strip shall permit a three-foot reduction of parking space length to 17 feet.
Parking lot dimensions shall be as shown in Figure 2 herein.59
§ 85-34. Rear lotting.
Rear lots, as defined herein, may be permitted by the Borough Council, in
accordance with the following standards and criteria.
G. One-way driveways and/or parking at less than right angles may be
permitted only when:
(1) Right-angled parking and two-way driveways are not feasible
because of site characteristics; or
(2) Proven by the applicant to be superior for the particular
development proposal.
H. Wherever feasible, internal circulation driveways shall extend from
access drives in locations which permit and encourage entering traffic
to turn and enter the parking aisles without first traveling along a
building-front driveway. This feature is intended to reduce the volume
of vehicular traffic along the building-front driveway to make it safer for
pedestrian traffic. Refer to Figure 1 for an illustration of this concept.58
A. Purposes of rear lotting. The purposes of rear lotting shall be to:
(1) Permit reasonable subdivision of land which is physically
constrained by unusual configuration of the tract or limited road
frontage and which could not be subdivided in a desirable manner
using conventional streets and lotting patterns.
(2) Permit an alternative to the use of local access streets where such
streets cannot be justified in terms of the number of lots served,
volumes of traffic generated and/or the need to extend, supplement
or otherwise support or reinforce an established road pattern or
traffic circulation plan for the area surrounding the proposed
subdivision:
(a) As an interim alternative where future subdivision will result in
appropriate street construction.
(b) As a permanent alternative.
B. Parts of a rear lot. Rear lots shall be comprised of two parts, the access
strip and the body of the lot, in compliance with the following
standards:
58.Editor's Note: Figure 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
59.Editor's Note: Figure 2 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 85-32 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 85-34
85:302
(1) The all-weather access strip shall be a minimum of 25 feet wide for
its entire length, including that portion which abuts a public street
right-of-way for access.
(2) When necessary or desirable for grading, drainage or preservation
of natural features, such as trees, the access strip shall be widened
beyond the twenty-five-foot minimum as necessary. Fifty feet is
suggested as a maximum width.
(3) When the body of the rear lot is capable of being further subdivided
into additional lots, the minimum width for its access strip shall be
50 feet, for future use as a road right-of-way, unless further
subdivision is prohibited by a deed restriction or other legal
instrument approved by the Borough Solicitor.
(4) The access strip shall be a fee-simple part of the rear lot and shall
not be a separate parcel or easement.
(5) The body of a rear lot shall comply with all the minimum
dimensional requirements of the zoning district in which it is
located. The area of the access strip shall not be counted toward
the minimum lot area requirement.
C. Review factors. In reviewing applications for rear lots, the following
factors will be considered by the Borough Council, Planning
Commission and Engineer:
(1) The amount of road frontage and configuration off the property
being subdivided.
(2) The sizes and number of lots proposed, including both the total
number of lots and the number of rear lots.
(3) The type and character of road which the tract abuts.
(4) The topography of the parcel being subdivided, with an emphasis
on trees and slopes.
(5) The physical characteristics of the surrounding area and whether
or not the subdivision site is distinguishable from it.
(6) The development status of the surrounding sites.
(7) The visual character preferred for the tract, that is, whether it is
better to see a lot of houses abutting the road or to hide some in
rear areas to reduce the perceivable density of development.
(8) Whether rear lots would set an undesirable precedent for nearby
sites.
(9) The economic impact of requiring road construction as compared
to using rear lots.
§ 85-34 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 85-34
85:303
(10) The visual and physical impacts of road construction as compared
to the use of access strips.
D. Design standards for rear lots.
(1) The length of the access strip shall be kept to a minimum, and, as a
guide, the preferred length is approximately equal to the depth of
one lot which complies with the minimum lot width and area
requirements of the district in which it is located.
(2) The location of the access strip should be logical relative to the
body of the rear lot, surrounding property configurations and
natural features of the land, and it shall intersect the public street
at a safe, visible location.
(3) Turns greater than 60° should be avoided in access strips:
(a) It may be necessary to widen the access strip at such sharp
turns to accommodate grading, drainage or tree preservation.
(b) For access strips that may become roads, the Borough Council
may require turns to be designed to accommodate horizontal
curves required for roads.
(4) Driveways serving access strips shall comply with the borough's
engineering standards for drainage and cartway, from the edge of
road pavement to a distance of 50 feet beyond the ultimate right-ofway
line of the road.
(5) When two access strips abut, they should share a common access
point and driveway from the edge of pavement to a distance of 50
feet beyond the ultimate right-of-way line of the road, from which
point either one common driveway or two individual driveways may
continue. The shared portion shall be a minimum of 18 feet wide.
(6) When more than two access strips would abut one another, the
Borough Council may require, instead, the use of a public street, in
accordance with the standards of this chapter.
E. Provisions for future roads. The Borough Council may permit the use of
rear lots where one or more access strips are intended to serve as a
right-of-way for a road which will serve future lotting. The following
regulations shall apply:
(1) Legal guaranties shall be provided to assure future use of any
access strip proposed for future use as a road, subject to approval
of the Borough Solicitor.
(2) The road shall be constructed or financially guaranteed at the
applicant's expense.
(3) Access strips legally and financially guaranteed for future use as
roads may comprise the legal and physical access to otherwise
§ 85-34 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 85-34
85:304
§ 85-35. Additional regulations for floodplain areas.
The regulations contained herein shall apply in those areas identified as
flood prone in Chapter 95, Zoning. The Flood Boundary and Floodway Map
shall be available in the Borough Office for inspection. In regard to the
adopted Floodplain Conservation District, the regulations contained herein
shall apply to those areas defined and established as floodplain and not in
conflict with the information provided in the Flood Insurance Study.
landlocked residual parcels only if the access is irrevocably
guaranteed.
(4) An overall tentative sketch plan shall be submitted as part of the
proposed subdivision to show how the rear-lotting and reservation
of access strips for future roads forms a logical and appropriate
first phase in subdivision of the entire tract and/or how it will allow
interconnection with adjacent tracts.
(5) When the road is constructed, any access strips which are no
longer needed shall revert to the owners of the abutting lots, in
accordance with the terms agreed to as part of the original
preliminary plan approval which created the access strips.
A. The regulations contained herein are intended to conform to the
requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program, P.L. 93-234,
and the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, P.L. 851, No. 166 of
1978,60 and as either is amended. Furthermore, it is the purpose of
these regulations to:
(1) Regulate the subdivision and development of floodplain areas in
order to promote the general health, welfare and safety of the
community.
(2) Require that each subdivision lot or development site in floodplain
areas be provided with a safe building site with adequate access
and that public facilities which serve such sites be designed and
installed to preclude flood damage at the time of initial
construction.
(3) Protect individuals from buying lands which are unsuitable for use
because of flood hazards by prohibiting the subdivision and
development of unprotected floodplain areas.
(4) Maintain the certification of East Greenville Borough and the
eligibility of the property owners in the borough for the benefits of
the National Flood Insurance Program, P.L. 93-234.
B. Prospective developers shall consult with the Code Enforcement Officer
to make a determination as to whether or not the proposed subdivision
or land development is located within an identified floodplain.
60.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 85-34 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 85-35
85:305
C. Where not prohibited by this or any other codes or ordinances, land
located in floodplain may be subdivided or developed in accordance
with this and any other codes or ordinances regulating such
development.
D. The finished elevation of proposed streets within floodplain areas shall
be a minimum of two feet above the base flood elevation. Drainage
openings shall be sufficient to discharge flood flows without increasing
flood heights onto lands of other property owners.
E. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the one-hundredyear
flow without risk to persons or property. The drainage system shall
ensure drainage at all points along streets and ensure conveyance of
drainage away from buildings.
F. The Borough Council may require in a floodplain an underground
system to accommodate a one-hundred-year flood and a secondary
surface system to accommodate larger, less frequent floods. Drainage
plans shall be consistent with local and regional drainage plans. The
facilities shall be designed to prevent the discharge of increased runoff
onto adjacent properties.
G. All new or replacement sanitary sewer systems, whether public or
private, located in floodplain areas shall be floodproofed, and all
appurtenances thereto (including but not limited to pumping stations)
shall be floodproofed up to a point 1 1/2 feet above the base flood
elevation.
H. All new or replacement water systems, whether public or private, in
floodplain areas shall be floodproofed up to a point 1 1/2 feet above the
base flood elevation.
I. All other new or replacement public or private utilities and facilities in
floodplain areas shall be elevated or floodproofed to a point 1 1/2 feet
above the base flood elevation.
J. Waivers. Guidelines for relaxation from the requirements set forth in
this section are as follows:
(1) A waiver shall not be issued within any designated regulatory
floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood
discharge would result.
(2) A waiver shall only be issued if there is:
(a) A determination that failure to relax the requirements would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant.
(b) A determination that the relaxing of a requirement will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public
safety or extraordinary public expense or create nuisances,
cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with
existing local laws or ordinances.
§ 85-35 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 85-35
85:306
§ 85-36. Blocks.
(c) A determination that relaxing of a requirement will not result
in any adverse impact on adjacent landowners either upstream
or downstream.
(3) A waiver shall only be issued upon a determination that the waiver
is the minimum necessary considering the flood hazard to afford
relief.
(4) The borough shall maintain a record of all waivers, including
justification for their issuance, and report such decisions issued in
its annual report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administrator.
K. Where the subdivision or land development lies partially or completely
in a floodplain or where the subdivision or land development borders on
a floodplain, the plan shall include detailed information identifying the
following:
(1) Location and elevation of existing and proposed streets, water
supply and sanitary facilities and any other permitted
improvements, soil types and proposed floodproofing measures.
(2) Boundaries of the floodplain and the base flood elevation as defined
in Chapter 95, Zoning.
A. Layout. The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with
due regard to:
(1) Provision of adequate sites for buildings of the type proposed.
(2) Zoning requirements.61
(3) Topography.
(4) Requirements for safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian
circulation, including the reduction of intersections with major
streets.
B. Length.
(1) Blocks shall have a maximum length of 1,600 feet and a minimum
length of 500 feet; provided, however, that the Borough Planning
Commission or Borough Council may decrease the maximum and/
or minimum lengths of blocks if, in the opinion of either body, the
topography of the land in question and/or surface water drainage
conditions warrant such a decrease.
(2) In the design of blocks longer than 1,000 feet, special consideration
shall be given to the requirements of satisfactory fire protection.
61.Editor's Note: See Ch. 95, Zoning.
§ 85-35 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 85-36
85:307
§ 85-37. Lots.
§ 85-38. Proposals with existing buildings.
(3) Where practicable, blocks along major and collector streets shall
not be less than 1,000 feet long.
C. Crosswalks.
(1) Crosswalks shall be required wherever necessary to facilitate
pedestrian circulation and to give access to community facilities, as
well as in blocks of over 1,000 feet in length.
(2) Such crosswalks shall have a width of not less than 10 feet and a
paved walk of not less than four feet.
D. Depth. Residential blocks shall be of sufficient depth to accommodate
two tiers of lots, except where prevented by the size, topographical
conditions or other inherent conditions of property, in which case the
Borough Planning Commission or Borough Council may approve a
single tier or lots.
E. Commercial and industrial blocks. Blocks in commercial and industrial
areas may vary from the elements of design detailed above as required
by the nature of the use.
A. Lots shall meet or exceed the minimum area and width requirements of
Chapter 95, Zoning.
B. Deep, narrow lots are to be avoided, except that lots for attached
dwelling units may receive special consideration.
C. Wide, shallow lots are to be avoided.
D. Every lot shall contain a building envelope suitable for the type(s) of
development proposed.
E. Every lot shall have frontage along the right-of-way of a public street.
F. Lot lines shall be drawn parallel, concentric, at right angles or radial to
the right-of-way line whenever feasible and not otherwise justifiable by
existing, permanent, natural or man-made features.
A. No proposal will be approved with a property line extending through
any portion of an existing building, except where that property line
follows a party wall separating semidetached or attached units, in
accordance with the Chapter 95, Zoning.
B. When existing buildings are retained:
(1) Minimum building setbacks shall be met or exceeded, in respect to
all new lot lines created, for the district in which the buildings are
located, even if this results in a lot area or dimensions in excess of
the otherwise applicable minimums.
§ 85-36 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 85-38
85:308
(2) Building setbacks in excess of the applicable minimums are
encouraged, in respect to all new lot lines created, when the height
and/or bulk of the existing building significantly exceeds that of
proposed, abutting development. For tall buildings, a setback equal
to the height of the building is suggested as a minimum. For
proportionally wide or deep buildings, a setback equal to 1/2 of the
width or depth of the building is suggested as a minimum.
(3) Run-down buildings shall be rehabilitated on the exterior to
conform in quality to surrounding new development.
(4) Structurally deficient buildings shall be rehabilitated in
conformance with the Borough Building Code and BOCA Property
Maintenance Code.62
(5) Additions to retained buildings shall conform in all respects to the
requirements of Chapter 95, Zoning, applicable to the district in
which the building is located and shall be in harmony with the
character, design, building materials and other architectural
features of the building.
(6) Historical or culturally significant buildings shall retain their
respective characters, to the greatest extent practical.
(7) New buildings abutting the retained building should reflect the
character and architectural features of the retained building to the
greatest extent practical.
(8) In nonresidential districts, retained buildings shall be provided
with adequate parking, service and landscaped areas in
accordance with Chapter 95, Zoning, provisions for the intended
use. If the applicant cannot specify the intended use, then the most
land consumptive provisions shall be applied, to ensure sufficient
land area for uses permitted in that district.
(9) The building setback lines, existing and proposed buildings,
driveways, parking areas, walks and other similar information shall
be shown on the plan, with a note added describing the buildings
and their intended purposes.
(10)No plan approval will be granted to a subdivision or a land
development unless and until the above requirements are complied
with to the satisfaction of the Borough Council upon
recommendation of the Borough Planning Commission and
Engineer.
C. When existing buildings will be removed:
(1) The plan must show the location and include a brief description of
the building(s) to be removed.
62.Editor's Note: See Ch. 35, Building Construction and Ch. 73, Property Maintenance,
respectively.
§ 85-38 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 85-38
85:309
§ 85-39. General planting requirements.
All subdivisions and land developments shall be required to install, maintain
and guarantee plant materials as required herein for the visual and other
environmental benefits these plants will provide, as well as for the specific
benefits of buffering or screening or otherwise dividing spaces.
(2) Plan approval will be granted upon written agreement to the
expeditious removal of buildings intended for removal, in
conformance with applicable borough requirements and
procedures regarding demolition of buildings and disposition of the
reusable parts and/or disposal of the rubble. If the building will not
be removed immediately, a financial guaranty must be posted for its
removal, in compliance with § 85-50 herein.
A. Preservation of existing desirable woodland, trees and/or shrubs may
be counted in lieu of the requirements herein. Upon review of sufficient
evidence provided by the applicant, Borough Council may waive a part
or all of these planting requirements.
B. Street trees. All proposals shall provide street trees selected from the
lists of shade trees in § 85-40A and B herein, in compliance with the
following:
(1) Where street trees exist along the street on abutting properties,
new street trees shall be planted in line with the existing ones.
Compatible species are encouraged.
(2) Where few or no street trees exist along the street, new street trees
shall be located a minimum of five feet from the sidewalk, toward
the proposed development. Applicants are encouraged to use a
variety of trees to protect against insects, disease or physical
damage in any one species, as well as for visual interest.
(3) Street tree spacing shall be not less than the minimums listed, nor
more than twice the minimum of 50 feet, whichever is lower.
C. Parking lot planting. All proposals with parking lots shall provide
planting in compliance with the following standards, wherever required
by this chapter:
(1) The primary plant materials used shall be shade trees selected
from the lists in § 85-40A and B herein, planted at the minimum
spacing listed for the type of tree.
(2) Additional planting is encouraged to include a variety of
ornamental trees, shrubs and ground covers selected from the lists
in § 85-40C herein:
(a) At the ends of planting strips at driveway intersections,
drivers' visibility shall be maintained by limited planting for the
end 35 feet.
§ 85-38 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 85-39
85:310
(b) At the ends of planting strips between rows of parking spaces,
visibility shall be maintained by limited planting for the end 20
feet.
(c) "Limited planting" shall mean:
[1] Not more than one shade tree within the area.
[2] No shrubs or ground cover plants exceeding two feet in
height.
[3] No evergreen trees.
(d) Refer to Figure 1 for a graphic illustration of these
limitations.63
D. Buffer and screen planting. Along property lines separating the
applicant's proposal from lands owned by others, buffer planting shall
be provided in compliance with the following:
(1) Where development on both sides of the property line is or will be
of essentially the same type and intensity, no additional buffer
planting is required.
(2) Where development on both sides of the property line is or will be
of essentially the same type but of significantly different intensities,
the buffer area shall be planted in accordance with Subsection C
herein, including additional planting.
(3) Where the applicant's proposal is nonresidential and the abutting
properties are residential, buffer planting shall be as follows:
(a) Parking lot planting as required by Subsection C herein,
including additional planting; plus
(b) Screen planting sufficient to substantially obscure the least
desirable views from the residential property onto the
applicant's property. Screening plants shall be chosen from the
list in § 85-40C(4).
[1] Suggested minimum screen planting is a double row of
evergreen trees, six feet in height, planted 10 feet on
center, with each row offset five feet to achieve a more
complete screening effect.
[2] Additional planting and the use of earthen mounding is
encouraged to provide a more varied and complete
screening effect wherever possible.
63.Editor's Note: Figure 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 85-39 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 85-40
85:311
§ 85-40. Lists of plant materials.
These lists in this section shall be used for all planting required by this
chapter. Alternative plant materials may be used only with the approval of
the Borough Council, after sufficient evidence is submitted regarding their
suitability for their purposes and locations.
A. Large shade trees.
Genus, Species and
Cultivar
Common Name Minimum Spacing
(feet)
Carpinus betulus European hornbeam 25
Celtis occidentalis Hackberry 20
Fraxius americana cv
Autumn Purple or
Rosewood
White ash 30
Fraxius pennsylvanica
cv Marshall's Seedless
or Summit
Green ash 30
Ginkgo biloba cv
Autumn Gold or
Sentry
Ginkgo 25
Gleditsia triacanthos
var. inermis
Thornless honeylocust
25
Platanus acerifolia cv
Bloodgood
Bloodgood London
planetree
30
Ulmus parvifolia Chinese elm 30
Zelkova serrata Japanese zelkova 30
Quercus species
(scarlet; shingle; bur;
red; crownright pin)
Various oaks 30
B. Smaller shade trees.
Genus, Species and
Cultivar
Common Name Minimum Spacing
(feet)
Amelanchier
canadensis
Shadblow
serviceberry*
15
Crataegus
phaenopyrum
Washington
hawthorn*
15
Crataegus cv Toba Toba hawthorn* 15
Pyrus calleryana Callery pear* 25
§ 85-40 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 85-40
85:312
NOTES:
* Denotes flowering trees.
C. Plants for additional planting in and around parking areas. These plants
are intended for use as specified in § 85-39C(2) herein:
(1) All trees listed in Subsections A and B above.
(2) Flowering trees.
Genus, Species Common Name
Cornus mas Corneliancherry dogwood
Koelreuteria paniculata Goldenraintree
Magnolia virginiana Sweetbay magnolia
Sorbus alnifolia Korean mountainash
Syringa retinculata Japanese tree lilac
Malus species Flowering crabapples: Sargent,
Redbud, Japanese
(3) Low growing shrubs and ground covers:
(a) Cotoneasters.
(b) Horizontal junipers.
(c) Dwarf Japanese yews.
(d) Ivy.
(e) Canby paxistima (pachistima).
(f) Pachysandra.
(4) Screening plants:
(a) Large trees:
Genus, Species Common Name
Juniperus virginiana Eastern red cedar
Quercus robur cv Fasigiata English oak
(b) Flowering small trees:
Genus, Species Common Name
Crataegus phaenopyrum Washington hawthorn
Crataegus cv Toba Toba hawthorn
Pyrus calleryana cv
Chanticleer
Callery pear
(c) Evergreen trees.
§ 85-40 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 85-40
85:313
§ 85-41. Natural or historic feature preservation.
The design of subdivisions and land developments should be done in a
manner which would preserve desirable natural and/or historic features of
Genus, Species Common Name
Pinus thunbergii Japanese black pine
Pinus strobus Eastern white pine
Pinus sylvestris Scotch pine
Thuja occidentalis American arborvitae
Tsuga canadensis Canada hemlock
Tsuga caroliniana Carolina hemlock
(d) Hedge plants.
Genus, Species Common Name
Ligustrum japonicum Japanese privet
Ligustrum vulgare Common privet
Berberis thunbergii Japanese barberry
Taxus cuspidata Japanese yew
Cornus racemosa Gray dogwood
D. Purposes. The plant materials in these sections were selected for the
following purposes:
(1) Subsections A, B and C(1) and (2) for their abilities to tolerate poor
soils, salt runoff, air pollution and other adverse environmental
factors, especially within and around parking lots, streets and
buildings, as well as for their shade providing qualities, low
maintenance characteristics and/or other desirable ornamental
characteristics.
(2) Subsection C(3) and (4) for their low-growing or screening
characteristics as well as hardiness under adverse urbanized
environmental conditions.
(3) Where more favorable planting environments can be obtained,
alternative plant materials should be considered, which may be
more suitable and attractive in those areas.
E. Sources. Plant materials in these sections were selected from:
(1) Trees for Urban Parks, Morris Arboretum for the United States
Department of the Interior.
(2) Trees for American Gardens and Shrubs and Vines for American
Gardens, Donald Wyman.
§ 85-40 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 85-41
85:314
a site wherever reasonably possible. Included in such features would be the
following:
§ 85-42. Topsoil preservation.
No topsoil shall be removed from the site or used as spoil. Topsoil must
be removed from the areas of construction and stored separately. Upon
completion of the construction, the topsoil must be redistributed on the site
uniformly. All areas of the site shall be stabilized by seeding or planting on
slopes of less than 10% and shall be stabilized by sodding on slopes 10% or
more and planted in ground cover on slopes 20% or more.
§ 85-43. Protection of preserved features.
Items preserved under §§ 85-41 and 85-42 above shall be protected during
all phases of construction by fencing or other means from the effects of
construction equipment operation, grading and any other activity which
could endanger the preserved items.
§ 85-44. Open space areas and community assets.
Applicants are encouraged to provide open space for parks, playgrounds,
recreational facilities and other community spaces. In commercial areas,
space for walkways, malls, sitting areas or other community spaces are
encouraged. Preservation of existing natural amenities as part of these
spaces should be considered by the applicant.
§ 85-45. Compliance with engineering and construction standards.
The items listed below shall be designed, constructed, developed, installed,
inspected and/or maintained in compliance with the borough's engineering
standards, which standards are incorporated by reference as a part of this
chapter.
A. Scenic areas or views.
B. Historic structures or sites.
C. Trees six inches or more in caliper at chest height.
D. Woodlands, tree masses, hedgerows or other significant plant
materials.
A. Street, driveway and parking area paving.
B. Radii of pavement and right-of-way at intersections.
C. Driveways and parking areas on a lot serving a single dwelling unit.
D. Construction inspection.
E. Sidewalks and curbs.
§ 85-41 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 85-45
85:315
§ 85-46. Water supply.
Each property and/or unit shall be connected to the community water
system.
§ 85-47. Sanitary sewage disposal.
Each property and/or unit shall be connected with the public sewer system,
subject to approval by the Upper Montgomery Joint Authority.
F. Stormwater runoff and other drainage facilities.
G. Utility locations, easements and rights-of-way.
H. Sanitary sewers and on-site disposals.
I. Water supply.
J. Erosion and sediment control.
K. Bridges and culverts.
L. Survey monuments.
M. All other items related to subdivision and/or land development for
which it is reasonable and prudent to be included.
§ 85-45 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 85-47
85:316
ARTICLE V
Improvement Construction Requirements
§ 85-48. Applicability of article.
The requirements of this article shall apply to all applicants submitting
a final plan for subdivision or land development in the Borough of East
Greenville. For additional details regarding these requirements, please
refer to the Borough of East Greenville's Administrative Guidelines for
Subdivision and Land Development Proposals.
§ 85-49. Completion of guaranty of required improvements.
§ 85-50. Inspection of work and materials.
A. No final plan shall be approved until the applicant has either:
(1) Completed all of the improvements required by the Borough
Council for final plan approval, in compliance with the
requirements of this chapter; or
(2) Provided a proper financial guaranty for those improvements, as
required by this article, in compliance with the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code,X101 dK as required in § 85-55
herein.
A. Notice; inspection during progress of work.
(1) The Borough Engineer shall be notified 48 hours in advance of the
commencement of any construction or installation operation, in
order that provision may be made for inspection by the borough.
(2) Construction and installation operations shall also be subject to
inspection by the borough during the progress of the work. The
subdivider, developer or builder shall pay the reasonable and
necessary expenses for inspections, in accordance with the fee
schedule established by resolution of the Borough Council.
B. Improvement specifications. All required road improvements shall be
constructed in accordance with the applicable provisions of the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Form 408, including the
latest revisions and other applicable regulations. All other required
improvements shall be constructed in accordance with approved
specifications.
(1) Specifications. The specifications will be furnished to the applicant
by the borough. If any of the specifications are unavailable at the
borough office, the Borough Engineer shall provide the applicable
specifications.
(2) Sample of materials. During or after construction of any required
improvement, if the borough requires a sample of materials, said
§ 85-48 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 85-50
85:317
§ 85-51. Off-site improvements.
Certain improvements beyond the geographical boundaries of a site to
be subdivided and/or developed, including but not limited to road
improvements, may be required to be constructed where it can clearly be
demonstrated that such improvements have been made necessary solely
through the additional burden imposed by the subdivision and/or
development of the site. The Borough Council shall render final judgment
in any instances where a dispute arises as to the direct casual relationship
for the improvement(s) after receiving the advice of the Borough Engineer
and Solicitor and/or other experts. The subdivider or developer may be
required to cover costs which must be incurred by the borough or other
governmental jurisdiction in order to make these improvements feasible.
The legal and financial arrangements to cover costs of the off-site
improvements shall be the same as those prescribed in § 85-50.
§ 85-52. Conditions of acceptance.
sample shall be furnished by the appropriate contractor, in a form
specified by the Borough Engineer.
C. Delivery slips. Copies of all delivery slips for materials used in the
construction of any storm sewers, sanitary sewers, roads, curbs,
sidewalks or any other facility within a borough right-of-way or
easement shall be supplied to the borough.
A. Conditions. The borough shall have no obligation to accept dedication
of any street or other improvement unless:
(1) The required improvements, utility mains and laterals and
monuments shown on the approved plan or plans have been
constructed to meet all requirements and are free of defects or
deterioration.
(2) It is established to the satisfaction of the Borough Council that
there is a need for the dedication of improvements.
B. Acceptance. The borough shall have no responsibility with respect to
any street or other improvement, not withstanding the use of the same
by the public, unless the street or other improvement is accepted by an
ordinance (or resolution) adopted by the Borough Council.
C. Offer of dedication.
(1) The applicant shall submit a written offer of dedication to the
borough for the streets or other improvements, including the
following:
(a) A deed of dedication covering the improvements.
(b) A copy of a title insurance policy establishing the applicant's
clear title to the property.
§ 85-50 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 85-52
85:318
§ 85-53. Guaranty of completed improvements.
§ 85-54. Private maintenance of improvements.
Where the maintenance of improvements is to be the responsibility of
individual lot owners, a homeowners' association or similar entity or an
organization capable of carrying out maintenance responsibilities, Council
shall require that maintenance responsibilities be set forth in perpetual
covenants or deed restrictions binding on the landowners' successors in
interest and may further require that an initial maintenance fund be
established in a reasonable manner.
(2) The items required in Subsection C(1) above shall be submitted to
the Borough Engineer and Solicitor for their review and
recommendations.
(3) Borough Council may accept dedication of the streets or other
improvements by passing a resolution to that effect.
A. When the Borough Council accepts dedication of required
improvements following their completion, Council shall require posting
of financial security by the applicant to secure the structural integrity
and functioning of these improvements in accordance with the design
and specifications as depicted on the approved final plan.
B. Said financial security shall be of the same type as otherwise required
by § 85-50 herein.
C. The amount of financial security shall be 15% of the actual cost of
installation of the improvements.
D. The term of the guaranty shall be 18 months from the date of
acceptance of dedication.
§ 85-52 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 85-54
85:319

ARTICLE VI
Mobile Home Regulations
§ 85-55. General applicability.
§ 85-56. Mobile home park site design.
The following regulations shall apply to mobile home parks:
A. Individual mobile homes. Individual mobile homes, as defined in § 85-64
herein, may be erected on any lot where the use is permitted, provided
that compliance is made with zoning requirements and all sections of
this chapter which apply to subdivisions and development of singlefamily
detached dwellings.
B. Mobile home parks. The provisions of this article shall be followed in
the construction or alteration of all mobile home parks, as defined in
§ 85-64 herein. These provisions are in addition to other applicable
regulations of this chapter. Compliance with Chapter 95, Zoning, is
required.
A. Arrangement of structure and facilities. The tract, including mobile
home stands, patios, other dwellings and structures and all tract
improvements, shall be organized in relation to topography, the shape
of the plot and common facilities. Special attention shall be given to
new mobile home designs and to common appurtenances that are
available.
B. Adaptation to tract assets. Each mobile home unit or other dwelling or
structure shall be fitted to the terrain with a minimum disturbance of
the land and a minimum elevation difference between the floor level of
the unit and the ground elevation under it. Existing trees and shrubs,
rock formation, streams, floodplains, steep slopes and other natural
features of the tract shall be preserved to the maximum extent
practical. Favorable views shall be emphasized by the plan.
C. Courts and spaces. Groups or clusters of units, so placed as to create
interior spaces and courtyards, shall be incorporated whenever
feasible.
D. Orientation. Mobile homes are encouraged to be arranged in a variety
of orientations and are strongly encouraged to have many units with
their long sides facing the street rather than their ends, in order to
provide variety and interest.
E. Street layout. Street patterns unrelated to the topography of the site
are to be avoided.
F. Roadways.
(1) Standards. All borough standards for the construction of streets
contained in this chapter64 shall be adhered to for all public streets
§ 85-55 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 85-56
85:321
in and abutting mobile home parks. In those parks wherein the
streets are to be maintained as private internal roadways, owned
and maintained by the mobile home park operator or owned and
maintained in common by the residents/owners of the individual
lots, the standards shall be as follows:
(a) Right-of-way. There shall be an equivalent right-of-way (as
defined herein) reserved along those streets which are
designed to function as feeder or collector streets and which
connect major exterior roadways, form major loops, traverse
the development or provide major or important access to
adjacent parcels. No equivalent right-of-way is required on
other streets. On those streets where an equivalent right-ofway
is required, parallel parking may be permitted, but
perpendicular or angle parking is discouraged.
(b) Pavement. Pavement width of all residential streets serving as
access to mobile home lots shall be not less than 26 feet,
except that this may be reduced to not less than 20 feet on a
street serving as access to no more than 10 mobile home lots
where parking is prohibited along the road and off-street
visitor parking is provided in common areas within 300 feet of
all dwelling units at a rate of 0.3 space per mobile home.
(c) Grades. Gradients on all residential streets shall not exceed
10%.
(d) Culs-de-sac. A paved turnaround area with a minimum radius
of 40 feet shall be provided at the closed end of any cul-de-sac
road serving as a sole access to four or more mobile home lots.
No permanently closed cul-de-sac street shall exceed 500 feet
in length or serve as the only access to more than 20 mobile
home lots.
(2) Access limitations. Mobile home lots may have direct access only
onto streets internal to the development. Direct access from a
mobile home lot shall not be permitted onto the streets from which
the mobile home park gains primary access.
(3) Conversions. Any road built as a private road and later proposed for
conversion to a public road shall be brought up to the applicable
standards for public streets prior to being ordained as a public way,
unless this requirement is waived by the governing body
subsequent to determining that compliance with the requirement
would have a negative effect on the mobile home park.
G. Pedestrian circulation.
(1) General requirements. All mobile home parks shall provide safe,
convenient, all-season pedestrian walkways of adequate width for
64.Editor's Note: See § 85-45, Compliance with engineering and construction standards.
§ 85-56 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 85-56
85:322
§ 85-57. Common open space.
In addition to any requirements of Chapter 95, Zoning, the following
regulations shall also apply:
intended use, durable and convenient to maintain between
individual mobile homes, mobile home development, all community
facilities provided for the residents and off-site pedestrian traffic
generators, such as schools, bus stops, commercial centers, etc.
These pedestrian walkways may parallel vehicular roadways,
where they shall only be required on one side, or they may form
a separate but coordinated system away from streets. Walkways
must be provided wherever pedestrian traffic is concentrated and
where school children congregate, but may be waived elsewhere if
the applicant successfully demonstrates a lack of need.
(2) Common walk system. Where a common walk system is provided
and maintained between locations, such common walks shall have
a minimum width of four feet. Where these walks parallel roadways
they shall be separated from the road pavement by a distance of at
least four feet.
(3) Individual walks. All dwellings shall be connected to common walks
or to streets or to driveways or parking spaces connecting to a
paved street. Such individual walks shall have a minimum width of
two feet.
H. Parking.
(1) Spaces required. Two paved off-street parking spaces shall be
provided for each dwelling on the same lot therewith. Parking for
any commercial or other nonresidential use shall follow the
requirements otherwise applicable for such uses.
(2) Common parking areas.
(a) Aisle width. Where common parking facilities are to be used,
no parking aisle will be less than 22 feet in width.
(b) All parking areas shall conform to § 85-31 herein.
A. Arrangement; recreation.
(1) Arrangement. The common space shall be designed as a contiguous
area unless the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the
Borough Council that two or more separate areas would be
preferable. The open space shall also have easily identifiable
pedestrian and visual accessibility to all residents of the mobile
home park, although all units do not have to abut the common open
space.
(2) Recreation. Recreation areas and facilities shall be provided to
meet the anticipated needs of the residents of the mobile home
§ 85-56 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 85-57
85:323
§ 85-58. Common elements.
§ 85-59. Utilities.
park. Not less than 25% of the required open space area, exclusive
of lands within the required buffers, shall be devoted to recreation.
Recreation areas should be of a size, shape and topography that is
conducive to active and passive recreation.
B. Buffers.
(1) General requirements. Along all exterior property boundary lines a
permanent buffer shall be provided as set forth in § 85-39D hereof.
(2) Existing buffers. In cases where the property line of a mobile home
park occurs along natural features which function as buffers,
including but not limited to mature vegetation, significant grade
changes or stream valleys which are likely to be permanently
preserved, buffering may be waived along that property line upon
approval of the Borough Council upon recommendation of the
Borough Planning Commission.
(3) Buffer landscape plan. A landscaping plan shall be submitted with
the final plans showing all pertinent information, including the
location, size and species of all individual trees and shrubs to be
preserved or planted or, alternately, the general characteristics of
existing vegetation masses which are to be preserved.
C. Drainage considerations. The standards and requirements contained in
Article IV herein shall be complied with.
A. Ownership. Common open space and roadways shall be offered for
dedication to the borough or public use assured through easements or
other appropriate means in any mobile home park where all lots will be
sold or where the Borough Council determines those facilities to be key
elements in the open space and/or circulation systems of the borough.
In all other cases, these and other common elements may be retained in
private ownership or may be owned jointly by the residents of the
development.
B. Maintenance. Prior to development plan approval, provisions
acceptable to the Borough Council and Borough Solicitor for the
maintenance of all common elements which will not be owned and
maintained by a governmental agency shall be established.
C. Service building. The structure or structures containing the
management office and other common facilities shall be conveniently
located for the use intended.
A. Water supply.
§ 85-57 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 85-59
85:324
(1) General requirements. Each property and/or unit shall be
connected to the community water system.
(2) Water distribution system. All water piping, fixtures and other
equipment shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with
state and local regulations as well as those of the servicing utility.
(3) Individual water-riser pipes and connection.
(a) Individual water-riser pipes shall be located within the
confined areas of the mobile home stand at a point where the
water connection will approximate a vertical position, thereby
ensuring the shortest water connection possible and
decreasing susceptibility to water pipe freezing.
(b) The water-riser pipe shall have a minimum inside diameter
consistent with the standards of the servicing public utility or,
in lack thereof, of the Borough Engineer and terminate at least
four inches above the ground surface. The water outlet shall be
provided with a cap when a mobile home does not occupy the
lot.
(c) Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent freezing of
service lines, valves and riser pipes and to protect risers from
heaving and thawing actions of ground during freezing
weather. Surface drainage shall be diverted from the location
of the riser pipe.
(4) Fire protection. All mobile home parks shall be provided with fire
hydrants to meet the specifications of the Middle States
Department Association of Fire Underwriters. In addition, those
hydrants shall be in sufficient numbers to be within 600 feet of all
existing and proposed mobile homes and other dwellings and
structures, measured by way of accessible streets or common
areas.
B. Sewage disposal.
(1) General requirements. Each property and/or unit shall be
connected with the public sewer system, subject to approval by the
Upper Montgomery Joint Authority.
(2) Sewer system. All sewer lines shall be located in trenches of
sufficient depth to be free of breakage from traffic or other
movements and shall be separated from the water supply system.
The system shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with
all state regulations, as well as those of the servicing utility.
(3) Individual sewer connections.
(a) Each mobile home stand shall be provided with a sewer riser
pipe consistent with the standards of the servicing utility. The
sewer riser pipe shall be so located on each stand that the
§ 85-59 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 85-59
85:325
§ 85-60. Permits and licenses; fees; inspections.
sewer connection to the mobile home drain outlet will
approximate a vertical position.
(b) The sewer connection shall have an inside diameter and slope
as required by the servicing utility. All joints shall be
watertight.
(c) All material used for sewer connection shall be in accordance
with state and local regulations as well as those of the
servicing utility.
(d) Provision shall be made for plugging the sewer riser pipe when
a mobile home does not occupy the lot. Surface drainage shall
be diverted away from the riser. The rim of the riser pipe shall
extend at least 1/2 inch above ground elevation.
C. Underground utilities. All electric, natural gas, telephone and any other
utility lines shall be placed underground in all mobile home parks and
each shall have the necessary shutoff valves and other safety
requirements normally associated with safe operations. All utility
connections shall be appropriately capped for safety purposes
whenever a mobile home stand is not occupied.
A. Permits required.
(1) Lots for sale. In those mobile home parks wherein some or all of the
mobile home lots will be sold individually (whether totally fee
simple, fee simple with a homeowners' association, condominium
or cooperative), no lot to be conveyed shall be developed or mobile
home or other structure placed or constructed thereon until the
subdivision and/or land development plan has properly approved
and the proper building and construction permits have been issued
to the lot in accordance with standard procedures for any building
activity in the borough. No mobile home or other structure shall be
occupied until a valid occupancy permit has been issued by the
borough.
(2) Lots for lease. In those mobile home parks wherein some or all of
the mobile home lots will be leased, the following regulations shall
apply to the entire development exclusive of the lots being sold
individually:
(a) Initial permits. It shall be unlawful for any person or group to
construct, alter, extend or operate a mobile home park unless
and until that person or group obtains:
[1] A valid permit issued by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources, in the name of the operator, for
a specified construction, alteration or extension proposed.
§ 85-59 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 85-60
85:326
[2] Valid permit(s) authorizing construction of initial
occupancy issued by the Borough Code Enforcement
Officer in the name of the operator. All permits for water
supply and sewage systems shall have been obtained.
[3] Compliance with all other requirements contained herein.
[4] Final approval of the application by the Borough Council.
(b) Annual licenses. In addition to the initial permits, the operator
of a mobile home park with lots for lease shall apply to the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources and to
the Borough Code Enforcement Officer on or before the first
day of each year for an annual license to continue operation of
the mobile home park. The Code Enforcement Officer shall
issue the annual license upon satisfactory proof that the park
continues to meet the standards prescribed by the state
agencies having jurisdiction and the standards of this article
and other applicable ordinances. The license so issued shall be
valid for one year from the date of issuance.
B. Fees.
(1) Fees for the initial application and preliminary and final approvals
of any mobile home park shall be prescribed by regulations of the
Borough Council.
(2) The fee for the annual license required for mobile home parks
having lots for lease shall be prescribed by regulations of the
Borough Council and shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement
Officer with the application for the annual license.
C. Inspection.
(1) Upon notification to the licensee, manager or person in charge of a
mobile home park with lots for lease, the Building Inspector or
Code Enforcement Officer may inspect a mobile home park after
due notice to determine compliance with this article.
(2) Upon receipt of the application for annual license and before
issuing such annual license, the Code Enforcement Officer or other
designated representative of the borough shall make an inspection
of the mobile home park to determine compliance with this article
and other applicable ordinances. The Code Enforcement Officer or
other representative shall thereafter notify the licensee of any
instances of noncompliance and shall not issue the annual license
until the licensee has corrected all such violations.
D. Modular and mobile home inspections. The applicant or developer shall
inform the Borough Engineer of the delivery date of a modular and/or
mobile home. The Borough Engineer shall inspect the modular or
mobile home upon its arrival at the site prior to installation, to
§ 85-60 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 85-60
85:327
§ 85-61. Additional requirements.
§ 85-62. Mobile home definitions.65
For the purpose of this article, these terms shall be defined as follows:
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one unit, or in two or more units
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready
for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent
foundation. A mobile home need not meet local building codes, but shall
meet the standards of the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development, as indicated by the structural engineering bulletin(s) which
shall be provided to the borough by the applicant; also known as
"mobilehome."
determine if it meets the standards of Part 5, Standards for the
Installation of Mobile Homes (ANSI/NFPA) publication No. 501A 1977.
The Borough Engineer shall also inspect a modular home after its
installation and prior to occupancy by residents, in order to determine
its compliance with installation instruction outlined in the building
system approval report, which shall be provided by the applicant or
developer.
A. Mobile home stands. A concrete pad, properly graded, placed and
compacted so as to be durable and adequate for the support of the
maximum anticipated loads during all seasons, shall be used for all
mobile homes.
B. Anchoring. Every mobile home placed within a mobile home park shall
be anchored to the mobile home stand where it is located prior to the
unit being occupied or used in any other way or prior to the expiration
of seven days, whichever occurs first. The anchoring system shall be
designed to resist a minimum wind velocity of 90 miles per hour.
C. Stability. All mobile homes placed within a mobile home park shall,
prior to occupancy or other use, be affixed to their mobile home stands
in such a way so as to prevent tilting of the unit. No mobile home shall
permanently rest on the wheels used to transport the unit.
D. Skirts. All mobile homes placed within a mobile home park shall, prior
to occupancy or other use, have skirts installed for protection of the
utility connections.
E. Hitch. The hitch or tow bar attached to a mobile home for transport
purposes shall be removed and remain removed from the mobile home
when it is placed on its mobile home stand.
65.Editor's Note: For definitions applicable to the rest of this chapter, see § 85-8, Definitions
§ 85-60 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 85-62
85:328
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved
with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary
for the erection thereon of a single mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has
been so designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile home
lots for the placement thereof of mobile homes.
§ 85-62 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 85-62
85:329

ARTICLE VII
Administration; Fees; Penalties
§ 85-63. General administration.
All provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the Borough Council
or its officially designated representatives. All matters relating to this
chapter shall be submitted to the Borough Secretary who shall handle
the matter in accordance with current borough policies, procedures and
guidelines established by Council.
§ 85-64. Records.
The borough shall keep a public record of its correspondence, findings,
recommendations and actions relating to plans filed for review, in
accordance with the policies, procedures and guidelines established by the
Council.
§ 85-65. Fees and costs.
§ 85-66. Violations and penalties.
A. No application for preliminary or final plan approval shall be considered
as submitted until the fees and/or escrow deposit, as set forth below,
shall have been paid.
B. Council shall adopt and amend by resolution a schedule of fees, payable
by the applicant to the borough, for the filing of preliminary and final
plans.
C. Council shall adopt and amend by resolution a schedule of escrow
deposits to be paid by the applicant to the borough at the time of filing
of an application, sufficient to pay all borough expenditures anticipated
in the course of its review and disposition of plans.
(1) Costs incurred by the borough in excess of the escrowed amount
shall be paid by the applicant prior to the granting of approvals or
permits.
(2) If costs incurred by the borough are less than the escrowed
amount, the difference shall be refunded to the applicant following
disposition of the plans.
D. Borough expenditures subject to escrow as in Subsection C above
include but are not limited to the following:
(1) Engineering and other technical services such as plan review and
construction inspections.
(2) Materials and facilities tests.
(3) Services of the Borough Solicitor in reviewing and/or preparing
documents related to the plan reviews.
§ 85-63 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 85-66
85:331
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a
civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the borough, pay a
judgment of not more than $500, plus all court costs, including the
reasonable attorney fees incurred by the borough as a result thereof.
B. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or be payable until
the date of the determination of a violation by the District Justice.
C. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of
civil procedure.
D. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation,
unless the district justice determining that there has been a violation
further determines that there was a good faith basis for the person,
partnership or corporation violating this chapter to have believed that
there was no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to
have been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date
of the determination of a violation by the District Justice and thereafter
each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
E. All fines collected for such violations shall be paid to the borough.
§ 85-66 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 85-66
85:332
ARTICLE VIII
Amendments; Validity
§ 85-67. Amendment procedure.
The Borough Council may, from time to time, amend, supplement, change,
modify or repeal this chapter by proceeding in accordance with the
regulations of this article. The Council shall, by resolution adopted at a
regular or special meeting, fix the time and place of a public hearing on the
proposed amendment and cause public notice thereof to be given as follows:
§ 85-68. Referral to Planning Commissions.
All proposed amendments before adoption shall be referred to the Borough
and Montgomery County Planning Commissions at least 30 days prior to the
public hearing, for recommendation and report, which shall be advisory.
§ 85-69. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding
pending in any court or any rights acquired or existing under prior
subdivision and land development regulations of the Borough of East
Greenville, nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be
lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
A. By publishing a notice thereof once each week for two successive weeks
in a newspaper of general circulation in the borough. The first notice
shall not be more than 30 days or less than seven days from the date of
the hearing.
B. The notice shall state the time and place of the hearing, the general
nature of the proposed amendment and that full opportunity to be
heard will be given to any citizen and all parties in interest attending
such hearing.
C. Whenever a proposed amendment affects a particular property, there
shall be posted upon said property or premises at such place or places
as the Borough Council may direct, notice of said proposed amendment.
§ 85-67 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 85-69
85:333
Chapter 88
TAXATION
§ 85-69 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 85-69
85:334
ARTICLE I
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 3-5-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-266]
§ 88-1. Imposition of tax.
The Borough of East Greenville adopts the provisions of Article XI-D of the
Tax Reform Code of 1971 and imposes a realty transfer tax as authorized
under that Article subject to the rate limitations therein. The tax imposed
under this section shall be at the rate of 1%.
§ 88-2. Administration.
The tax imposed under § 88-1 and all applicable interest and penalties shall
be administered, collected and enforced under the Act of December 31,
1965 (P.L. 1257, No. 511), as amended, known as "The Local Tax Enabling
Act," provided that, if the correct amount of the tax is not paid by the
last date prescribed for timely payment, the Borough of East Greenville,
pursuant to Section 1102-D of the Tax Reform Code of 1971 (72 P.S.
§ 8102-D), authorizes and directs the Department of Revenue of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to determine, collect and enforce the tax,
interest and penalties.
§ 88-3. Interest.
Any tax imposed under § 88-1 that is not paid by the date the tax is due
shall bear interest as prescribed for interest on delinquent municipal claims
under the Act of May 16, 1923 (P.L. 207, No. 153) (53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.),
as amended, known as "The Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act." The
interest rate shall be the lesser of the interest rate imposed upon delinquent
commonwealth taxes as provided in Section 806 of the Act of April 9, 1929
(P.L. 343, No. 176) (72 P.S. § 806), as amended, known as "The Fiscal Code,"
or the maximum interest rate permitted under the Municipal Claims and Tax
Liens Act for tax claims.
§ 88-4. Repealer.
A. As of the effective date of this article, Ordinance No. 87-1, enacted by
the Borough Council of the Borough of East Greenville on January 5,
1987, is repealed.
B. The repealed ordinance enumerated in Subsection A shall remain
effective for documents that became subject to tax prior to the effective
date of this article.
66.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Realty Transfer Tax, adopted
1-5-1987 by Ord. No. 1-87.
§ 88-1 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 88-5
85:335
§ 88-5. When effective.
The provisions of this article shall become effective on and be applicable
to any document made, executed, delivered, accepted or presented for
recording on or after the date of enactment.
§ 88-6. (Reserved)
§ 88-7. (Reserved)
§ 88-8. (Reserved)
§ 88-9. (Reserved)
§ 88-10. (Reserved)
§ 88-11. (Reserved)
§ 88-12. (Reserved)
§ 88-13. (Reserved)
§ 88-14. (Reserved)
§ 88-15. (Reserved)
§ 88-5 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 88-15
85:336
ARTICLE II
Per Capita Tax
[Adopted 12-4-1972 by Ord. No. 7-72]
§ 88-16. Imposition of tax.
By authority of the Act of General Assembly of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania approved December 31, 1965, Act No. 511, as amended,
known as "The Local Tax Enabling Act,"67 a per capita tax of $5 is hereby
levied and assessed for the fiscal year 1973 and for each subsequent fiscal
year thereafter upon each resident and inhabitant of the Borough of East
Greenville who is 18 years of age and over, which tax shall be in addition to
any other taxes levied and assessed by the Borough of East Greenville.
§ 88-17. Adoption of list of residents.
The list of residents of the Borough of East Greenville prepared annually
by the Board for the Assessment and Revision of Taxes of Montgomery
County, or such list of residents as may be prepared by law, and any names
of residents added to said list in the manner provided by law, are hereby
adopted for purposes of levying and assessing the per capita tax imposed by
this article.
§ 88-18. Collection.
Said tax shall be collected and paid over by the duly elected or appointed
Tax Collector of the Borough of East Greenville at the same time as other
borough taxes are collected and paid over.
§ 88-19. Discounts and penalties.
The amount and periods of discount and penalty for payment of said tax
shall be the same as provided for in the Local Tax Collection Law of May 25,
1945, P.L. 1050, its amendments and supplements.68
§ 88-20. Tax Collector: powers and duties, compensation.
A. The Tax Collector shall have all of the powers and be subject to all of the
duties to the same extent and as fully provided for in the said Local Tax
Collection Law of 1945,69 its amendments and supplements.
B. The compensation of the Tax Collector for the collection of said tax shall
be the same as fixed from time to time by the Borough of East
Greenville for the collection of other borough taxes.
67.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
68.Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5511.1 et seq.
69.Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5511.1 et seq.
§ 88-16 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 88-20
85:337

ARTICLE III
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 2-13-1967 by Ord. No. 4-67]
§ 88-21. Definitions and word usage.
A. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall have, for
the purpose of this article, the meanings ascribed to them in this
section:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other
unincorporated group of two or more persons.
BUSINESS — An enterprise, activity, profession or any other
undertaking of an unincorporated nature conducted for profit or
ordinarily conducted for profit, whether by a person, partnership,
association or any other entity.
CORPORATION — A corporation or joint-stock association organized
under the laws of the United States, the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or any other state, territory, foreign country or
dependency.
CURRENT YEAR — The calendar year for which the tax is levied.
DOMICILE — The place where one lives and has his permanent home
and to which he has the intention of returning whenever he is absent.
Actual residence is not necessarily "domicile," for "domicile" is the fixed
place of abode which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent
rather than transitory. "Domicile" is the place in which a man has
voluntarily fixed the habitation of himself and his family, not for a mere
special or limited purpose but with the present intention of making a
permanent home until some event occurs to induce him to adopt some
other permanent home. In the case of businesses or associations, the
"domicile" is that place considered as the center of business affairs and
the place where its functions are discharged.
EARNED INCOME — Salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses, incentive
payments, fees, tips and other compensation received by a person or
his personal representative for services rendered, whether directly or
through an agent, and whether in cash or in property. However, "earned
income" shall not include wages or compensation paid to persons on
active military service; periodic payments for sickness and disability
other than regular wages received during a period of sickness,
disability or retirement, or payments arising under workmen's
compensation acts, occupational disease acts and similar legislation; or
payments commonly recognized as old-age benefits, retirement pay or
pensions paid to persons retired from service after reaching a specific
age or after a stated period of employment; or payments commonly
known as public assistance, or unemployment compensation payments
made by any governmental agency; or payments to reimburse
expenses; or payments made by employers or labor unions for wage and
salary supplemental programs, including but not limited to programs
§ 88-21 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 88-21
85:339
§ 88-22. Imposition of tax.
A tax for general revenue purposes in the amount of 1% is hereby imposed
on earned income and net profits earned by residents and nonresidents of
the political subdivision during the taxable year beginning on the first day
of April 1967 and continuing for each taxable year thereafter.
§ 88-23. Declaration and payment of tax.
covering hospitalization, sickness, disability or death, supplemental
unemployment benefits, strike benefits, social security and retirement.
EMPLOYER — A person, partnership, association, corporation,
institution, governmental body or unit or agency, or any other entity
employing one or more persons for a salary, wage, commission or other
compensation.
INCOME TAX OFFICER OR OFFICER — Any person, public employee
or private agency designated by the political subdivision to collect and
administer the tax on earned income and net profits.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession or other activity, except by corporations, after provision for
all costs and expenses incurred in the conduct thereof, determined
either on a cash or accrual basis in accordance with the accounting
system used in such business, profession or other activity, but without
deduction of taxes based on income.
NONRESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity
domiciled outside the political subdivision.
PERSON OR INDIVIDUAL — A natural person.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION — The Borough of East Greenville, the
Borough of Green Lane, the Borough of Red Hill, the Township of
Marlborough and the Township of Upper Hanover.
PRECEDING YEAR — The calendar year before the current year.
RESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity
domiciled in the political subdivision.
SUCCEEDING YEAR — The calendar year following the current year.
TAXPAYER — A person, partnership, association or any other entity
required hereunder to file a return of earned income or net profits or to
pay a tax thereon.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural, and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
A. Net profits.
(1) For 1967. Every taxpayer making net profits shall, on or before
June 15, 1967, make and file with the Income Tax Officer on a form
prescribed by the Income Tax Officer, a declaration of his estimated
§ 88-21 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 88-23
85:340
net profits during the period beginning April 1, 1967 and ending
December 31, 1967, and pay to the Income Tax Officer in three
equal installments the tax due thereon as follows: the first
installment at the time of filing the declaration, the second
installment on or before September 15, 1967 and the third
installment on or before January 15, 1968. And on or before April
15, 1968, the taxpayer shall file a final return showing the amount
of net profits earned during the period April 1, 1967 and ending
December 31, 1967, the total amount of tax due thereon and the
amount of tax paid thereon. At the time of filing the final return,
the taxpayer shall pay to the Income Tax Officer the balance of
tax due or shall make demand for refund or credit in the case of
overpayment.
(2) After 1967.
(a) Every taxpayer making net profits shall, on or before April 15
of the current year, make and file with the Income Tax Officer
on a form prescribed by the Income Tax Officer, a declaration
of his estimated net profits during the period beginning
January 1 and ending December 31 of the current year, and pay
to the Officer in four equal quarterly installments the tax due
thereon as follows: the first installment on or before April 15 of
the current year, the second installment on or before June 15 of
the current year, the third installment on or before September
15 of the current year and the fourth installment on or before
January 15 of the succeeding year.
(b) Any taxpayer who first anticipates any net profits after April 15
of the current year shall make and file the declaration
hereinabove required on or before June 15 of the current year,
September 15 of the current year or December 15 of the
current year, whichever of these dates next follows the date on
which the taxpayer first anticipates such net profit, and pay to
the Income Tax Officer in equal installments the tax due
thereon on or before the quarterly payment dates which
remain after the filing of the declaration.
(c) Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15 of the succeeding
year, make and file with the Income Tax Officer on a form
prescribed by the Income Tax Officer, a final return showing
the amount of net profits earned during the period beginning
January 1 of the current year and ending December 31 of the
current year, the total amount of tax due thereon and the total
amount of tax paid thereon. At the time of filing the final
return, the taxpayer shall pay to the Income Tax Officer the
balance of tax due or shall make demand for refund or credit in
the case of overpayment.
(d) Any taxpayer may, in lieu of paying the last quarterly
installment of his estimated tax, elect to make and file with the
§ 88-23 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 88-23
85:341
Officer on or before January 31 of the succeeding year, the final
return as hereinabove required.
(e) Every taxpayer who discontinues business prior to December
31 of the current year shall, within 30 days after the
discontinuance of business, file his final return as hereinabove
required and pay the tax due.
B. Earned income.
(1) For 1967. Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15, 1968, make
and file with the Income Tax Officer a final return showing the
amount of earned income (other than net profit) received during
the period beginning April 1, 1967 and ending December 31, 1967,
the total tax due thereon, the amount of the tax paid thereon, the
amount of tax paid thereon that has been withheld pursuant to the
provisions relating to collection at source and the balance of the tax
due. At the time of filing said final return, the taxpayer shall pay the
balance of the tax due or shall make demand for refund or credit in
the case of overpayment.
(2) After 1967. Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15 of the
succeeding year, make and file with the Income Tax Officer on a
form prescribed by the Income Tax Officer, a final return showing
the amount of earned income received during the period beginning
January 1 of the current year and ending December 31 of the
current year, the total amount of tax due thereon, the amount of tax
paid thereon, the amount of tax thereon that has been withheld
pursuant to the provisions relating to collection at source and the
balance of tax due. At the time of filing the final return, the
taxpayer shall pay the balance of the tax due or shall make demand
for refund or credit in the case of overpayment.
(3) Quarterly return. Every taxpayer who is employed for a salary,
wage, commission or other compensation and who receives any
earned income not subject to the provisions relating to collection at
source shall make and file with the Income Tax Officer on a form
prescribed by the Income Tax Officer, a quarterly return on or
before April 30 of the current year, July 31 of the current year,
October 31 of the current year and January 31 of the succeeding
year, setting forth the aggregate amount of earned income not
subject to withholding and earned by him during the three month
period ending March 31 of the current year, June 30 of the current
year, September 30 of the current year and December 31 of the
current year; respectively, and subject to the tax, together with
such other information as the Officer may require. Every taxpayer
making such return shall, at the time of filing thereof, pay to the
Officer the amount of tax shown as due thereon.
(4) Where the taxpayer has filed a declaration required hereinabove
and shall thereafter reasonably expect to earn during the taxable
§ 88-23 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 88-23
85:342
§ 88-24. Collection at source.
period additional earnings not subject to collection at source, or
finds that he has overestimated his earnings, he may file an
amended declaration with the Income Tax Officer, setting forth
such relevant information as the Income Tax Officer may require.
C. Fiscal year.
(1) Where the taxpayer is on a fiscal year basis different from the
taxable period, he may file a declaration on a fiscal year basis,
setting forth his estimated net profits or earnings for a period
included in the taxable period; then, in lieu of filing his declaration
and making payments thereon at the times set forth in Subsections
A and B, he may pay the quarterly installments of the estimated tax
according to the declaration filed for the portion of the taxable
period included in said fiscal year, and on or before the 105th day
after the close of the fiscal year, file a declaration of the estimated
tax for the portion of the taxable period included in said succeeding
fiscal year and pay said tax in equal quarterly installments,
beginning with the due date of the filing and ending with the first
quarterly installment due after the close of the taxable period.
(2) The taxpayer shall file a final return on or before the 105th day
after the close of the fiscal year.
A. Registration by employers. Every employer having an office, factory,
workshop, branch, warehouse or other place of business within the
political subdivision who, on April 1, 1967, employs one or more
persons, other than domestic servants, for a salary, wage, commission
or other compensation, shall, on or before April 1, 1967, register with
the Income Tax Officer his name and address and such other
information as the Officer may require. Every employer having an
office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse or other place of business
within the political subdivision who, after April 1, 1967, employs for the
first time after that date one or more persons, other than domestic
servants, for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation, shall,
within 15 days after becoming an employer, register with the Officer his
name and address and such other information as the Officer may
require.
B. Duty to withhold. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop,
branch, warehouse or other place of business within the political
subdivision who employs one or more persons, other than domestic
servants, for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation, shall
deduct at the time of payment thereof the tax imposed by this article on
the earned income due to his employee or employees.
C. Withholding procedure.
(1) For 1967.
§ 88-23 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 88-24
85:343
(a) For the period from April 1, 1967, to December 31, 1967, every
employer shall, on or before July 31, 1967, and on or before
July 31, 1967, and on or before October 31, 1967, and on or
before January 31, 1968, file a return and pay to the Income
Tax Officer the taxes deducted during the preceding threemonth
periods ending June 30, 1967, September 30, 1967, and
December 31, 1967, respectively.
(b) On or before February 28, 1968, every employer shall file with
the Income Tax Officer:
[1] An annual return showing the total amount of earned
income paid, the total amount of tax deducted and the total
amount of tax paid to the Income Tax Officer for the period
beginning April 1, 1967, and ending December 31, 1967.
[2] A return withholding statement for each employee
employed during all or any part of the period beginning
April 1, 1967, and ending December 31, 1967, setting forth
the employee's name, address and social security number,
the amount of earned income paid to the employee during
said period, the amount of tax deducted, the political
subdivisions imposing the tax upon such employee and the
amount of tax paid to the Income Tax Officer. Every
employer shall furnish two copies of the individual return
to the employee for whom it is filed.
(2) After 1967.
(a) Every employer shall, on or before April 30 of the current year,
July 31 of the current year, October 31 of the current year and
January 31 of the succeeding year, file a return and pay to the
Income Tax Officer the amount of taxes deducted during the
preceding three-month periods ending March 31 of the current
year, June 30 of the current year, September 30 of the current
year and December 31 of the current year, respectively. Such
return shall show the name and social security number of each
such employee, the earned income of such employee during
such preceding three-month period, the tax deducted
therefrom, the political subdivisions imposing the tax upon
such employee, the total earned income of all such employees
during such preceding three-month period and the total tax
deducted therefrom and paid with the return.
(b) On or before February 28 of the succeeding year, every
employer shall file with the Income Tax Officer:
[1] An annual return showing the total amount of earned
income paid, the total amount of tax deducted and the total
amount of tax paid to the Income Tax Officer for the period
beginning January 1 of the current year and ending
December 31 of the current year.
§ 88-24 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 88-24
85:344
§ 88-25. Income Tax Officer: powers and duties; confidential
information.
[2] A return withholding statement for each employee
employed during all or any part of the period beginning
January 1 of the current year and ending December 31 of
the current year, setting forth the employee's name,
address and social security number, the amount of earned
income paid to the employee during said period, the
amount of tax deducted, the political subdivisions
imposing the tax upon such employee and the amount of
tax paid to the Income Tax Officer. Every employer shall
furnish two copies of the individual return to the employee
for whom it is filed.
D. Every employer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of the
current year shall, within 30 days after discontinuance of business, file
the returns and withholding statements hereinabove required and pay
the tax due.
E. Every employer who willfully or negligently fails or omits to make the
deductions required by this section shall be liable for payment of the
taxes which he was required to withhold to the extent that such taxes
have not been recovered from the employee.
F. The failure or omission of any employer to make the deductions
required by this section shall not relieve any employee from the
payment of the tax or from complying with the requirements of this
article with respect to making returns and payment thereof.
G. Any employer who for two of the preceding four quarterly periods has
failed to deduct the proper tax or any part thereof or has failed to pay
over the proper amount of tax to the Income Tax Officer may be
required by such Officer to file his return and pay the tax monthly. In
such cases, payments of tax shall be made to the Officer on or before
the last day of the month succeeding the month for which the tax was
withheld.
H. No employer shall be required to register, deduct taxes, file returns or
pay taxes in the cases of domestic servants.
A. The office of Income Tax Officer is hereby created and the person
designated as such by the political subdivision shall administer the
provisions of this article. Such person shall be bonded as the political
subdivision may determine at all times for all money coming into his
hands under this article, and the cost of such bond shall be paid as
determined by the political subdivision.
B. The Income Tax Officer shall collect and receive the taxes, fines and
penalties imposed by this article, shall furnish a receipt for payment
when requested to do so by a taxpayer and shall keep a record showing
§ 88-24 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 88-25
85:345
the amount received by him from each taxpayer under this article,
together with the date of the receipt of such payment.
C. The Income Tax Officer is hereby empowered to prescribe, adopt,
promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to any matter
pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this article,
including provisions for the reexamination and correction of
declarations and returns and of payments alleged or found to be
incorrect or as to which an overpayment is claimed or found to have
occurred, and to make refunds in cases of overpayment for any period
of time not to exceed six years subsequent to the date of payment of the
sum involved, and to prescribe forms necessary for the administration
of this article. No rule or regulation of any kind shall be enforceable
unless it has been approved by resolution of the political subdivision. A
copy of such rules and regulations currently in force shall be available
for public inspection.
D. The Income Tax Officer or any other person so designated by him is
hereby authorized to examine the books, papers and records of any
employer or of any taxpayer or of any person whom the Officer
reasonably believes to be an employer or taxpayer, in order to verify the
accuracy of any declaration or return, or if no declaration or return was
filed, to ascertain the tax due. Every employer and every taxpayer and
every person whom the Officer reasonably believes to be an employer
or taxpayer is hereby directed and required to give to the Officer or to
any agent designated by him the means, facilities and opportunity for
such examination and investigations as are hereby authorized.
E. The Income Tax Officer is authorized to establish different filing,
reporting and payment dates for taxpayers whose fiscal years do not
coincide with the calendar year.
F. The Income Tax Officer is authorized to examine any person under oath
concerning any income which was or should have been returned for
taxation and shall have the power to compel the attendance of persons
whom he deems necessary to examine as witnesses and to compel the
production of books, records and papers relating to any account being
examined.
G. The Income Tax Officer shall have the power to reexamine returns and
correct erroneous returns, and on petition and proof by the taxpayer, to
make refunds and authorize the refunding of taxes erroneously or
improperly collected from or paid by the taxpayer.
H. Any information gained by the Income Tax Officer or any other official
or agent of this political subdivision as a result of any return,
investigation, hearing or examination required or authorized by this
article shall become confidential, except for official purposes or except
in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by
law. Any disclosure of any such information contrary to the provisions of
this section shall constitute a violation of this article.
§ 88-25 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 88-26
85:346
§ 88-26. Interest and penalty on unpaid taxes; collection.
§ 88-27. Violations and penalties.
A. All taxes imposed under this article remaining unpaid after they
become due shall bear interest, in addition to the amount of unpaid tax,
at the rate of 6% per annum, and the person against whom such tax is
imposed shall pay a penalty of 1/2 of 1% of the amount of the unpaid tax
for each month or fraction of a month during which the tax remains
unpaid.
B. All taxes imposed by this article, together with all penalties, interest
and costs, shall be collectible by the Income Tax Officer as taxes are by
law recoverable under the appropriate provisions, not inconsistent with
this article, of The Local Tax Enabling Act of 1965, approved December
31, 1965, P.L. 1257,70 provided that the amount of any tax imposed by
this article shall be assessed within three years after the return was
filed or within three years after the tax became due, whichever is later,
and no proceeding in court without assessment for the collection of
such tax shall be commenced after the expiration of such period, except
as follows:
(1) In the case of a false or fraudulent return with the intent to evade
tax, the tax may be assessed or a proceeding in court for collection
may be commenced without assessment at any time.
(2) In the case of a willful attempt to defeat or evade tax, the tax may
be assessed or a proceeding in court for collection may be
commenced without assessment at any time.
(3) In the case of failure to file a return, the tax may be assessed or a
proceeding in court for collection may be commenced without
assessment at any time.
(4) In the case where a taxpayer omits from his earned income an
amount which is in excess of 25% of the amount stated in the
return, the tax may be assessed or a proceeding in court may be
commenced without assessment at any time within six years after
the return was filed or within six years after the tax became due,
whichever is later.
A. Any person who fails, neglects or refuses to make any declaration or
return required by this article; any employer who fails, neglects or
refuses to register or to pay the tax deducted from his employees, or
fails, neglects or refuses to deduct or withhold the tax from his
employees; any person who refuses to permit the Income Tax Officer or
any agent designated by him to examine his books, records and papers;
and any person who knowingly makes any incomplete, false or
fraudulent return or attempts to do anything whatsoever to avoid the
70.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 88-26 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 88-27
85:347
§ 88-28. Authorization for creation of bureaus and joint
agreements.
The political subdivision reserves the privilege of providing for the creation
of bureaus or the compensation of officers, clerks and employees either
under existing departments or otherwise, as may be deemed expedient or
necessary for the assessment and collection of taxes imposed under this
article, and also the right to make joint agreements for the collection,
including the cost thereof, with other municipalities and school districts
imposing like or similar taxes.
§ 88-29. Nonapplicability of provisions.
This article shall knot apply to personal property or to persons as to whom
it is beyond the legal power of the political subdivision to impose the tax
herein provided for.
full disclosure of the amount of his net profits or earned income in order
to avoid the payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed by
this article, shall, upon conviction thereof before any District Justice,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500 for each offense and
costs, and in default of payment of said fine and costs, to imprisonment
for a period not exceeding 30 days.
B. Any person who, except as permitted by the provisions of § 88-25H of
this article, divulges any information which is confidential under the
provisions of this article, shall, upon conviction thereof before any
District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50 nor more
than $500 for each offense, together with costs, and in default of
payment of such fine and costs, shall be imprisoned for a period not
exceeding 30 days.
C. The penalties imposed under this section shall be in addition to any
other penalty imposed by any other section of this article or of The
Local Tax Enabling Act of 1965, P.L. 1257.71
71.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 88-27 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 88-29
85:348
ARTICLE IV
Real Estate Tax Certifications
[Adopted 2-28-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-0172]
§ 88-30. Authorization to charge and recover fees.
A. The Tax Collector for the Borough of East Greenville is hereby
authorized to charge a fee not to exceed $25 for each and every tax
certification requested and a fee not to exceed $5 per duplicate bill
requested, plus costs of expedited service, including, but not limited to,
faxing costs and express and overnight mailing charges.
B. The Tax Collector for the Borough of East Greenville is hereby
authorized to recover from the taxpayer any and all bank fees charged
to the tax collection account for tax payments returned due to
insufficient funds.
72.Editor's Note: This ordinance repealed former Article IV, Real Estate Tax Certifications,
adopted 12-23-1997 by Ord. No. 11-97.
§ 88-30 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 88-30
85:349

ARTICLE V
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 6-7-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-04]
§ 88-31. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in, this section, except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
COLLECTOR — The person, public employee or private agency designated
by the political subdivision to collect and administer the tax herein imposed.
DCED — The Department of Community and Economic Development of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EARNED INCOME — Compensation, as this term is defined in Section 13
(relating to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act
of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as
amended.
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, limited-liability
corporation, limited-liability partnership, corporation, governmental body,
agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation basis, including a self-employed person.
HE, HIS or HIM — Indicates the singular and plural number, as well as
male, female and neuter genders.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation,
trade or profession within the corporate limits of the political subdivision.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession or other activity, as this term is defined in Section 13 (relating
to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of December
31, 1965, P.L. 1257, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as amended.
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, carried on or
performed within the corporate limits of the political subdivision for which
compensation is charged or received, whether by means of salary, wages,
commission or fees for services rendered.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION — The area within the corporate limits of the
Borough of East Greenville.
TAX — The local services tax at the rate fixed in § 88-32 of this article.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 until December 31 in any year; a
calendar year.
§ 88-32. Levy of tax.
A. For specific revenue purposes, an annual tax is hereby levied and
assessed, commencing January 1, 2011, upon the privilege of engaging
§ 88-31 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 88-32
85:351
§ 88-33. Exemption and refunds.
in an occupation with a primary place of employment within the
Borough of East Greenville during the tax year. Each natural person
who exercises such privilege for any length of time during any tax year
shall pay the tax for that year in the amount of $52, assessed on a prorata
basis, in accordance with the provisions of this article.
B. This tax may be used solely for the following purposes as the same may
be allocated by the Borough of East Greenville from time to time:
(1) Emergency services, which shall include emergency medical
services, police services and/or fire services;
(2) Road construction and/or maintenance;
(3) Reduction of property taxes; or
(4) Property tax relief through implementation of a homestead and
farmstead exclusion in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 85,
Subchapter F73 (relating to homestead property exclusion).
C. The political subdivision shall use no less than 25% of the funds derived
from the tax for emergency services.
D. This tax is in addition to all other taxes of any kind or nature heretofore
levied by the political subdivision.
E. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person may be employed.
A. Exemption. Any person whose total earned income and net profits from
all sources within the political subdivision is less than $12,000 for any
calendar year in which the tax is levied is exempt from the payment of
the tax for that calendar year. In addition, the following persons are
exempt from payment of the tax:
(1) Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which
the United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans Administration or its
successor to be a total, one-hundred-percent disability.
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. For the purposes of this subsection, "reserve
component of the armed forces" shall mean the United States Army
Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
73.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8581 et seq.
§ 88-32 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 88-33
85:352
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air
Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
B. Procedure to claim exemption.
(1) A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax
may annually file an exemption certificate with the political
subdivision and with the person's employer affirming that the
person reasonably expects to receive earned income and net profits
from all sources within the political subdivision of less than
$12,000 in the calendar year for which the exemption certificate is
filed. In the event the political subdivision utilizes a tax collection
officer, it shall provide a copy of the exemption certificate to that
officer. The exemption certificate shall have attached to it a copy of
all the employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms from employment
within the political subdivision for the year prior to the fiscal year
for which the employee is requesting to be exempted from the tax.
Upon receipt of the exemption certificate and until otherwise
instructed by the political subdivision or except as required by
Subsection B(2), the employer shall not withhold the tax from the
person during the calendar year or the remainder of the calendar
year for which the exemption certificate applies. Employers shall
ensure that the exemption certificate forms are readily available to
employees at all times and shall furnish each new employee with a
form at the time of hiring. The exemption certificate form shall be
the uniform form provided by the political subdivision.
(2) With respect to a person who claimed an exemption from the tax for
a given calendar year, upon notification to an employer by the
person or by the political subdivision that the person has received
earned income and net profits from all sources within the political
subdivision equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or
that the person is otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for that
calendar year, or upon an employer's payment to the person of
earned income within the municipality in an amount equal to or in
excess of $12,000 in that calendar year, an employer shall withhold
the local services tax from the person under Subsection B(3).
(3) If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year
from the tax becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year under
Subsection B(2), the employer shall withhold the tax for the
remainder of that calendar year. The employer shall withhold from
the person, for the first payroll period after receipt of the
notification under Subsection B(2), a lump sum equal to the amount
of tax that was not withheld from the person due to the exemption
claimed by the person under this subsection, plus the per-payroll
amount due for that first payroll period. The amount of tax withheld
per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in that
calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for other
employees. In the event the employment of a person subject to
§ 88-33 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 88-33
85:353
§ 88-34. Duty of employers to collect.
withholding of the tax under this subsection is subsequently
severed in that calendar year, the person shall be liable for any
outstanding balance of tax due, and the political subdivision may
pursue collection under this article.
(4) Except as provided in Subsection B(2), it is the intent of this
subsection that employers shall not be responsible for investigating
exemption certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or
exempting any employee from the local services tax.
C. Refunds. The Borough of East Greenville, in consultation with the
Collector and DCED, shall establish procedures for the processing of
refund claims for any tax paid by any person who is eligible for
exemption, which procedures shall be in accord with provisions of the
general municipal law relating to refunds of overpayments and interest
on overpayments. Refunds made within 75 days of a refund request or
75 days after the last day the employer is required to remit the tax for
the last quarter of the calendar year, whichever is later, shall not be
subject to interest. No refunds shall be made for amounts overpaid in a
calendar year that do not exceed $1. The Borough of East Greenville or
the Collector shall determine eligibility for exemption and provide
refunds to exempt persons.
A. Each employer within the political subdivision, as well as those
employers situated outside the political subdivision but who engage in
business within the political subdivision, is hereby charged with the
duty of collecting the tax from each of his employees engaged by him or
performing for him within the political subdivision and making a return
and payment thereof to the Collector. Further, each employer is hereby
authorized to deduct this tax for each employee in his employ, whether
said employee is paid by salary, wage or commission and whether or not
all such services are performed within the political subdivision.
B. A person subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro rata
share of the tax for each payroll period in which the person is engaging
in an occupation. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person
for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the rate of the tax
levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods
established by the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of
determining the pro rata share, an employer shall round down the
amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest 1/100 of a
dollar. Collection of the tax shall be made on a payroll-period basis for
each payroll period in which the person is engaging in an occupation,
except as provided in Subsection D of this section. For purposes of this
subsection, "combined rate" shall mean the aggregate annual rate of
the tax levied by the school district and the municipality.
C. No person shall be subject to the payment of the local services tax by
more than one political subdivision during each payroll period.
§ 88-33 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 88-34
85:354
§ 88-35. Returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the
tax on forms to be supplied to the employer by the Collector. If an employer
fails to file the return and pay the tax, whether or not the employer makes
collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him to an
employee, except as provided hereafter in this article, the employer shall be
responsible for the payment of the tax in full as though the tax had been
originally levied against the employer.
§ 88-36. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
In each tax year, each employer shall use his employment records to
determine the number of employees from whom such tax shall be deducted
and paid over to the Collector on or before the 30th day following the end
of each calendar quarter of each such tax year.
§ 88-37. Self-employed individuals.
Each self-employed individual who performs services of any type or kind
or engages in any occupation or profession within a primary place of
employment within the political subdivision shall be required to comply with
D. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the tax if the employee provides a recent pay statement
from a principal employer that includes the name of the employer, the
length of the payroll period and the amount of the tax withheld and a
statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
employee's principal employer, and the employee will notify other
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two
weeks of its occurrence. The employee's statement shall be provided on
the form approved by DCED.
E. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person may be employed. The political subdivision shall provide a
taxpayer a receipt of payment upon request by the taxpayer.
F. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for the
payment of the withheld tax money to the political subdivision if the
failure to withhold taxes arises from incorrect information submitted by
the employee as to the employee's place or places of employment, the
employee's principal office or where the employee is principally
employed. Further, an employer shall not be liable for payment of the
local services tax in an amount exceeding the amount withheld by the
employer if the employer complies with the provisions of § 88-33B of
this article and this section and remits the amount so withheld in
accordance with this article.
G. Employers shall be required to remit the local services taxes 30 days
after the end of each quarter of a calendar year.
§ 88-34 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 88-37
85:355
this article and pay the pro rata portion of the tax due to the Collector on or
before the 30th day following the end of each quarter.
§ 88-38. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation or
employed in more than one political subdivision.
§ 88-39. Nonresidents subject to tax.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places
of business outside of the political subdivision but who perform services
of any type or kind or engage in any occupation or profession within the
political subdivision do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject
themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under
this article with the same force and effect as though they were residents of
the political subdivision. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation
within the political subdivision and an employee of a nonresidential
employer may, for the purpose of this article, be considered a self-employed
person, and in the event his tax is not paid, the political subdivision shall
have the option of proceeding against either the employer or employee for
the collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 88-40. Duty of Collector; administration and enforcement of tax.
A. The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the
person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. In the
event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is,
concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires that the
person work in more than one political subdivision during a payroll
period, the priority of claim to collect the local services tax shall be in
the following order:
(1) First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his
principal office or is principally employed.
(2) Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and
works if the tax is levied by that political subdivision.
(3) Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and
which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home. In
case of dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that
calendar year declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment
constitutes prima facie certification of payment to all other political
subdivisions.
A. The Collector shall be appointed by resolution of the political
subdivision. It shall be the duty of the Collector to accept and receive
payments of this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the amount
received by him from each employer of self-employed person, together
with the date the tax was received.
§ 88-37 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 88-40
85:356
§ 88-41. Suits for recovery of unpaid tax; interest; penalty for
nonpayment.
§ 88-42. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article, or whoever refuses inspection of the books, records or accounts
in his custody and control setting forth the number of employees subject
to this tax who are in his employment, or whoever fails or refuses to file
any return required by this article shall be guilty of a violation and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600
and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to
imprisonment for not more than 30 days. The action to enforce the penalty
herein prescribed may be instituted against any person in charge of the
business of any employer who shall have failed or who refuses to file a
return required by this article.
B. The Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby charged and empowered,
subject to municipal approval, to prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules
and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration
and enforcement of this article, including provisions for the
examination of payroll records of any employer subject to this article,
the examination and correction of any return made in compliance with
this article and any payment alleged or found to be incorrect or as to
which overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any person
aggrieved by any decision of the Collector shall have the right to appeal
consistent with the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights74 under Act 50 of
1998.
C. The Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax
due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the
Collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due dates above set forth, the Collector may sue for the
recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article, together with
interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
on the amount of such tax shall be calculated beginning with the due
date of the tax, and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat rate of
such tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery
of this tax or other appropriate remedy undertaken, the individual liable
therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of
collection.
74.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8421 et seq.
§ 88-40 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 88-43
85:357
§ 88-43. Interpretation; validity.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
political subdivision to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any
occupation not within the taxing power of the political subdivision
under the Constitution of the United States and the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of
the tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
§ 88-43 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 88-43
85:358
ARTICLE VI
Collection of Delinquent Real Estate Taxes
[Adopted 12-17-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-04]
§ 88-44. Authorization; appointment of collector.
In addition to the authorization for the collection of taxes and institution
of tax sales authorized by the Real Estate Tax Sales Law (RETSL), 72 P.S.
§ 5860.201 et seq., the Montgomery County Tax Claim Bureau is appointed
as alternative collector and is authorized and directed to file liens for
existing delinquent real estate taxes with the Prothonotary of Montgomery
County in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Claims and Tax
Liens Act, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 88-45. Interest.
In accordance with the MCTLA and RETSL, interest shall be charged on
taxes so returned from and after but not before the first day of the month
following the return. Interest shall be charged at the rate of 9% per annum.
§ 88-46. Charges, expenses and fees.
Pursuant to Section 7106 of the MCTLA,75 it is hereby established that
the reasonable charges, expenses and fees incurred in the collection of
any delinquent account under the MCTLA are hereby fixed at 5% of the
total amount of the delinquent taxes (including interest and penalties),
and that additional reasonable attorney's fees incurred in the collection
of any delinquent taxes shall be fixed at 1% of the total amount of the
delinquent taxes (including interest and penalties), and that said charges
for attorney's fees and for all charges, expenses and fees set forth herein
shall be paid to the County of Montgomery through the Montgomery County
Tax Claim Bureau in lien of payment of commission pursuant to Section 207
of RETSL.76
§ 88-47. Additional action.
The proper officials of the Borough of East Greenville, Pennsylvania, are
hereby authorized and empowered to take such additional action as they
may deem necessary or appropriate to implement the article.
75.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7106.
76.Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5860.207.
§ 88-44 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 88-47
85:359
Chapter 89
TENANT REGISTRATION
§ 89-1. Annual report required.
§ 89-2. Reports to Borough Secretary; forms.
§ 89-3. Corporation presidents and partners to make reports.
When the owner of real estate subject to the provisions of this chapter is
a corporation, then the president of the corporation shall be the person
required to make the reports mandated herein. When the owner of real
estate subject to the provisions of this chapter is a partnership or other
entity, all of the partners or all of the members thereof shall be the persons
required to make the reports mandated herein.
§ 89-4. Purpose.
The provisions of this chapter are declared to be for the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the borough.
§ 89-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter, upon summary conviction before the District Magistrate, shall be
subject to a fine for the use of the borough of not less than $100 and not
more than $500 and the costs, as in other cases of summary conviction, and,
in default thereof, shall be sentenced to imprisonment in the Montgomery
County Prison for a period not exceeding 10 days.
Chapter 91
A. All owners of property leased for either residential or commercial
occupancy shall annually report the name, home address and date of
birth of all such residential and/or commercial building tenants. Every
owner of said leased unit(s) shall be further required to submit a
statement of the number of such rental units owned by him per building
within the Borough of East Greenville. Such reporting shall occur by
January 31 of each new year.
B. As tenants change from time to time during the course of the year, the
owner of such leased property shall report such change within 30 days
of each occurrence, regardless of the frequency of the occurrences.
A. The reporting required by the chapter shall be made to the Borough
Secretary at the borough office.
B. The borough shall provide forms to be used for the registration of
tenants of leased properties within the boundaries of East Greenville
Borough.
§ 88-47 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 89-5
89:360
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parades and motorcades — See Ch. 60.
§ 89-5 TENANT REGISTRATION § 89-5
89:361

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 91-1. Definitions and word usage.
§ 91-2. Adoption of permanent traffic and parking regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances or parts of ordinances or as amendments to ordinances of the
Borough of East Greenville.
§ 91-3. Temporary and emergency regulations.
§ 91-4. Experimental regulations.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in The Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania, as now in force or
as hereafter amended, enacted or reenacted, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
B. The term "legal holidays" as used in this chapter shall mean and
include: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas, or days celebrated as such.
C. In this chapter the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
A. The Chief of Police shall have the following powers to regulate traffic
and parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations.
(2) In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works, or in the
conduct of parades, processions or public events, to restrict or
prohibit traffic and/or parking in limited areas for periods of not
more than 72 hours.
B. Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Chief of Police and Police Department in the same manner as
permanent regulations. Any person who shall operate or park a vehicle
or tractor in violation of any such regulation, or who shall move,
remove, destroy, injure or deface any sign or marking erected, posted
or made to give notice of any such regulation, shall, upon conviction
thereof, be liable to the penalty set forth in the law or elsewhere in this
chapter for a violation of such nature.
A. The Chief of Police may, from time to time, designate places upon and
along the highways in the borough where, for a period of not more than
90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations, prohibitions and
restrictions shall be in force and effect, and shall designate such
§ 91-1 TENANT REGISTRATION § 91-4
89:363
§ 91-5. Enforcement. [Amended 11-28-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-06]
This chapter shall be enforced by the police officers of the Borough of
East Greenville Police Department who are hereby given authority to direct
traffic on the highways and intersections of the Borough in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter and the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. This chapter shall also be enforced by the Borough's Code
Enforcement Officer.
locations by proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions
and restrictions shall be effective just as if they had been specified
in this chapter. No person shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor
in violation of any such regulation, prohibition or restriction, and no
person shall move, remove, destroy or deface any sign or marking
erected, posted or made by authority of this section.
B. The purpose of this section is to allow for the test and experimental
determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent changes
in the ordinances of the borough relative to traffic and parking.
§ 91-4 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 91-5
89:364
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 91-6. Use of sidewalks by motor vehicles.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle or tractor upon any sidewalk in the
borough; nor shall any person operate a motor vehicle upon or across any
sidewalk except in order to gain access to or egress from a driveway or alley
at such locations where the curb, if such sidewalk is curbed, shall have been
properly cut down for the purpose.
§ 91-7. Speeds limits established. [Amended 6-7-1976 by Ord. No.
76-7; 9-4-1990 by Ord. No. 90-15; 9-4-1990 by Ord. No. 90-16;
3-6-2000 by Ord. No. 00-2; 4-4-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-02]
A. The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the highways or parts
thereof described below is hereby established at the rate of speed
indicated:
Highway
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Bank Street 25 From Main Street east to Upper
Hanover Township line
Blaker Drive 25 From Hamilton Road north to
Fruitville Road
Blaker Drive 25 From Hamilton Road south then
east then north to its terminus
west of State Street
Cherry Street 25 From Water Alley north to Front
Street
Church Street 25 From Main Street east to
Hickory Alley
Colonial Drive 25 From Hamilton Road north to
Morris Road
Fifth Street 25 From Washington Street west to
Green Alley
Forge Road 25 From State Street south to
Blaker Drive
Fourth Street 25 From Upper Hanover Township
line west to State Street
Front Street 25 From Main Street west to Long
Alley
Hamilton Road 25 From Blaker Drive south to its
terminus
Jefferson Street 25 From Sixth Street south to
Pennsburg Borough line
§ 91-6 TENANT REGISTRATION § 91-7
89:365
§ 91-8. Traffic control signals. [Amended 12-5-1982 by Ord. No.
8-82; 6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-4]
Highway
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Main Street 30 From Upper Hanover Township
line south to Pennsburg
Borough line
Morris Road 25 From Blaker Drive west to its
terminus
Railroad Street 25 From Water Alley north to Third
Street
Second Street 5 From Washington Street east to
Upper Hanover Township line
Second Street 25 From Washington Street west to
Long Alley
Sixth Street 25 From State Street east to Upper
Hanover 'Township line
State Street 25 From the Pennsburg Borough
line north to the Upper Hanover
Township line
Third Street 25 From Main Street west to Upper
Hanover Township line
Valley Road 25 From Colonial Drive west to its
terminus
Washington
Street
25 From Sixth Street south to
Pennsburg Borough line
B. The speed limits for traffic moving on any ordained public alley within
the corporate limits of the Borough of East Greenville shall be 15 miles
per hour.
A. Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection
of Fourth and Main Streets and at the intersection of Sixth and Main
Streets.
B. It shall be unlawful for northbound, as well as southbound, traffic on
Main Street to execute a right-hand turn onto Fourth Street after
coming to a stop at the traffic control signal installed at that
intersection, when the signal regulating the flow of traffic from the
direction of approach is red.
C. It shall be unlawful for eastbound, as well as westbound, traffic on
Fourth Street to execute a right-hand turn onto Main Street after
coming to a stop at the traffic control signal installed at that
intersection, when the signal regulating the flow of traffic from the
direction of approach is red.
§ 91-7 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 91-8
89:366
§ 91-9. One-way highways established. [Amended 1-6-1986 by Ord.
No. 1-86; 11-28-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-06]
The highways or parts of highways directed below are hereby designated as
one-way streets in the direction indicated:
Highway Direction of Travel Limits
Bank Street East From Main Street to Hickory
Alley
Hickory Alley North From Bank Street to Fourth
Street
Third Street West From Main Street to Jefferson
Street
§ 91-10. U-turns.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of a motor vehicle or tractor to make
a U-turn on any streets within the borough limits of the Borough of East
Greenville.
§ 91-11. Through highways established.
The highways described below are hereby established as through highways,
and the operator of every vehicle or tractor upon approaching any such
highway at any intersection thereof (except for such intersections where
there are now or shall hereafter be located official traffic signals) shall
come to a full stop, within a reasonable distance, before entering any such
through highway:
Highway Limits
Main Street Entire length
State Street Entire length
D. It shall be unlawful for westbound traffic on Sixth Street to execute a
right-hand turn onto Main Street after coming to a stop at the traffic
control signal installed at that intersection, when the signal regulating
the flow of traffic from the east is red.
E. Notice of the regulations contained in Subsections B, C and D above
shall be given to vehicle operators by the posting of signs reading NO
TURN ON RED at locations where such signs will be clearly visible to
motorists approaching the controlled intersections from those
directions whose flow of traffic is to be prevented from executing a
right-hand turn after coming to a stop at the traffic control signal, the
size and placement of said signs to be in conformity with regulations
promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
§ 91-8 TENANT REGISTRATION § 91-12
89:367
§ 91-12. Stop intersections established. [Amended 5-1-1978 by Ord.
No. 3-78]
The intersections described below (in addition to the highways intersecting
with the through highways established in § 91-11) are hereby established as
stop intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected in such a position
upon the first-named highway as to face traffic approaching the secondnamed
highway in the direction or directions indicated. All vehicles and
tractors approaching any such intersection upon the first-named highway, in
the direction or directions indicated in each case, shall come to a full stop,
within a reasonable distance, before entering any such intersection:
Stop Sign on Direction of
Travel
At Intersection of
Arlington Street South Sixth Street
Bank Street Both Washington Street
Blaker Drive [Added
6-5-1989 by Ord. No.
5-89]
West Blaker Drive (at intersection of
the access road running parallel
to State Street and Third Street
and known as "Blaker Drive,"
which intersects Blaker Drive
between Third Street and
Hamilton Drive)
Blaker Drive [Added
8-1-1983 by Ord. No.
3-83]
East State Street (immediately south
of the intersection of State
Street and Fourth Street)
Blaker Drive [Added
8-1-1983 by Ord. No.
3-83]
East State Street (midway between
the intersection of State Street
and Fourth Street and the
intersection of State Street and
Third Street)
Blaker Drive [Added
5-6-1991 by Ord. No.
5-91]
South Hamilton Drive
Blaker Drive South Third Street
Bull Road [Added
4-4-1994 by Ord. No.
2-94]
North Church Street
Cherry Alley Both Cherry Street
Cherry Alley Both Green Alley
Cherry Alley Both Jefferson Street
Cherry Alley West Long Alley
Cherry Alley East School Alley
Cherry Street Both Fourth Street
§ 91-12 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 91-12
89:368
Stop Sign on Direction of
Travel
At Intersection of
Cherry Street [Added
12-2-1996 by Ord.
No. 8-96]
Both Front Street
Cherry Street [Added
8-5-1996 by Ord. No.
5-96]
Both Second Street
Cherry Street Both Third Street
Church Street [Added
5-6-1991 by Ord. No.
5-91]
East Hickory Alley
Colonial Drive
[Repealed 4-4-1994
by Ord. No. 2-94]
Colonial Drive [Added
6-5-1989 by Ord. No.
5-89]
South Hamilton Drive
Colonial Drive [Added
6-5-1989 by Ord. No.
5-89]
North Morris Road
Colonial Drive [Added
12-2-1996 by Ord.
No. 8-96]
Both Valley Road
Fifth Street Both Jefferson Street
Fifth Street
[Amended 4-4-1994
by Ord. No. 2-94]
East Washington Street
Forge Road [Added
6-5-1989 by Ord. No.
5-89]
West Blaker Drive
Forge Road [Added
6-5-1989 by Ord. No.
5-89]
East State Street
Fourth Street [Added
2-2-1998 by Ord. No.
98-3]
Both Jefferson Street
Fourth Street Both Washington Street
Front Street Both Cherry Street
Front Street Both Jefferson Street
Front Street [Repealed 4-4-1994 by Ord. No. 2-94]
Green Alley North Fifth Street
§ 91-12 TENANT REGISTRATION § 91-12
89:369
Stop Sign on Direction of
Travel
At Intersection of
Green Alley Both Fourth Street
Green Alley South Front Street
Green Alley Both Second Street
Green Alley Both Third Street
Green Alley [Added
3-6-2000 by Ord. No.
00-2]
Both Water Alley
Hamilton Drive
[Added 6-5-1989 by
Ord. No. 5-89]
East Blaker Drive
Hickory Alley North Bank Street
Hickory Alley [Added
4-4-1994 by Ord. No.
2-94]
North Church Street
Hickory Alley Both Fifth Street
Hickory Alley Both Fourth Street
Hickory Alley Both Second Street
Hickory Alley North Sixth Street
Hickory Alley [Added
4-4-1994 by Ord. No.
2-94]
South Sixth Street
Hill Alley Both Cherry Street
Hill Alley East Green Alley
Hill Alley [Added
4-4-1994 by Ord. No.
2-94]
West Green Alley
Hill Alley [Added
4-4-1994 by Ord. No.
2-94]
East Jefferson Street
Hill Alley Both Long Alley
Hill Alley West Railroad Street
Jefferson Street [Repealed 4-4-1994 by Ord. No. 2-94]
Jefferson Street
[Added 3-6-2000 by
Ord. No. 00-2]
Both Fifth Street
Jefferson Street Both Fourth Street
Jefferson Street
[Added 6-5-1978 by
Ord. No. 4-78]
South Front Street
§ 91-12 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 91-12
89:370
Stop Sign on Direction of
Travel
At Intersection of
Jefferson Street North Sixth Street
Jefferson Street Both Third Street
Jefferson Street Both Second Street
Long Alley [Repealed 4-4-1994 by Ord. No. 2-94]
Long Alley Both Fourth Street
Long Alley [Added
4-4-1994 by Ord. No.
2-94]
North Front Street
Long Alley [Added
4-4-1994 by Ord. No.
2-94]
South Front Street
Long Alley [Added
4-4-1994 by Ord. No.
2-94]
North Second Street
Long Alley South Second Street
Long Alley Both Third Street
Long Alley North Water Alley
Morris Road [Added
11-6-1989 by Ord.
No. 14-89]
East Blaker Drive
Old Fifth [Added
4-4-1994 by Ord. No.
2-94]
West Washington Street
Railroad Street Both Fourth Street
Railroad Street Both Third Street
School Alley Both Fifth Street
School Alley Both Fourth Street
School Alley South Front Street
School Alley Both Second Street
School Alley North Sixth Street
School Alley Both Third Street
Second Street Both Cherry Street
Second Street Both Jefferson Street
Second Street Both Washington Street
Sixth Street Both Washington Street
Spring Alley [Added
12-4-1989 by Ord.
No. 15-89]
West Cherry Street
§ 91-12 TENANT REGISTRATION § 91-12
89:371
Stop Sign on Direction of
Travel
At Intersection of
Spring Alley [Added
12-4-1989 by Ord.
No. 15-89; repealed
4-4-1994 by Ord. No.
2-94]
State Street [Added
12-2-1996 by Ord.
No. 8-96]
Both Blaker Drive and Fourth Street
State Street [Added
7-25-1989 by Ord.
No. 7-89]
Both Third Street
Third Street
[Repealed 4-4-1994
by Ord. No. 2-94]
Third Street [Added
11-6-1989 by Ord.
No. 14-89]
West Jefferson Street
Valley Road
[Amended 9-4-1990
by Ord. No. 17-90]
East Colonial Drive
Washington Street
[Added 9-1-1987 by
Ord. No. 6-87]
Both Bank Street
Washington Street
[Added 9-1-1987 by
Ord. No. 6-87]
Both Fifth Street
Washington Street Both Second Street
Washington Street
[Added 9-1-1987 by
Ord. No. 6-87]
Both Sixth Street
Water Alley Both Cherry Street
Water Alley
[Amended 3-6-2000
by Ord. No. 00-2]
Both Green Alley
Water Alley Both Jefferson Street
Water Alley [Added
4-4-1994 by Ord. No.
2-94]
Both Long Alley
Water Alley East School Alley
§ 91-12 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 91-13
89:372
§ 91-13. Operation of vehicles on closed highways and limited-use
highways. [Amended 10-1-1979 by Ord. No. 9-79; 7-26-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-03]
§ 91-14. (Reserved)77
§ 91-15. Accident reports. [Amended 11-28-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-06]
The operator of any motor vehicle involved in an accident in the Borough
and required by law to report such accident to any department or agency of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any other person required to make
such report, shall, at the time of making such report to the commonwealth,
make a written report to the Chief of Police of the Borough containing the
same information if the accident directly or indirectly results in damage to
any Borough property.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle or tractor
upon any highway in the Borough that is under construction,
resurfacing or repair, in disregard of any official sign, barricade or
notice that the same is closed to vehicular traffic.
B. It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle designed, used or maintained
primarily for the transportation of property, when the titled owner of
said vehicle utilizes it in a commercial way for the generation of income,
to be driven on the following streets in the Borough of East Greenville,
except in those instances when such motor vehicles are making
deliveries to residents or businesses situated on said street, and then
only when such residents or businesses taking delivery are located on
the same block where such motor vehicle is being driven:
Street Location
State Street From the Pennsburg Borough line to Fourth
Street
Third Street From the Upper Hanover Township line to
State Street
Washington Street From the Upper Hanover Township line to
the Pennsburg Borough line
C. In all those instances where highway use is restricted as in Subsection
B above, the restriction shall be clearly indicated by the posting of signs
reading "No Trucks" and "Except Local Deliveries" at each point of
access to the street upon which the restriction is being enforced.
77.Editor’s Note: Former § 91-14, Play highways, was repealed 11-28-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-06.
§ 91-13 TENANT REGISTRATION § 91-15
89:373

ARTICLE III
Parking Regulations
§ 91-16. Parking without lights authorized.
The boundary limits of the Borough of East Greenville are hereby
established as a zone in which motor vehicles may remain standing without
lights, and all highways within such boundary limits are hereby designated
as highways where motor vehicles may remain standing without lights.
§ 91-17. Parking within marked spaces.
Wherever a space shall be marked off on any highway for the parking of an
individual vehicle, every vehicle therein parked shall be parked within the
lines bounding such space.
§ 91-18. Angle parking. [Amended 11-5-1990 by Ord. No. 18-90]
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the highways or parts thereof
described below except at the angle designated.
Highway Side Angle Location
Blaker Drive East 90° From a point 192 feet north of
the center line of Third Street
to a point 45 feet south of the
intersection of Forge Road
Blaker Drive North 90° From a point 120 feet west
(Third Street) of the center line
of State Street to a point 165
feet west thereof
Blaker Drive West 90° From a point 105 feet north of
the intersection with Hamilton
Road to a point 90 feet north of
the intersection with Forge
Road
Blaker Drive
(State Street)
West 90° From a point 225 feet north of
the center line of Third Street
to a point 390 feet north
thereof
Colonial Drive East 90° From a point 105 feet north of
the intersection with Hamilton
Road to a point 105 feet south
of the intersection with Morris
Road
§ 91-16 TENANT REGISTRATION § 91-18
89:375
Highway Side Angle Location
Colonial Drive West 90° From a point 105 feet north of
the intersection with Hamilton
Road to a point 105 feet south
of the intersection with Valley
Road
Colonial Drive West 90° From a point 105 feet north of
the intersection with Valley
Road to a point 105 feet south
of the intersection with Morris
Road
Forge Road North 90° From the intersection with
State Street extending to a
point 165 feet east of the
intersection with Blaker Drive
Forge Road South 90° From a point 165 feet west of
the intersection with State
Street and extending in a
westerly direction 165 feet
Hamilton Road North 90° From a point 12 feet west of
the intersection with Blaker
Drive to a point 12 feet east of
the intersection with Colonial
Drive
Hamilton Road North 90° From a point 12 feet west of
the intersection with Colonial
Drive and extending in a
westerly direction 125 feet
Hamilton Road South 90° From a point 12 feet west of
the intersection with Blaker
Drive and extending in a
westerly direction 365 feet
Morris Road North 90° From a point 25 feet west of
the intersection with Blaker
Drive and extending in a
westerly direction to the
borough line
Morris Road South 90° From a point 25 feet west of
the intersection with Blaker
Drive and extending in a
westerly direction 140 feet
Morris Road South 90° From a point 25 feet west of
the intersection with Colonial
Drive and extending in a
westerly direction to the
borough line
§ 91-18 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 91-18
89:376
Highway Side Angle Location
Valley Road Both 90° From a point 25 feet west of
the intersection with Colonial
Drive and extending in a
westerly direction to the
borough line
§ 91-19. Parking prohibited at all times.
A. No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the highways or
parts thereof described below:
(1) Within an intersection.
(2) On a crosswalk.
(3) Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb, or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
unless local officials shall indicate a different distance by signs or
markings.
(4) Within 25 feet of the intersection of curblines or, if none, then
within 15 feet of the intersection of property lines at an intersection
of highways.
(5) Within 30 feet upon the approach to any official flashing signal,
stop sign or traffic signal located at the side of the roadway.
(6) Within 15 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station.
(7) Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
(8) On a sidewalk.
(9) In front of a private driveway or alongside any street or highway
excavation or obstruction, nor opposite the same, unless a clear
and unobstructed width of not less than 20 feet upon the maintraveled
portion of the said street or highway shall be left free for
passage of other vehicles thereon.
(10)On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the curb or
edge of the highway.
(11) At any place where official signs have been erected prohibiting
standing and parking, whether permanent or temporary.
(12)Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a steam or interurban railway
crossing.
(13)On the side of the roadway opposite to the direction of oncoming
traffic in the nearest lane.
§ 91-18 TENANT REGISTRATION § 91-19
89:377
(14)Within or along that portion of a street which is a cul-de-sac, the
permanent vehicular turnaround located at the located at the
terminus of that street or within 15 feet of the start of any such culde-
sac, along either curbline of the street terminated by such culde-
sac. [Added 12-2-1996 by Ord. No. 8-9678]
(15)On the south side of Sixth Street from a point 145 feet west of the
westerly curbline of Jefferson Street to a point 145 feet to the west
thereof. [Added 6-7-1976 by Ord. No. 6-76; amended
11-5-1990 by Ord. No. 18-90]
(16)On the north side of Third Street from the westerly curbline of
Blaker Drive to a point 920 feet to the west thereof. [Added
5-4-1981 by Ord. No. 2-81; amended 11-5-1990 by Ord. No.
18-90]
(17)On the west side of Main Street from a point 100 feet south of the
southern curbline of Second Street to a point 100 feet north of the
northern curbline of Second Street. [Added 4-5-1982 by Ord. No.
5-82; amended 11-5-1990 by Ord. No. 18-90]
(18)On the east side of Main Street from a point 100 feet south of the
southern curbline of Second Street to a point 100 feet north of the
northern curbline of Second Street. [Added 4-5-1982 by Ord. No.
5-82; amended 11-5-1990 by Ord. No. 18-90]
(19)On the south side of Fifth Street from the westerly curbline of Main
Street to the eastern edge of the cartway of School Alley. [Added
10-3-1983 by Ord. No. 6-83;79 amended 11-5-1990 by Ord.
No. 18-90]
(20)On the south side of Fifth Street from the easterly curbline of Main
Street to the western edge of the cartway of Hickory Alley. [Added
10-3-1983 by Ord. No. 5-83;80 amended 11-5-1990 by Ord.
No. 18-90]
(21)On the west side of Blaker Drive from the intersection with
Hamilton Road and extending in a northerly direction for 110 feet.
[Added 3-5-1984 by Ord. No. 4-84; amended 11-5-1990 by
Ord. No. 18-90]
(22)On the west side of Blaker Drive from a point 50 feet north of the
intersection with Morris Road, extending in a southerly direction to
that intersection. [Added 12-2-1996 by Ord. No. 8-96]
78.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of the subsequent
subsections.
79.Editor's Note: Section 2 of this ordinance provided that "Section 91-21 is hereby repealed
insofar as it conflicts with § 91-19A(18)."
80.Editor's Note: Section 2 of this ordinance provided that "Section 91-21 is hereby repealed
insofar as it conflicts with § 91-19A(19)."
§ 91-19 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 91-19
89:378
(23)On the west side of Blaker Drive from a point 90 feet south of the
southern curbline of Morris Road to a point 160 feet to the south
thereof. [Added 12-2-1996 by Ord. No. 8-96]
(24)On the east side of Colonial Drive from a point 120 feet south of the
intersection with Morris Road extending in a northerly direction to
that intersection. [Added 3-5-1984 by Ord. No. 4-84; amended
11-5-1990 by Ord. No. 18-90]
(25)On the west side of Colonial Drive from a point 105 feet north of the
intersection with Hamilton Road, extending in a southerly direction
to that intersection. [Added 12-2-1996 by Ord. No. 8-96]
(26)On the south side of Morris Road from the intersection with
Colonial Drive extending in a westerly direction for 25 feet. [Added
11-5-1990 by Ord. No. 18-90]
(27)On the south side of Morris Road from the intersection with
Colonial Drive extending in an easterly direction for 35 feet.
[Added 11-5-1990 by Ord. No. 18-90]
(28)On both sides of Fourth Street from the intersection with Main
Street to the eastern edge of School Alley. [Added 11-5-1990 by
Ord. No. 18-90]
(29)On the north side of Fourth Street from the intersection with Main
Street to the western edge of Hickory Alley. [Added 11-5-1990 by
Ord. No. 18-90]
(30)On the south side of Fourth Street from the intersection with Long
Alley west to the intersection with Railroad Street. [Added
11-5-1990 by Ord. No. 18-90]
(31)On both sides of Second Street from the intersection with Main
Street east to the western edge of Hickory Alley. [Added
11-5-1990 by Ord. No. 18-90]
(32)On the north side of Second Street from the intersection with Main
Street to the eastern edge of School Alley. [Added 11-5-1990 by
Ord. No. 18-90]
(33) All of the east side of State Street from the Upper Hanover
Township line to the Pennsburg Borough line, excepting that
portion of such east side of State Street between the southeast
curbline of the intersection of State Street with Fourth Street and a
point 100 feet north of the northeast curbline of the intersection of
State Street with Third Street. [Added 11-5-1990 by Ord. No.
18-90]
(34)On the west side of State Street from its intersection with Third
Street north to its intersection with Fourth Street. [Added
11-5-1990 by Ord. No. 18-90]
§ 91-19 TENANT REGISTRATION § 91-19
89:379
(35)On the north side of Fourth Street, from the intersection of the
curbline of the said Fourth Street with the east side curbline of
Jefferson Street, extending in an easterly direction for 40 feet.
[Added 3-2-1998 by Ord. No. 98-7]
(36)On the north side of Fourth Street, from the intersection of the
curbline of the said Fourth Street with the west side curbline of
Jefferson Street, extending in a westerly direction for 40 feet.
[Added 3-2-1998 by Ord. No. 98-7]
(37)On the south side of Fourth Street, from the intersection of the
curbline of the said Fourth Street with the east side curbline of
Jefferson Street, extending in an easterly direction for 40 feet.
[Added 3-2-1998 by Ord. No. 98-7]
(38)On the south side of Fourth Street, from the intersection of the
curbline of the said Fourth Street with the west side curbline of
Jefferson Street, extending in a westerly direction for 40 feet.
[Added 3-2-1998 by Ord. No. 98-7]
(39)On the north side of Sixth Street from the railroad overpass 390
feet west to the intersection of the said north side of Sixth Street
with the east side of State Street. [Added 3-1-1999 by Ord. No.
99-2]
(40)On the south side of Second Street from its intersection with the
Eastern edge of Hickory Alley east to the intersection of the said
south side of Second Street with the west side of Washington
Street. [Added 3-1-1999 by Ord. No. 99-2]
(41)On the south side of Second Street from its intersection with the
east side of Washington Street east to the Upper Hanover Township
line. [Added 3-1-1999 by Ord. No. 99-2]
(42)On the east side of State Street from a point 168 feet north of the
north side curbline of Third Street to a point 50 feet to the north
thereof. [Added 5-5-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-4]
(43)On the east side of State Street from a point 144 feet south of the
south side curbline of Fourth Street to a point 34 feet to the south
thereof. [Added 5-5-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-4]
(44)On the north side of Fifth Street, from the intersection of the
curbline of said Fifth Street with the west side curbline of
Washington Street, extending in a westerly direction for 108 feet.
[Added 9-6-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-3]
(45)On the east side of Jefferson Street, from a point 83 feet north of
the north side Water Alley cartway line to a point 72 feet north
thereof. [Added 9-6-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-3]
§ 91-19 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 91-19
89:380
§ 91-20. Parking prohibited during certain hours. [Amended
5-7-1979 by Ord. No. 4-79; 2-1-1982 by Ord. No. 4-82; 6-7-1982 by
Ord. No. 6-82; 1-4-1983 by Ord. No. 2-83; 12-2-1985 by Ord. No.
4-85; 11-5-1990 by Ord. No. 18-90; 7-6-1999 by Ord. No. 99-4;
9-7-1999 by Ord. No. 99-5]
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified below upon any
of the highways or parts of highways described below:
Highway Side Hours Location
Jefferson Street West 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. and 2:00
p.m. to 4:00
p.m., except
Saturday,
Sunday and
holidays
From Fifth Street to a
point 489 feet north
thereof
Main Street Both 12:00 midnight
to 6:00 a.m.
daily
From Pennsburg
Borough line to Upper
Hanover Township line
Sixth Street
[Repealed
4-22-2014 by
Ord. No.
2014-03]
(46)On the west side of Railroad Street from the intersection thereof
with the south side curbline of Third Street to a point 163 feet to
the south thereof. [Added 9-6-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-3]
(47) Along the western terminus of Hamilton Road from a point 35 feet
south of the northern curbline of that road, north to said curbline,
and along the northern curbline of Hamilton Road from its western
terminus to a point 30 feet east thereof. [Added 9-6-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-3; amended 6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-4]
B. Except when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic
signs or signals, or except where angle parking is permitted, the
operator of a vehicle on a highway within a business or residence
district shall not park other than parallel to the edge of the highway or
curb. Vehicles which, because of type or construction, cannot load or
unload parallel to the curb shall be exempt, while loading or unloading
only, from the requirements of standing parallel to the curb.
§ 91-19 TENANT REGISTRATION § 91-21
89:381
§ 91-21. Time limit parking. [Amended 7-7-1980 by Ord. No. 4-80;
11-5-1990 by Ord. No. 18-90; 2-12-2001 by Ord. No. 01-3; 1-5-2004
by Ord. No. 2004-3; 9-6-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-3]
No person shall park a vehicle or allow the same to remain parked upon any
of the highways or parts of highways described below between the hours
specified for longer than the time indicated below:
Highway Sides Hours/ Days Time Limit Location
A. Bank
Street
North 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through
Thursday; 9:00
a.m. to 8:00
p.m., Friday;
9:00 a.m. to
noon Saturday
15 mins. From a point 16 feet
east of the
intersection with
Main Street to a
point 77 feet east
thereof
B. Fourth
Street
South 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
Monday
through
Saturday
15 mins. From a point 25 feet
east of the
intersection with
Main Street and
extending in an
easterly direction
120 feet
C. Jefferson
Street
East 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.
Monday
through Friday
5 mins. On the east side of
Jefferson Street from
a point 318 feet
north of its
intersection with the
north side curbline
of Fifth Street to a
point 80 feet to the
north thereof
D. Main
Street
West 8:00 a.m. to
12:00
midnight, daily
5 mins. From the southern
curbline of Third
Street to a point 125
feet south thereof
§ 91-22. Miscellaneous parking regulations. [Amended 2-6-1984 by
Ord. No. 3-84; 1-4-1988 by Ord. No. 2-88; 11-5-1990 by Ord. No.
18-90; 8-3-1992 by Ord. No. 4-92; 11-6-1995 by Ord. No. 6-95;
7-6-1999 by Ord. No. 99-4; 3-6-2000 by Ord. No. 00-2; 1-2-2001 by
Ord. No. 01-2; 9-6-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-3; 6-4-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-4; 4-22-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-03; 7-26-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-03; 11-28-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-06]
A. Handicapped parking spaces.
§ 91-21 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 91-22
89:382
(1) Application process.
(a) Any resident of the Borough may complete an application to
the Borough for a handicapped parking space only after
furnishing proof of disability by way of a valid handicapped
license plate or placard or a disabled veteran license plate or
by meeting one of the criteria outlined in Subsection A(5)(b) of
this section or at the discretion of the Mayor and, in the event
the Mayor is unavailable, the Borough Manager after a
reasonable inquiry thereinto.
(b) All applications should be sent to the Borough office.
(c) New applications shall be reviewed by the Mayor and, in the
event the Mayor is unavailable, the Borough Manager will
review the application and make a decision on whether to
grant a handicapped parking space to the applicant.
(d) Renewal applications shall be reviewed by the Mayor and, in
the event the Mayor is unavailable, the Borough Manager will
review the application and make a final decision regarding
renewal of an existing space.
(e) It is required that each applicant, whether for a new permit or
a renewal, shall complete an application form and provide the
Borough with all the information requested.
(f) Any incomplete application form may be denied by the
Borough.
(g) Initial cost will be $25 per application.
(2) Application renewal.
(a) Each permit for a handicapped parking space shall be renewed
on an annual basis.
(b) Applications for renewal shall be submitted to the Borough
office between July 1 and July 31 of each calendar year.
(c) In making a final determination regarding the renewal of a
previously permitted handicapped space, the Borough shall
apply the criteria contained in this policy.
(d) Once a permit is not renewed for any reason, any subsequent
application by the same applicant shall be considered a new
application and shall be governed by the provisions of this
policy.
(e) There will be no renewal fee charged.
(3) Types of handicapped parking spaces.
§ 91-22 TENANT REGISTRATION § 91-22
89:383
(a) Upon the approval of a completed application, the Borough
may designate space along any street or highway within the
physical boundary of the Borough. Such space shall be as close
as possible to the residence of such handicapped person and
may be specifically reserved for the vehicle that such space
was requested for in the application or requested as a generic
space with no vehicle specifically listed.
(4) Location and number of handicapped parking spaces.
(a) There shall be no more than two handicapped parking spaces
located on any block where parking is permitted on both sides
of the street unless otherwise approved by the Borough.
(b) There shall be no more than one handicapped parking space
located on any block where parking is permitted on only one
side of the street unless otherwise approved by the Borough.
(c) All handicapped parking spaces permitted prior to the effective
date of this subsection shall be allowed to endure at their
current location but must be renewed annually.
(d) In the event that previously permitted spaces exceed the
maximum allowed per block, the Borough may refrain from
granting any additional spaces in that block until the number
of handicapped spaces decreases below the maximum allowed.
(5) Criteria.
(a) No permit shall be granted where adequate, handicappedaccessible
off-street parking is available.
(b) All applicants shall meet at least one of the following
requirements:
[1] The applicant is wheelchair-confined.
[2] The person requesting a space is caring for a person who
has a physical or mental disability and lives at the same
address.
[3] The applicant meets any one of the other criteria listed in
this list and is a person temporarily residing at the address
of the requested space for the duration of at least three
months or longer.
[4] The applicant has severe cardiopulmonary insufficiency
requiring the use of ambulatory oxygen.
[5] The applicant requires the use of prosthetic devices that
restricts normal ambulation.
§ 91-22 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 91-22
89:384
[6] The applicant fits other physical or mental limitations that
the Borough believes are severe enough to warrant the
allocation of a handicapped parking space.
(6) Rescission of handicapped parking space. The Borough reserves
the right to rescind the designation for a handicapped parking
space at any time for any reason.
(7) Use. Upon designation of a handicapped parking space by the
Borough, which shall thereby cause to be erected handicapped
signs and markings, said spot shall be open and available to any
individual who has been approved by the Borough.
B. Parking prohibited by vehicle type.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to park, along any Borough
street, a vehicle or device of the class or type listed below:
(a) Commercial vehicles. Any truck, truck-trailer or commercial
vehicle having a gross vehicle weight of 9,001 pounds or
greater, or a Class A to Class C vehicle having a gross vehicle
weight of between 5,000 and 9,000 pounds which is affixed in
combination with a trailer or other apparatus regardless of the
weight thereof.
(b) Recreational vehicles and general purpose trailers. Any motor
home, travel trailer, camper trailer, boat, boat trailer or
general purpose trailer designed to be towed by any motorized
vehicle for transport of lawn equipment, other devices or
commodities, regardless of size or weight.
(c) Dumpsters, collection bins or other nonmotorized vehicles or
devices for a period not to exceed 14 days, and then only after
a permit is obtained from the Borough and with adequate
reflectors and safety devices placed to prevent vehicles from
colliding with such temporarily placed devices.
(2) Exceptions. Between 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. daily, a vehicle not
otherwise prohibited from parking along a public street may so
park, without need for a permit or approval from a Borough official.
Excluding emergency response situations, persons seeking to park
otherwise prohibited vehicles along public streets for the purpose
of loading and unloading property and passengers between 8:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following morning must seek and secure
from the Borough Secretary a permit, valid for one such ten-hour
period only, licensing this otherwise proscribed activity. The cost to
the licensee for such overnight parking permit shall be as from time
to time established by Borough Council. The permit shall be
displayed prominently on the vehicle, street side toward the front
of the trailer no more than six feet from the ground.
§ 91-22 TENANT REGISTRATION § 91-22
89:385
(3) Notice of parking restrictions shall be provided by means of posted
traffic control devices, certified letter, personal service or
placement of a notice on the windshield or other readily visible
location on the vehicle or device. In the absence of a posted traffic
control device, enforcement of this section shall not take place
unless a notice of violation has been issued to the owner prior to
the date and time enforcement is initiated.
§ 91-22 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 91-22
89:386
ARTICLE IV
Snow and Ice Emergencies
§ 91-23. Declaration of emergency. [Amended 12-2-1996 by Ord. No.
8-96]
When, in the opinion of the Mayor, the actual or expected snowfall will
create hazardous or dangerous highway conditions for vehicular or
pedestrian traffic, he is hereby authorized to declare a snow emergency. He
shall immediately inform the public by issuing press releases to such local
news media or broadcast or publish emergency weather information. Such
snow emergency shall continue in force until the Mayor shall declare the
emergency no longer exists by press release in the same fashion.
§ 91-24. Parking prohibited on certain streets.
§ 91-25. Placement of signs.
A. After any such emergency shall have been declared, it shall be unlawful
during the period of such emergency for any person to park a motor
vehicle or tractor or to allow the same to remain parked on any highway
or portion thereof named in Subsection B below, or to operate any
motor vehicle or tractor on any such highway or portion thereof unless
such vehicle or tractor shall be equipped with adequate equipment to
provide sufficient traction to keep such vehicle or tractor in motion so
that other traffic on such highways will not be blocked or seriously
impeded.
B. The highways or portions thereof to which the provisions of this Article
shall be applicable during all periods of emergency declared as
provided in § 91-23 above shall be as described below:
Highway Limits
Main Street Entire length within borough
A. In order to assist the operators of motor vehicles and tractors in
determining the highways affected by this Article, the Chief of Police
shall place at appropriate positions on the highways or portions thereof
designated in § 91-24B above, signs reading as follows:
§ 91-23 TENANT REGISTRATION § 91-25
89:387
§ 91-26. Violations.
SNOW
EMERGENCY
ROUTE
SNOW TIRES OR
CHAINS REQUIRED
NO PARKING
DURING EMERGENCY
VEHICLES
TOWED AWAY
B. The Chief of Police shall also, through radio, newspaper or other
available media, disseminate information as to the existence of such
emergency.
A. Any person who shall park a motor vehicle or tractor upon or along any
of the highways or portions thereof listed in § 91-24B at any time during
a period of emergency declared as provided in § 91-23 shall be guilty of
a violation of this Article.
B. Any person who shall operate a vehicle or tractor upon any highway or
portion thereof listed in § 91-24B, which such vehicle or tractor shall
become stalled upon any of such highways during a period of
emergency declared as provided in § 91-23 of this Article and such
stalling shall have been by reason of the failure to have such vehicle or
tractor equipped with the equipment hereinabove prescribed, shall be
guilty of a violation of this Article.
§ 91-25 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 91-26
89:388
ARTICLE V
Penalties
§ 91-27. Violations and penalties.
A. Unless another penalty is specifically provided for in Subsection B
below, any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $50 and
costs of prosecution, and in the event of nonpayment of such fine and
costs of prosecution, such person shall be subject to imprisonment for a
period not exceeding 10 days.
B. Any person who shall violate any provision of a section listed below
shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than that
specified for violation of said section, and in the event of nonpayment of
such fine and costs of prosecution, such person shall be subject to
imprisonment for a period not exceeding that indicated below for said
section: [Amended 7-6-1999 by Ord. No. 99-4; 11-28-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-06]
Article/Section Maximum Fine
Maximum
Imprisonment
(days)
Article I (§§ 91-3 and 91-4) $25 10
Article II (§§ 91-7 and
91-8)
Set by state statute 10
Article II (§§ 91-9 and
91-10)
$25 10
Article II (§§ 91-11 and
91-12)
Set by state statute 10
Article II (§ 91-13) $25 10
Article II (§ 91-15) Min. of $100/Max.
of $500
10
Article III (§§ 91-17
through 91-22B)
$25 10
Article IV (§ 91-22C(1)(a)) $100 10
Article IV (§ 91-22C(1)(b)) $25 10
C. A notice of violation of any provision of Article III (§§ 91-17 through
91-22) of this chapter shall be placed on the vehicle parked in violation,
and shall contain instructions to the owner or operator of such vehicle
that if he shall report to the Police Department of the Borough of East
Greenville and pay the penalty imposed for such violation within 10
business days after the time of such notice, the same shall save the
violator from prosecution. [Amended 11-28-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-06]
§ 91-27 TENANT REGISTRATION § 91-27
89:389
Chapter 93
(RESERVED)
Chapter 94
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer Authority — See Ch. 20.
Building construction — See Ch. 35.
Plumbing — See Ch. 67.
Sewers — See Ch. 78.
§ 91-27 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 91-27
93:390
ARTICLE I
Service
[Adopted 7-7-1997 by Ord. No. 8-9781]
§ 94-1. Application for service.
§ 94-2. Fees for installation of service. [Amended 1-5-2004 by Ord.
No. 2004-2]
The Borough shall charge the hereinafter enumerated fees for each gallon
per day of capacity (GPD) as hereinafter determined whenever the owner
of any property, or his or her designated agent, connects such property
with the Borough's public water system, or whenever said owner adds to
or modifies property already connected to that system in such manner as
to increase the GPD as hereinafter determined. The enumerated fees shall
include:
A. Service connections will be made and water will be furnished upon
written application by the prospective customer (or his/her properly
authorized agent) on a form provided by the borough for this purpose
and after approval of such application by the Borough Council. The
application for service shall state clearly the class (R, C, I), scope and
type of use to be made of the service, as well as the purpose for which it
will be used.
B. The application and these rules and regulations constitute the contract
between the customer and the borough; and each customer, by the
taking of water, agrees to be bound thereby.
C. A new application must be made to and approved by the Borough
Council upon any change in the identity of the contracting customer at
a property or in the service as described in the application, and the
Borough Council may, upon five days' notice, discontinue the water
supply until such new application has been made and approved.
D. Each application for service shall be made in conformity with and shall
state the basis of rates applicable to customers under the tariff
provisions.
A. Connection fee: a charge to reimburse the Borough for the cost of the
waterline between the main in the street and the property line. This
cost shall be based upon actual cost or average cost of previous similar
connections. This fee shall include all road openings and restorations as
well as permit fees and engineering fees in connection therewith.
(1) Prior to any work schedule being set for a new connection, or
connections, to the Borough's water system, the property owner or
his designated agent shall:
81.Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Ch. 94, Water, adopted 9-6-1988 by Ord.
No. 5-88.
§ 94-1 WATER § 94-2
94:391
(a) Complete a written application requesting connection, or
connections, on forms supplied by the Borough.
(b) Read and execute an agreement with the Borough on forms
supplied by the Borough agreeing to pay to the Borough all
actual costs related to said connection or connections.
(c) Pay in advance for the water connection or connections, $2,332
per connection.
The advanced payments referred to in Subsection A(1)(c)
above shall in no instance be construed as being full payment.
The property owner, or his designated agent, shall be
responsible for all actual costs related to effect the water
connection between the Borough mains and the established
curbline of said property.
(2) The property owner, or his designated agent, shall receive a final
cost bill to be computed from the particular job sheet as filed by the
Borough's Maintenance Supervisor.
(3) The advanced payment shall be deducted from the total actual
costs and the balance will represent the final cost bill. The final
Borough invoice shall be forwarded within 15 days after the street
surface has been properly restored and the said new service
completed between the water main and the established curbline.
(4) In the event that the balance due the Borough is not paid in full
within 15 days of the date of said final cost bill, said services may
be made ineffective by shutting off the water supply. Before service
will be restored, these additional costs plus 10%, an adjusted final
cost bill, must be paid in full.
(5) The Borough reserves the right to adjust and/or waive required
connection fees where their imposition would not be warranted.
For example, if a property owner has entered a development
agreement with the Borough and is undertaking construction of an
on-site water system at his own expense, there may be no need for
connection fees as hereinbefore set forth since there would be no
actual costs to the Borough.
B. Customer facilities fee: a charge to reimburse the Borough for the cost
of line and/or service for connection of the facilities installed between
the property line and the building. This charge shall be based on actual
costs incurred. The Borough may require the owner to install these
facilities. The fee shall include the cost of providing a water meter or
meters. The billing procedure shall be the same as for the connection
fees in Subsection A above.
C. Tapping fee. A charge which includes the following components:
capacity, distribution and collection, special purpose and
reimbursement, to be charged for use of the water systems of the
§ 94-2 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 94-2
94:392
Borough, that shall be in addition to any charges assessed against
the property in the construction of water mains as well as other user
charges or rates charged for rental and use of the water system itself.
(1) The tapping fee for public water service shall be $2,668 per EDU as
hereinafter defined.
(2) The aforementioned tapping fees, as well as any fees set forth to
this section may be altered or changed by Borough Council from
time to time as circumstances may warrant by appropriate
resolution of Council.
(3) The aforestated tapping fees are determined and established by
studies done by Borough Engineer, Cowan Associates, Inc., entitled
"East Greenville Borough Water Distribution System Tapping Fee
Report," dated November 13, 2003. Copies of said report, detailing
itemization of all calculations showing the manner in which the fees
were determined, are available for public inspection at the Borough
Hall.
(4) Tapping fees shall be payable at time of application for connection
to systems or at such other time as the property owner and
Borough may agree upon in writing.
D. Equivalent dwelling unit. Equivalent dwelling unit shall mean any room,
group of rooms, mobile home or other enclosure occupied or intended
for occupancy as separate living quarters by a family or group of
persons living together or by persons living alone. Each dwelling unit in
a double house, townhouse, or connecting houses, in a mobile home or
in an apartment, will be charged as a separate entity or unit.
(1) Each church, chapel or firehouse shall constitute one equivalent
dwelling unit. Each school (public or private) shall constitute one
equivalent dwelling unit for each unit of 20 pupils expected to he
enrolled and occupying said school. Teachers and employees shall
be classified as pupils for purposes of this calculation.
(2) For any improved nonresidential property to be served by the
Borough water system, the number of equivalent dwelling units for
which such property shall be charged shall be in accordance with
the following schedule, with each 350 gallons per day of estimated
water usage equal to one equivalent dwelling unit:
TABLE OF EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNITS
Type of Establishment Estimated Water Usage and
Basis of Calculation
(gallons per day)
Barbershop 100 per chair
Beauty shop 125 per chair
§ 94-2 WATER § 94-2
94:393
TABLE OF EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNITS
Type of Establishment Estimated Water Usage and
Basis of Calculation
(gallons per day)
Church, chapel, synagogue or
mosque
175
Dental office 750 per chair
Retail store without cafeteria or
restaurant
12 per 100 square feet
Drug store 500
With fountain service Add 1,500
Serving meals Add 50 per seat
Industrial plant per shift without
cafeteria or restaurant
15 per employee
With cafeteria or restaurant 20 per employee
Laundromat 600 per machine
Meat market 5 per 100 square feet floor area
or 25 per employee
Motel or hotel
With kitchen 150 per room
Without kitchen 100 per room
Office building 12 per 100 square feet floor
area or 25 per employee
Physician's office 200 per examining room
Restaurant
Multi-service 50 per seat
Single service 35 per seat
Drive-in 35 per car space
Tavern 20 per seat
Fast food 35 per car
Service station
With car wash 1,000 per wash rack
Without car wash 200 per pump
School (nonresidential)
With cafeteria and gym
showers
20 per student or employee
With cafeteria, no gym
showers
15 per student or employee
§ 94-2 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 94-2
94:394
§ 94-3. Service connection.
TABLE OF EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNITS
Type of Establishment Estimated Water Usage and
Basis of Calculation
(gallons per day)
With no cafeteria or gym
showers
10 per student or employee
Theater 3 per seat
Drive-in 10 per car
College or boarding school 65 per student and 15 per
employee
Hospitals 175 per bed and 12 per
employee
Nursing homes 100 per bed and 15 per
employee
Dormitories, rooming houses and
group homes
65 per person
Swimming pools with snack bars 15 per person
Summer camps 65 per person
Trailer camps 150 per site
Other establishments To be established based upon
estimated flow
(3) In the case of a combination of uses, each use shall be adjusted
according to the applicable portion of this schedule. Secondary
uses in residential buildings shall be adjusted as separate uses and
be rated accordingly.
(4) If the owner or user of any property fails to provide the Borough
with complete information, in writing, required to compute the
aforementioned charge, the Borough may estimate a reasonable
applicable charge for such property.
A. The borough will make all connections to its mains and will furnish,
install and maintain all service lines from the main to and including the
curb stop and box, which shall be placed immediately inside the portion
of the customer's property which abuts the street or road, all of which
service line shall be the property of the borough and shall be accessible
to and under its control.
B. All service lines from the curb stop and box to the meter shall be
approved by the borough as to size and installation and shall be kept in
good repair by the customer at his expense. Service lines shall be
copper and shall conform to the Borough Plumbing Code82 that is in
§ 94-2 WATER § 94-3
94:395
§ 94-4. Refusal to install service.
No service will be furnished by the borough to any applicant until all arrears
for water rents, repairs or other charges now or theretofore incurred or
owing by him/her shall be paid or satisfactory arrangements for payment
have been made.
§ 94-5. Meters.
effect at the time of the application for service. All service lines shall be
placed at least 3 1/2 feet below the surface of the ground.
C. No service lines shall be laid in the same trench with a gas pipe, sewer
pipe or any other facility of a public service company, except with
written approval of the borough. No line shall be laid within three feet
of any open excavation of vault, except with written approval of the
borough.
D. A stop and waste valve, easily accessible to the occupants, shall be
placed in the service line within the premises supplied with water. Such
vault shall be located so that it will be possible to drain the meter and
all pipes in the building.
E. All leaks in service lines from the curb box to and within the premises
shall be promptly repaired. Failure to make such repairs within a
reasonable time period may cause the borough to turn off the water and
it will not be again turned on until the borough has been reimbursed, in
full, for all proper and necessary expenses incurred in shutting off and
turning on the water.
F. The borough shall in no event be responsible for maintenance of or for
damage caused by water escaping from the service line of any other
pipe or fixture on the outlet side of the curb stop; and the customer at
all times shall comply with state and municipal regulations in reference
thereto and shall make any changes thereon which may be required
because of change of grade, relocation of mains or other such changes
deemed necessary by the borough.
G. The use of water service by a customer shall be in accordance with the
class, scope and type of use and for the purpose stated in the
application and service contract. A customer shall not use or allow the
use of water service through his/her facilities for others or for purposes
other than those covered by his/her application. To make a service
available for other purposes or character of use, a new application and
contract must be approved by the borough.
A. All water service, except for fire-fighting purposes, will be rendered
only through meters.
82.Editor's Note: See Ch. 67, Plumbing.
§ 94-3 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 94-5
94:396
B. Each customer's service shall have a separate meter to register the
amount of water consumed.
C. All meters will be furnished by and remain the property of the Borough.
The Borough reserves the right to establish the size of meter required
by each customer. The Borough will provide a mounting device to be
installed by the customer. All meters will be installed by the Borough.
All customers requiring meters larger than one inch and all customers
outside the corporate limits of the Borough will reimburse the Borough
for the price of the meter. If a meter larger than one inch becomes
defective at any time, the Borough will replace it at the Borough's
expense, and said new meter will remain the property of the Borough.
[Amended 7-3-2000 by Ord. No. 00-3]
D. Upon request by the borough, all customers will allow the borough to
install a remote reading device to permit meter reading from a location
on an outside wall of a residence or other building. All such remote
readers will remain the property of the borough.
E. Meters and remote reading devices will be maintained by the borough
as far as ordinary wear and tear is concerned. The customer, in case of
an inside meter installation or an outside meter installation if the
borough has agreed upon the site and the installation of a meter vault
or meter box, shall be responsible to the borough for any injury to or
loss of any meter arising out of or caused by the customer's negligence
or carelessness, including any loss or damage caused by freezing or
that of his/her servants, employees, members of his/her household or
any person upon his/her premises under or by his/her consent or
sufferance. The customer shall not permit anyone, not an agent of the
borough or otherwise lawfully authorized so to do, to remove, inspect or
tamper with the borough's meter, remote reading device or other
property of the borough on his/her premises. If a meter vault or meter
box becomes unsuitable and the borough so notifies the customer, the
customer shall remedy this condition promptly, at his/her expense.
F. All meters and remote reading devices shall be set at convenient
locations, accessible to the borough and subject to its control. When
possible and if the customer and borough agree, the meter shall be
installed within the premises supplied, at a point approved by the
borough, in order to control the entire supply. A proper place for the
meter and protection therefore shall be provided by the customer.
G. Where it is not convenient or if both the customer and the borough
agree not to place the meter in the building, as provided in Subsection
F, the meter will be placed outside the building in a suitable vault of
concrete or block or in a meter box. The meter vault or meter box shall
be provided with a suitable cover and locking device.
H. The cover and locking device for each outside meter vault or meter box
shall conform to a proper uniform standard established by the borough.
The covers and locking device shall be of uniform design for
§ 94-5 WATER § 94-5
94:397
§ 94-6. Meter testing.
convenience and efficiency in the borough's operation. An outside
meter vault or meter box shall be located, at the option of the customer,
either inside the property line or near the curb stop and shall be built at
the expense of the customer. The site shall be a suitable and safe place
for the installation of a meter and it must be accessible to the borough.
A. The quantity of water recorded by the meter and not the remote
reading device shall be conclusive for both the customer and the
borough, except when the meter has been found to be registering
inaccurately or has ceased to register. In either of such cases, the meter
will be promptly repaired or replaced by the borough and the quantity
of water consumed shall be estimated by the average registration of the
meter in previous corresponding periods.
B. In the case of a disputed bill involving the accuracy of a meter, such
meter shall be tested, upon the request of the customer. If the meter so
tested is found to have an error in registration of 4% or more, the bills
will be increased or decreased accordingly as provided by said rules.
C. Each request for the test of a meter for accuracy shall be accompanied
by a deposit, the amount of which shall be determined by the size of the
meter to be tested.
D. If the meter so tested shall be found to have an error in registration of
less than 4%, the deposit shall be retained by the borough as
compensation for such test; if the error in registration is found to be 4%
or more, then the amount of the deposit shall be borne by the borough
and the amount of the deposit shall be returned to the customer.
E. Each request for the test of a meter for accuracy shall be accompanied
by a deposit governed by the size of the meter and the current cost of
testing by a borough-appointed testing company.
F. If for two successive quarters the quantity of water recorded by the
remote reading device reveals consumption that differs by more than
10% from the amount consumed in the same quarters the previous year,
or immediately upon the meter ceasing to register any flow to a
property, the Borough may request an opportunity to test and, if
necessary, to replace the meter. The Borough employee charged with
the duty of conducting quarterly meter readings shall advise the
customer of the Borough's desire to test the meter by leaving a card at
the customer's door asking that he call the Borough office and arrange
for a time at which an employee of the Borough might test the meter. If
the customer fails to arrange for the requested testing within 14 days of
the date on which the card requesting the test was left at his door, the
Borough Secretary shall write to him, again requesting that the
customer call the Borough office to arrange for meter testing and
advising that failure to do so prior to the close of the then-current
quarter will be a violation of the rules and regulations of this article and
§ 94-5 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 94-6
94:398
§ 94-7. Bills.
§ 94-8. Discontinuance of service.
subject the customer to discontinuance of service on the first day of the
next succeeding quarter. [Added 1-6-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
A. Each customer is subject to a minimum charge, the amount of which is
set forth in the Schedule of Rates that are in current use by the
borough.
B. Bills for water service will be rendered as specified on the Schedule of
Rates and are due and payable upon presentation. If a bill is not paid
within 30 days after it has been rendered, service may be terminated
after due notice and will not be reconnected until the amount due plus a
10% penalty and turn-on charge of $25 is paid in full by bank check,
money order or cash.
C. All delinquent bills for rentals and charges shall be entered as a lien
against the premises served, and such lien shall be filed and collected in
the manner provided by law for the filing and collection of municipal
claims.
D. The presentation or nonpresentation of a bill shall not be held to be a
waiver of any of the rules or regulations.
E. Water rates shall be payable quarterly, being due and payable on the
first days of March, June, September and December. [Amended
1-6-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
F. The borough will read all meters on a regular schedule. In the event
that a scheduled reading of meters can not be obtained because of
inability to gain access to the meter location, the borough reserves the
right to estimate the amount of the bill. Bills so determined shall have
the same force and effect as if the meter had been read.
G. In all cases where water is served to a building occupied by two or more
establishments, firms or families, only one meter shall be furnished by
the borough to such building. The water rate as registered by the meter
will be equally divided among the individual billing units, and separate
bills for each billing unit shall be calculated and totaled. However, the
owner will be furnished with only one bill. The owner may request that
separate meters be installed for each portion of the building separately
occupied. Cost of installation and meters shall be at the expense of the
owner.
A. Whenever the customer desires to have his/her service contract
terminate or his/her water service discontinued, he shall notify the
borough to that effect in writing. The customer will be responsible for
the payment of all service rendered by the borough prior to receipt of
such written notice and during a reasonable time thereafter to enable
§ 94-6 WATER § 94-8
94:399
§ 94-9. Uses prohibited during declared water emergencies.
The Mayor, after consultation with and/or upon recommendation of the
water plant operator, may declare all or any part thereof of the following
water uses as nonessential and prohibited within the Borough of East
Greenville, which ban shall continue until terminated by resolution of the
Council of the Borough of East Greenville at a regular or special meeting.
the borough to make the final reading of the meter or meters or to
discontinue water service.
B. When premises will be unoccupied temporarily, the customer shall
notify the borough in writing and the water will be turned off and all
charges will cease from the date when water service is turned off. When
the property is again occupied, the customer shall notify the borough in
writing and the water will be turned on. No refund or allowances will be
made for unoccupied property when written notice has not been given
as above provided. No refund will be allowed for property unoccupied
for a period of less than one month.
C. In cases of vacancy of a customer's property, the customer must notify
the borough in writing of such vacancy, and upon his failure to do so, he
will become responsible for any damage to the property of the borough
arising from freezing, water damage, injury to meter or any other
failure.
D. Upon written notification from the Upper Montgomery Joint Authority
that a customer is delinquent in payment of sewer rentals, water
service shall be discontinued as if this delinquency was a violation of
these rules and regulations.
E. Service to any customer may be discontinued for violation of any of
these rules and regulations; however, before service may be
discontinued for any violation, the borough shall give written notice to
the customer and a reasonable date after which service will be
discontinued if the violation continues. After service is thus
discontinued for violation of the rules and regulations, service will not
be resumed until reasonable assurance is given that the customer will
comply with the rules and regulations and until the turn-on fee of $25
has been paid to the borough.
A. The use of any water for watering of lawns, excepting newly seeded or
sodded lawns.
B. The use of fresh water for irrigation and watering of outdoor garden,
landscaped areas, trees, shrubs or other outdoor plants, except:
(1) Agricultural irrigation, including vegetable gardens, for the
production of food and fiber or the maintenance of livestock.
(2) The use of fresh water by commercial nurseries at the minimum
level necessary to maintain stock, to the extent that sources of
§ 94-8 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 94-9
94:400
water, other than fresh water, adequate to supply needs are not
available or feasible to use.
(3) The use of fresh water by arboretums and public gardens of
national, state or regional significance where necessary to preserve
specimens, to the extent that sources of water, other than fresh
water, adequate to supply needs are not available or feasible to use.
(4) The use of fresh water at the minimum rate necessary to implement
revegetation following earth moving, where such revegetation is
required pursuant to an adopted erosion and sedimentation control
plan adopted pursuant to state law of regulation, to the extent that
sources of water, other than fresh water, adequate to supply needs
are not available or feasible to use.
C. The use of fresh water for watering any portion of golf courses, except
for greens.
D. The use of any water for washing paved surfaces such as streets, roads,
sidewalks, driveways, garages, parking areas, tennis courts and patios.
E. The use of water for ornamental purposes, including fountains, artificial
waterfalls and reflecting pools.
F. The use of any water for washing or cleaning of automobiles, trucks,
other motor vehicles and trailers, except:
(1) The use of water by commercial car washers.
(2) The use of water for cleaning of construction, public transportation
or government vehicles where absolutely necessary to preserve the
proper functioning of the vehicle.
G. The use of water from a fire hydrant (including sprinkler caps) by a
municipality, contractors or any other person for any purpose, except:
(1) Fire fighting.
(2) Health protection purposes specifically approved by the health
officials of the municipality.
H. The use of fire hydrants by fire companies for testing fire apparatus and
for Fire Department drills except as deemed necessary in the interest of
public safety and specifically approved by the municipal governing
body.
I. The use of water for flushing sewers or hydrants by municipalities or
any other person except as specifically found necessary and approved
in the interest of public health or safety by the municipal health
officials.
J. The serving of water in restaurants, clubs or eating places unless
specifically requested by a customer.
§ 94-9 WATER § 94-9
94:401
§ 94-10. Builders temporary service.
§ 94-11. Miscellaneous use regulations.
K. The use of any water to refill air-conditioning cooling towers after
draining, except:
(1) Refilling for start-up at the beginning of the cooling season.
(2) Makeup water during the cooling season.
(3) Refilling specifically approved by the municipal health officials or
other designated municipal officer where the system has been
drained for health protection or repair purposes.
L. The use of water to refill private residential swimming pools servicing
fewer than 25 dwelling units, except swimming pools operated by
health care facilities used in relation to patient care and rehabilitation.
M. The use of water to fill any public or private swimming pool which does
not have filtration equipment allowing for continued use and recycling
of water over the swimming season.
A. Contractors, builders or others will be required to take water at the
borough's established meter rates and in addition shall pay a fee of $25
for installing and disconnecting the temporary meter, to be paid at the
time a permit is granted.
B. Bills for water service for building purposes are payable and due after
service is rendered and upon presentation.
A. Water shall not be turned on to any customer's premises by any person
who is not an agent of the borough except temporarily by a plumber,
with borough approval, to enable him/her to test his work, provided that
it shall be turned off immediately after the test is made.
B. The authorized agents of the borough shall have the right of access, at
all reasonable hours, to the premises supplied with water for the
purpose of reading meters, examining pipes and fixtures, observing
manner of using water and for any other purpose which is proper and
necessary in the conduct of the borough's business. Such agents shall
carry proper credentials evidencing their employment by the borough.
C. The borough will not be liable for any claim or damage arising from a
shortage of water, the breaking of machinery of other facilities or for
any other cause.
D. As necessity may arise in case of a main break, emergency or other
unavoidable cause, the borough shall have the right to temporarily cut
off the water supply in order to make necessary repairs, connections,
etc. The borough shall use all reasonable and practicable measures to
notify the customer, in advance, of such discontinuance of service. The
borough shall not be liable for any damage or inconvenience suffered by
§ 94-9 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 94-11
94:402
§ 94-12. Fire protection.
the customer or for any claim for interruption in service, lessening of
supply, inadequate pressure, poor quality of water or any other cause.
The borough may restrict or regulate the quantity of water used by
customers in case of scarcity or whenever the public welfare may
require it.
E. No customer shall open or close any of the borough's curb stops,
corporation stops or valves in any public or private line, unless written
approval by the borough shall have first been obtained.
F. No agent or employee of the borough shall have the right or authority to
bind it by any promise, agreement or representation contrary to the
letter or intent of these rules and regulations.
G. Lawn, greenhouse and garden sprinkling will be permitted through
flexible hoses if equipped with hand or automatic nozzles.
H. Underground lawn sprinklers and irrigation systems may be installed
only under special approval by the borough. Customers must furnish
schematic drawings of the proposed pipe layout, together with valves,
sprinkler heads and appurtenances, including sizes and specifications.
I. Any person owning property within the borough limits will be required
to connect to the water main if his property is located along a street or
road in which a water main has been located.
J. No interconnection or cross-connection shall be made or permitted
between the water system being operated by the borough and any other
water supply, unless the proposed connection has been approved by the
State Department of Health and the borough.
K. The borough reserves the right to alter or amend these rules and
regulations in the manner provided by law.
A. Water from fire hydrants or other fire-fighting facilities shall be used
only for fire-fighting purposes.
B. The borough shall have no greater duty, with regard to fire hydrant
service or private fire-fighting service, than to supply only such volumes
of water at such pressures as may be available in the normal operation
of the waterworks facilities.
C. The borough shall not be considered an insurer of property or persons
or to have undertaken to extinguish fire or to protect persons or
property against loss or damage by fire or otherwise. In consideration
of the level of charges for private fire-fighting service, the borough shall
not be held liable for any amount in excess of 10% of the annual charge
for private fire-fighting service because of any claim based upon a loss
resulting from failure to supply water or pressure or for any other
cause. In the absence of a charge for public fire hydrant service, the
§ 94-11 WATER § 94-12
94:403
§ 94-13. Extension of mains.
§ 94-14. Service outside the borough.
§ 94-15. Definitions and word usage.
borough shall not be held liable for any claim based upon a loss
resulting from failure to supply water or pressure or for any other
cause.
D. Where metered service is provided to any customer, the borough shall
not be responsible for the quantities of water or pressure which may be
available for any fire-fighting facilities or purpose where the customer
installs such facilities or make connections to his/her water system for
such purposes on the discharge side of the meter in his/her service line
and shall not be held liable for any claim based upon loss due to fire or
fire fighting.
E. The borough will consider installation of public fire hydrants outside of
the borough only upon authorization from the political subdivision in
which the unit is to be installed and which will be responsible for
payment of bills.
A. Extension of distribution mains shall be made only after petition of the
owner of real estate or their authorized agents, along the proposed line
and upon their entering into in agreement which shall satisfy the
borough that an annual revenue will occur to the borough as a result of
such extension, equal to 7% of the cost of laying the main, dating from
the time when water is turned on for public use.
B. For any extension of main outside the borough, the assured annual
revenue shall be 12 1/2% of the cost of laying the main.
C. The borough may, at its own discretion, extend any distribution main
without petition or refuse any petition.
A. The borough furnishes water to a few customers outside its corporate
limits solely as an accommodation and does not solicit such service. The
borough reserves the right to terminate any and all such services, at its
own discretion, without liability to any person or persons whose water
service may be terminated.
B. The borough does not represent itself as ready to serve additional
properties situated outside its corporate limits, and service connections
which it may permit shall be in accordance with the provisions of these
rules and regulations and such other conditions as the borough may
specify.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
§ 94-12 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 94-15
94:404
BOROUGH — Borough of East Greenville, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania, or duly authorized agent appointed by the Borough
Council.
BUILDING UNIT — Any portion of a building or complex of buildings
which is utilized for separate purposes as follows:
CONNECTION — Water piping and fittings leading from the water main
to the premises of a customer.
CORPORATION STOP — A valve which is inserted into the main for the
connection of the water supply service pipe.
CURB STOP — A valve for insertion in the service pipe at or near the
curb or property line of the customer.
CURB STOP BOX — A box or metal housing which encloses, protects
and provides access to the curb stop.
CUSTOMER — Any person, as hereinafter defined, owning any
premises receiving water from the borough.
PERSON — Any individual, association, partnership, firm or
corporation.
PREMISES — A property which cannot be completely divided in its
present utilitarian condition through sale, that is:
STOP AND WASTE VALVE — A valve installed at the termination of
the water supply service pipe and at the beginning of the customer's
plumbing system.
WATER MAIN — The system of water piping valves, fittings and
equipment used to distribute water throughout the area served by the
borough.
(1) Apartment or dwelling.
(2) Commercial establishment.
(3) Industry facility.
(4) Office.
A building under one roof, owned, leased or occupied by one party
as one business or residence.
(1)
A combination of residential or commercial buildings leased or
occupied by one party in one common enclosure.
(2)
(3) The one side of a double house having a solid vertical partition wall.
A building owned by one party having more than one internal
division such as apartments, offices, stores, etc., and which have a
common or separate entrance.
(4)
B. In these rules and regulations, the singular shall include the plural.
§ 94-15 WATER § 94-16
94:405
§ 94-16. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter or failing to comply with any order issued pursuant to any section
hereof shall be guilty of a summary offense punishable by a fine of not more
than $1,000 or by imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or both such fine
and imprisonment and may in accordance with said rules and regulations
discontinue water service. Each day that a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense.
§ 94-16 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 94-16
94:406
ARTICLE II
Cross-Connection Control
[Adopted 3-4-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-3]
§ 94-17. Purpose and policy.
§ 94-18. Definitions.
These definitions will be applicable to the provisions of this article.
AIR GAP SEPARATION — The unobstructed vertical distance through the
free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet
supplying potable water to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the
flood level rim of the receptacle. The differential distance shall be at least
double the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the top of
the rim of the vessel. In no case shall the air gap be less than one inch.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this article is:
(1) To protect the public water supply system from contamination or
pollution by isolating within the consumer's water system
contaminants or pollutants which could backflow through the
service connection into the public water supply system.
(2) To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections,
actual or potential, between the public or consumer's potable water
system and nonpotable water system, plumbing fixtures and
sources or systems containing process fluids.
(3) To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of crossconnection
control which will systematically and effectively
prevent the contamination or pollution of the public and the
consumer's potable water system.
B. Application. This article shall apply to all premises (commercial and
noncommercial) served by the public water supply system of the East
Greenville Borough.
C. Policy. The East Greenville Borough and the consumer have the joint
responsibility for the protection of the public water supply system from
contamination due to backflow of contaminants through the water
service connection. If, in the judgment of the East Greenville Borough
or its authorized representative, an approved backflow prevention
device is required, the East Greenville Borough shall give notice to the
consumer to install such approved backflow prevention device at each
service connection to his premises. The consumer shall immediately
install such approved device or devices at his own expense, and failure,
refusal or inability on the part of the consumer to install such device or
devices shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to the
premises until such device or devices have been installed.
§ 94-17 WATER § 94-18
94:407
APPROVED — A backflow prevention device or method that has been
accepted by the public water supplier or by any enforcement entity.
ATMOSPHERIC VACUUM BREAKER (AVB) — A fixture outlet device
containing an optional shutoff valve followed by a valve body containing a
resilient seated float-check, a check seat and an air inlet port. If the shutoff
valve is open, the flow of water causes the float to close the air inlet port.
If the shutoff valve is closed, the float falls and forms a check valve against
backsiphonage and at the same time opens the air inlet port. If no shutoff
valve is provided, the flow of water will determine the opening and closing
of the air inlet port.
AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM — Any water source or system on the premises
of, or available to, the customer except connections to other approved
community water supply systems.
BACKFLOW — A flow condition, induced by a differential in pressure, that
causes the flow of water or mixtures of water and other substances into
the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from a source other
than its intended source. Backflow can result from either backsiphonage or
backpressure.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY — A device or other means which
will prevent the backflow of water or any other substance into the public
water supply system.
BACKPRESSURE — The backflow of water or a mixture of water and
other substances from a plumbing fixture or other customer source into a
public water supply system due to an increase of pressure in the fixture or
customer source to a value that exceeds the system pressure.
BACKSIPHONAGE — The backflow of water or a mixture of water and
other substances from a plumbing fixture or other customer source into a
public water supply system due to a temporary negative or subatmospheric
pressure within the pubic water supply system.
CONSUMER — The owner or person in control of any premises supplied by
or in manner connected to a public water supply system.
CONSUMER'S WATER SYSTEM — Any water system located on the
consumer's premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public
water supply system. A household plumbing system is considered to be a
consumer's water system.
CONTAINMENT — Cross-connection control which isolates the customer's
entire facility from the public water supply system so as to provide the
protection necessary to prevent contamination of the public water supply
in the event of backflow from the customer's facility. Though containment
control prevents contamination of the public water supply, it offers no
protection to the water distribution system within the facility. Reduced
pressure zone devices are used for containment control.
CONTAMINATION — The degradation of the quality of the drinking water
by wastewaters, processed fluids, or any water of a quality less than
accepted drinking water quality to a degree which would create an actual
§ 94-18 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 94-18
94:408
hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of
disease.
CROSS-CONNECTION — An arrangement allowing either a direct or
indirect connection through which backflow can occur between the potable
water system and a nonpotable substance.
DEGREE OF HAZARD — An evaluation of the potential risk to health and
the adverse effect upon the public water supply system.
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY (DCVA) — An assembly composed of
two independently acting spring-loaded check valves connected in series,
two resilient seated shutoff valves, and four properly located resilient
seated test cocks for testing.
FIXTURE OUTLET PROTECTION — Cross-connection control that isolates
all free-flowing fixture outlets (i.e., faucets) from the water distribution
system within a facility. Fixture protection prevents backflow contamination
of both the facility's water system and the public water supply. Examples
of fixture outlet protection devices include atmospheric vacuum breakers,
hose-bibb vacuum breakers, and pressure vacuum breakers.
HEALTH HAZARD — Any condition, device, or practice in a water system
or its operation that creates or may create a danger to the health and wellbeing
of its users. The word "severe" as used to qualify "health hazard,"
means a hazard to the health of the user that could reasonably be expected
to result in significant morbidity or death.
HOSE-BIBB VACUUM BREAKER (HBVB) — A fixture outlet device which
contains a soft-seated, spring-loaded, air inlet valve and is designed to be
attached to an outlet having a hose connection thread.
INTERCHANGEABLE CONNECTION — An arrangement or device that will
allow alternate, but not simultaneous, use of two sources of water.
INTERNAL PROTECTION — Cross-connection control which isolates all
non-outlet, water-use appliances within a facility (e.g., kitchen appliances,
air conditioners, boilers, process tanks, photodeveloping equipment) from
the water distribution system within the facility. Internal protection
prevents backflow contamination of both the facility water system and the
public water supply. Reduced pressure zone devices and double check valve
assemblies are used for internal protection.
NON-HEALTH HAZARD — Any condition, device or practice in a water
system or its operation that creates, or may create, an impairment of the
quality of the water to a degree which does not create a hazard to the public
health but which does adversely and unreasonably affect the aesthetic
qualities of such water for domestic use.
NON-POTABLE WATER — Water not safe for drinking, personal, culinary or
any other type of domestic use.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, company, corporation,
municipality, municipal authority, political subdivision or any agency of
federal or state government. The term includes the officers, employees and
§ 94-18 WATER § 94-18
94:409
agents of any partnership, association, company, corporation, municipality,
municipal authority, political subdivision or any agency of federal or state
government.
POLLUTION — The presence in water of any foreign substance that tends to
degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard or to impair the usefulness
or quality of the water to a degree which does not create an actual hazard
to the public health but which does adversely and unreasonably affect such
waters for domestic use.
POTABLE WATER — Water which is satisfactory for drinking, personal,
culinary, and domestic purposes and meets the requirements of DEP.
PRESSURE VACUUM BREAKER (PVB) — A fixture outlet device containing
an independently operating, soft-seated, spring-loaded check valve and an
independently operating, soft-seated, spring-loaded, air inlet valve on the
discharge side of the check valve.
PROCESS FLUIDS — Any fluid or solution that may be chemically,
biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or
concentration such as would constitute a health, pollution, or system hazard
if introduced into the public or a consumer's water system. This includes
but is not limited to:
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLIER — A person who owns or operates a public
water system.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM — A system which provides water to the
public for human consumption which has at least 15 service connections or
regularly serves an average of at least 25 individuals daily at least 60 days
out of the year. The term includes any collection, treatment, storage, and
distribution facilities under control of the operator of the system and used
in connection with the system. The term includes collection or pretreatment
storage facilities not under such control which are used in connection
with the system. The term also includes a system which provides water
A. Polluted or contaminated waters;
B. Process waters;
Used waters originating from the public water system which may have
deteriorated in sanitary quality;
C.
D. Cooling waters;
Contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes, streams, or
irrigation systems;
E.
F. Chemicals in solution or suspension;
Oils, gases, acids, alkalis, and other liquid or gaseous fluids used in
industrial or other processes, or for fire-fighting purposes;
G.
H. Heating system waters from boilers or heat pumps.
§ 94-18 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 94-18
94:410
for human consumption via bottling, vending machines, retail sale, or bulk
hauling methods.
REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE DEVICE — A device which contains two
independently acting, soft-seated, spring-loaded check valves, together with
a soft-seated, spring-loaded, diaphragm-activated, pressure differential
relief valve located between the two check valves. During normal flow and
during backflow conditions the pressure between these two checks shall be
less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the
differential relief valve shall maintain the pressure between the checks at
less than the supply pressure by opening to the atmosphere. The device
must include resilient seated shutoff valves at each end, and four properly
located resilient seated test cocks.
RESIDENTIAL DUAL CHECK VALVE (RDCV) — A nontestable backflow
prevention device that is used for containment control of residential homes
and consists of two independently operating, soft-seated, spring-loaded,
consecutive check valves.
SERVICE CONNECTION — The terminal end of a service line from the
public water supply system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service
line, then the service connection means the downstream end of the meter.
SYSTEM HAZARD — A condition posing an actual or potential threat of
damage to the physical properties of the public water system.
§ 94-19. Water system.
§ 94-20. Cross-connections prohibited.
A. The water system shall be considered as made up of two parts: the East
Greenville Borough System and the consumer's water system.
B. The public water system shall consist of the source facilities and the
distribution system and shall include all those facilities of the public
water supply system under the control of the East Greenville Borough
up to the point where the consumer's water system begins. The public
water supply will normally terminate on the upstream side of the meter.
C. The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in the
production, treatment, storage, and delivery of water to the public
distribution system.
D. The public distribution system shall include the network of conduits
used for delivery of water from the source to the consumer's water
system.
E. The consumer's water system shall include all facilities beyond the
service connection which are utilized in conveying water from the
public distribution system to points of use.
A. No water service connection shall be installed or maintained to any
premises where actual or potential cross-connections to the public
§ 94-18 WATER § 94-20
94:411
§ 94-21. Survey and investigations.
§ 94-22. Where protection is required.
water supply system or consumer's water system may exist unless such
actual or potential cross-connections are abated or controlled to the
satisfaction of the East Greenville Borough.
B. No connection shall be installed or maintained whereby water from an
auxiliary water supply may enter a public or consumer's water system
unless such auxiliary water supply and the method of connection and
use of such supply shall have been approved.
A. The consumer shall make arrangements to be available upon notice by
the East Greenville Borough or its authorized representatives for the
purposes of conducting surveys and investigations of water use
practices within the consumer's premises to determine whether there
are direct or indirect cross-connections to the consumer's water system
through which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into the
public potable water system.
B. On request by the East Greenville Borough, the consumer shall furnish
information on water use practices within his premises.
C. It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to conduct periodic
surveys of water use practices on his premises to determine whether
there are actual or potential cross-connections to his water system
through which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into the
public water supply system.
A. An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed prior to the
first branch line leading off each service line to a consumer's water
system where, in the judgment of the East Greenville Borough, an
actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system exists.
B. An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system where the following
conditions exist:
(1) Systems having an auxiliary water supply, unless such auxiliary
supply is accepted as an additional source by the East Greenville
Borough and approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP).
(2) Systems where any substance is handled in such a fashion as to
create an actual or potential hazard to the public water supply
system. This shall include systems having sources or auxiliary
systems containing process fluids or water originating from the
public water supply system which are no longer under the sanitary
control of the water purveyor.
§ 94-20 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 94-22
94:412
§ 94-23. Type of protection required.
(3) Systems having internal cross-connections that, in the judgment of
the Fast Greenville Borough, are not correctable or intricate
plumbing arrangements which make it impractical to determine
whether or not cross-connections exist.
(4) Systems where, because of security requirements or other
prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make
a complete cross-connection survey.
(5) Systems having a repeated history of cross-connections.
(6) Others specified by the public water supplier.
C. An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system serving, but not necessarily
limited to, the following type facilities unless the East Greenville
Borough determines that no actual or potential hazard to the public
water supply system exists.
(1) Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes;
(2) Laboratories;
(3) Piers, docks, waterfront facilities;
(4) Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or stormwater
pumping stations;
(5) Food or beverage processing plants;
(6) Chemical plants;
(7) Metalplating industries;
(8) Petroleum processing or storage plants;
(9) Radioactive material processing plants;
(10) Car wash or truck wash;
(11) Residence;
(12) Others specified by the water purveyor.
A. The type of protection required under § 94-22A, B and C of this article
shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists as follows:
(1) An approved air gap separation shall be installed where the public
water supply system may be contaminated with substances that are
dangerous to the public health and could cause a severe health
hazard. A severe health hazard is sewage and radioactive
materials.
§ 94-22 WATER § 94-23
94:413
§ 94-24. Backflow prevention devices.
(2) An approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure
zone backflow prevention device shall be installed where the public
water supply system may be contaminated with a substance that
could cause a system or health hazard.
(3) An approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure
zone backflow prevention device or an approved double check
valve assembly shall be installed where the public water supply
system may be polluted with a substance that would be
objectionable but not dangerous to health.
(4) An approved pressure vacuum breaker assembly or spill resistance
vacuum breaker assembly can be installed in place of the abovementioned
devices; however, these devices may only be used to
abate indirect cross-connections.
A. Any backflow prevention device required by this article shall be of a
model or construction approved by the public water supplier and shall
comply with the following:
(1) Air gap separation to be approved shall be at least twice the
diameter of the supply pipe, measured vertically above the top rim
of the vessel, but in no case less than one inch.
(2) A double check valve assembly or a reduced pressure zone device
shall be approved by the Fast Greenville Borough and shall mean a
device that has been manufactured in full conformance with
standards established by the American Water Works Association,
entitled:
(a) AWWA/ANSI C510-92 Standard for Double Check Valve
Backflow Assemblies.
(b) AWWA/ANSI C511-92 Standard for Reduced Pressure Principle
Backflow Prevention Assemblies.
(3) An approved assembly should also have met completely the
laboratory and field performance specifications of the Foundation
for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research of the
University of Southern California (USC FCCCHR) established in:
(a) Specifications of Backflow Prevention Assemblies, Section 10
of the most current Edition of the Manual of Cross-Connection
Control.
(4) The following testing laboratory has been qualified by the East
Greenville Borough to test and approve backflow prevention
assemblies:
§ 94-23 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 94-24
94:414
§ 94-25. Installation.
Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research
University of Southern California
KAP-200 University Park MC-2531
Los Angeles, California 90089-2531
Testing laboratories other than the laboratory listed above will be
added to an approved list as they are qualified by the East
Greenville Borough.
B. Existing backflow prevention devices approved by the East Greenville
Borough at the time of installation and properly maintained shall,
except for inspection and maintenance requirements, be excluded from
the requirement of Subsection A of this regulation, provided the East
Greenville Borough is assured that they will satisfactorily protect the
public water supply system. If the existing device is moved from the
present location or requires more than minimum maintenance or when
the East Greenville Borough finds that the maintenance of the device
constitutes a hazard to the public health, the device shall be replaced
by a backflow prevention device meeting the requirements of these
regulations.
A. Backflow prevention devices required by this article shall be installed at
a location and in a manner approved by the East Greenville Borough
and shall be installed by a person properly qualified and at the expense
of the consumer.
B. Backflow prevention devices installed on the service line to a
consumer's water system shall be located on the consumer's side of the
water meter, as close to the meter as is reasonably practical, and prior
to any other connection.
C. Pits or vaults shall be of watertight construction, be so located and
constructed as to prevent flooding and shall be maintained free from
standing water by means of either a sump pump or a suitable drain.
Such sump pump or drain shall not connect to a sanitary sewer nor
permit flooding of the pit or vault by reverse flow from its point of
discharge. An access ladder and adequate natural or artificial lighting
shall be provided to permit maintenance inspection and testing of the
backflow prevention device.
D. When installing a backflow prevention device the installer must comply
and be aware of all safety considerations when installations are
performed. Major safety considerations are thermal expansion and
device discharge damage. Thermal expansion can cause hot water
tanks and other storage vessels to explode when there are no provisions
made for thermal expansion. The East Greenville Borough strongly
recommends the installation of a thermal expansion tank on hot water
heaters to prevent the hot water heaters relief valve from discharging
§ 94-24 WATER § 94-25
94:415
§ 94-26. Inspection and maintenance.
or, more importantly, from exploding. Many backflow prevention
devices discharge large amounts of water for various reasons. This
discharge of water could obviously pose a hazard when the valves are
discharging onto or around electrical equipment. Equipment damage
or electrocution could occur. The installer must ensure that valve
discharge will not cause safety hazards or property damage. Thermal
expansion is a concern anytime substances are confined (in a closed
system) and are heated.
A. It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which backflow
prevention devices are required by this article, to have inspections,
tests, and overhaul made in accordance with the following schedule, or
more often where inspections indicate a need.
(1) Air separation shall be inspected at the time of installation, and at
least every 12 months thereafter.
(2) Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested for
tightness at the time of installation, and at least every 12 months
thereafter. These devices shall be dismantled, inspected internally,
cleaned, and repaired whenever needed, and at least every 30
months.
(3) Reduced pressure zone devices shall be inspected and tested for
tightness at the time of installation, and at least every 12 months
thereafter. These devices shall be dismantled, inspected internally,
cleaned, and repaired whenever needed and at least every five
years.
(4) Interchangeable connections shall be inspected at the time of
installation and at least every 12 months thereafter.
B. Inspections, tests, and overhaul of backflow prevention devices shall be
made at the expense of the water consumer and shall be performed by
the East Greenville Borough or a person certified to inspect, test or
overhaul backflow prevention devices.
C. Whenever backflow prevention devices required by these regulations
are found to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the
expense of the consumer without delay.
D. The water consumer must maintain a complete record of each backflow
prevention device from purchase to retirement. This shall include a
comprehensive listing that includes a record of all tests, inspections
and repairs. Records of inspections, tests, repairs and overhaul shall be
submitted to the East Greenville Borough.
E. Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative,
removed or otherwise made ineffective without specific authorization
by the water purveyor.
§ 94-25 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 94-27
94:416
§ 94-27. Booster pumps.
§ 94-28. Geothermal heating systems.
All geothermal heating equipment must be physically disconnected from the
potable water system. No water may be taken for geothermal uses (or any
other use) and reinjected into the potable water supply.
§ 94-29. Violations.
§ 94-30. Hydrant use restriction.
Only authorized persons shall be permitted to use hydrants. Tampering with
the hydrants by unauthorized persons is prohibited. Any person wishing
to use the hydrants (other than the Authority and fire companies) must
request permission from East Greenville Borough. East Greenville Borough
will provide the equipment to contractors for them to use to draw water
from hydrants.
§ 94-31. Auxiliary water systems.
Any auxiliary water systems (those water systems not part of the public
water system) shall be physically disconnected from the East Greenville
Borough public water system. Any connection, even when backflow
protection in the form of a mechanical device or air gap is in place, between
A. Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or
within any premises, such a pump shall be equipped with a lowpressure
cut-off device designed to shut off the booster pump when the
pressure in the service line on the suction side of the pump drops to 10
pounds per square inch gauge or less for a period of 30 seconds or
longer.
B. It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low-pressure
cut-off device in proper working order and to certify to the East
Greenville Borough, at least once a year, that the device is operating
properly.
A. The East Greenville Borough shall deny or discontinue, after reasonable
notice in writing, the water service to any premises wherein any
backflow prevention device required by this article is not installed,
tested, and maintained in a manner acceptable to the public water
supplier, or if it is found that the backflow prevention device has been
removed or bypassed, or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on
the premises, or if a low-pressure cut-off device required by this article
is not installed and maintained in proper working order.
B. Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the consumer
has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance
with this article and to the satisfaction of the public water supplier.
§ 94-27 WATER § 94-31
94:417
the East Greenville Borough and any other water source, such as an
auxiliary system, is strictly prohibited.
§ 94-32. Monetary responsibility.
All consumers considered to be nonhazardous will be charged a one-time
installation fee. The consumer will be billed in conjunction with the water
bill. All consumers considered to be aesthetically objectionable or
hazardous will be responsible for the full cost of installation and parts.
Hazardous and aesthetically objectionable consumers will be provided with
the specifications that need to be met and will hire a private plumber to
complete the work.
§ 94-33. Exclusions.
Consumers that are considered nonhazardous are excluded from § 94-26
unless evidence of a hazard is suspected.
§ 94-34. Priority system.
A. All facilities will be listed under one of the following priority levels:
(1) Hazardous facilities.
(2) Aesthetically objectionable facilities (non-health hazard).
(3) Nonhazardous facilities.
B. After all connections are placed into one of three priority levels listed
above, a review of the distribution system records will to done to
identify areas of chronic low pressures, leakage and breaks.
§ 94-31 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 94-34
94:418
Chapter 95
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 12.
Sewer Authority — See Ch. 20.
Building construction — See Ch. 35.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 44.
Plumbing — See Ch. 67.
Sewers — See Ch. 78.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 83.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
85.
§ 94-34 WATER § 94-34
94:419

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 95-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "East Greenville Zoning
Ordinance of 1996" and shall become effective upon enactment.
§ 95-2. Declaration of legislative intent.
This chapter is enacted in accordance with Article VI of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended,83 and is intended to serve the
following purposes:
A. To promote, protect and facilitate any or all of the following purposes:
(1) The public health, safety, morals and the general welfare of the
community.
(2) Coordinated and practical community development and proper
density of population.
(3) Emergency management preparedness and operations and police
protection.
(4) Provision of adequate light and air and access to incident solar
energy.
(5) Provision of vehicle parking and loading space, transportation,
schools, recreational facilities and public grounds.
(6) Provision of safe, reliable and adequate water supply for domestic,
commercial, agricultural and industrial use and other public
requirements and for the safe reliable disposal of sewage.
(7) Preservation of the natural, scenic and historical values in the
environment and the preservation of wooded areas, wetlands,
aquifers, floodplains and other natural resources.
B. To prevent one or more of the following:
(1) Overcrowding of land or blight.
(2) Danger and congestion in travel and transportation.
(3) Loss of health, life or property from fire, flood, panic or other
dangers.
C. To provide for the use of land for residential housing of various dwelling
types encompassing all basic forms of housing, including single-family
and two-family dwellings, mobile homes and mobile home parks and a
reasonable range of multifamily dwellings in various arrangements.
83.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 95-1 WATER § 95-2
94:421
§ 95-3. Statement of community development objectives.
The Borough of East Greenville, which has an adopted Comprehensive Plan
to guide the orderly growth and the borough development of the borough,
intends this chapter to implement the following community development
objectives which have been adopted by the Borough Council of East
Greenville in accordance with Section 606 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code84:
D. To accommodate reasonable overall community growth, including
opportunities for development of a variety of residential dwelling types
along with appropriate nonresidential uses.
A. Intergovernmental cooperation and implementation. The general goal
is to plan for and ensure the maximum future development of the
Borough of East Greenville by coordinating the planning of public and
private enterprises of the borough with the plans and enterprises of the
surrounding areas and region. Public involvement is a fundamental aim.
Planning shall continue to be directed at improving community facilities
and services, particularly where public opinion indicates the need is
greatest. In order to implement planned improvements, diversified land
use, intermunicipal cooperation and the consolidation of operating
agencies are being promoted. The guiding principle continues to be to
assure maximum community benefits consistent with local traditions,
the enlargement of goals and objectives for both public and private
enterprise and appropriate enhancement of human values.
B. Growth. The borough is a developed community with an established
character that should be preserved. All future growth, whether by
infilling of remaining vacant land or by redevelopment, should occur in
an orderly and controlled manner that is consistent with the scale and
character of the borough and which protects the social and economic
stability of each area.
C. Land use. East Greenville Borough has a wide variety of land uses,
including a strong residential character. The borough should preserve
and protect the character, stability and value of land and buildings.
D. Housing. The borough has a diverse housing mix, with many types and
densities and appearances. The integrity of established residential
neighborhoods should be protected. Infill housing should complement
the existing neighborhoods. New development should provide adequate
off-street parking, recreation facilities and open space.
E. Commerce. Future commercial development should respect
surrounding residential neighborhoods. In the borough, small-scale
commercial activities should mix with residences in certain areas such
as Main Street. Larger scale, auto-oriented uses should generally be
84.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 95-2 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-3
94:422
§ 95-4. Conflict.
It is not intended for this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or interfere
with any existing ordinance or enactment or with any rule, regulations
or permit adopted or issued thereunder, except insofar as the same may
be inconsistent or in conflict with any of the provisions of this chapter,
provided that where this chapter imposes greater restrictions upon the use
of buildings or land or upon the height and bulk of buildings or prescribes
larger open spaces than are required by the provision of such ordinance,
enactment, rule, regulations or permits, then the provisions of this chapter
shall control.
§ 95-5. Validity.
Should any section of this chapter be declared by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
chapter as a whole or any other part thereof.
restricted to the shopping center and their deleterious effects (such as
traffic and noise) should be limited.
F. Industry. The existing industry in the borough should be adequately
regulated so that it may remain and its noise, odors or other unwanted
features can be minimized.
G. Institutions. The many institutions in the borough are part of the
community and should be encouraged to remain and yet be respectful
to surrounding residential neighborhoods.
H. Transportation. The borough should strive for the best possible
relationship between land use and transportation. The public
thoroughfares of the borough should be safe and efficient for all
vehicles, pedestrians and bicyclists.
I. Community facilities and services. It is desirable to maintain or to
expand and improve the present level of community services. The
borough should have appropriate open space, recreational facilities,
opportunities for education and enrichment and health and safety
services. These regulations should aid in providing a guide for public
policy and action in the efficient provision of public facilities and
services and in the provision of safe and proper sanitary sewage
disposal and for private enterprise in building development, investment
and other economic activity relating to land use.
J. Environment. Borough regulations should maintain a high standard of
air and water quality and the protect the natural resources, including
stream valleys and floodplains. The appearance of the borough should
be improved through appropriate sign regulation, landscaping and
design controls.
§ 95-3 WATER § 95-6
94:423
§ 95-6. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are
hereby repealed.
§ 95-7. Interpretation.
§ 95-8. (Reserved)
§ 95-9. (Reserved)
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted, ministered and
applied in such a manner as will facilitate attainment of said objectives
and all others permitted by law.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to permit the construction or
use of any building or facility within the limits of the Borough of East
Greenville contrary to restrictions or prohibitions contained in any
existing ordinances or regulations or those which may hereafter be
enacted.
§ 95-6 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-9
94:424
ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 95-10. Word usage.
In interpreting this chapter, the present tense includes the future; the
singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular; the word
"building" includes the word "structure" and shall be construed as if
followed by the words "or part thereof"; the word "occupy" includes the
words "designed" or "intended to be occupied"; the word "person" includes
any "natural persons," "copartnership," "firm," "association" or
"corporation"; the word "use" includes the words "arranged," "designed"
or "intended to be used"; and the word "shall" is always intended to be
mandatory when capable of such interpretation.
§ 95-11. Definitions.85
Words and terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings given in this
article. Unless expressly stated otherwise, any pertinent word or term not
a part of this listing, but vital to the interpretation of this chapter, shall
be construed to have its legal definition as appears in the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended,86 or in absence of a legal
definition, its meaning as commonly accepted by practitioners including
civil engineers, surveyors, architects, landscape architects and planners.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A detached building or
structure subordinate to the principal building on the lot and used for
purposes customarily incidental to those of the principal building.
ACCESSORY USE — A use subordinate to the principal use or building or
other structure on a lot and customarily incidental to the principal use.
ACCESS STRIP — A piece of land which provides physical access to and
legal road frontage for a lot, but which does not comply with the minimum
lot width requirements of this chapter. Access strips provide access to rear
or interior lots. The area of an access strip shall not be included in the
minimum lot area under the provisions of this chapter.
ADULT USE — includes the following:
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having as a substantial or
significant portion of its stock-in-trade books, magazines, films for sale
or viewing on premises by use of motion-picture devices or any other
coin-operated means and other periodicals which are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or
an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or
display of such material.
A.
85.Editor's Note: See also §§ 95-131 and 95-156.
86.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 95-10 WATER § 95-11
94:425
AGRICULTURE — The cultivating of the soil and the raising and harvesting
of the products of the soil, including, but not by way of limitation, nursery,
horticulture and forestry.
ALLEY — A public or privately owned right-of-way on which no new
dwellings, stores or other principal buildings are intended to front, serving
as the secondary means of access to two or more properties.
ALLEY LOT — A designated parcel, tract, or area of land lawfully recorded
by the Montgomery County Board of Assessment office and Recorder of
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building used
regularly and routinely for presenting material having as a dominant
theme material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, for observation by patrons therein.
B.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET — A public or private
establishment which is licensed to serve food and/or alcoholic
beverages, which features topless dancers, strippers, male or female
impersonators or similar entertainers.
C.
MASSAGE PARLORS — Any place of business where any person,
partnership, firm, association or corporation engages in or carries on
or permits to be engaged in or carried on any method of pressure
on, friction against or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding,
vibrating, stimulating parts of the body with the hands or with the aid of
any mechanical apparatus or electrical apparatus or appliance, with or
without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, oil or other such
item.
D.
OTHER ADULT USES — Any business, activity or use similar to or of
the same general nature as the uses listed above. This section shall
include but shall not be limited to rap centers, nude wrestling studios,
sensitivity centers and escort bureaus, all of which exclude minors by
virtue of age as patrons thereof.
E.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES:
(1) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
(2) Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock or female breast.
(3)
F.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS:
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttock and female breast below a point immediately above
the top of the areola.
(1)
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
(2)
G.
§ 95-11 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-11
94:426
Deeds office, that does not have frontage on a street, but does have frontage
on an alley.[Added 6-4-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-01]
ALTERATION — Any change in existing facilities, structural parts or
mechanical equipment which does not increase the cubic content of a
building.
AMENITIES — Satisfaction derived from ownership or occupancy, or both,
of a property because of qualities of excellence which characterize the
property and its surroundings. In appraising, the term is most frequently
used in connection with considerations relating to properties which
typically are strongly appealing to prospective buyers for owner occupancy.
ANTENNA ARRAY — One or more rods, panels, discs or similar devices used
for the transmission or reception of radio frequency signals, which may
include omnidirectional antennas (rod), directional antennas (panel), and
parabolic antennas (disc). The antenna array does not include the support
structure defined below.[Added 3-12-2001 by Ord. No. 01-5]
APARTMENT — A dwelling unit in a building containing three or more units
having some common service or facilities, or both, and located on the same
lot.
APARTMENT HOUSE — A building containing three or more dwelling units
having common services or facilities, or both, and located on the same lot.
APPROVED — Passed upon as satisfactory by the authority designated by
law to give approval to the matter in question.
ASSEMBLAGE —
ATTACHED WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES — A wireless
telecommunication facility, some component of which is attached to an
attachment structure.[Added 3-12-2001 by Ord. No. 01-5]
ATTACHMENT STRUCTURE — A building or an existing structure, other
than a telecommunications tower, suitable for the support of a wireless
telecommunication facility, but which has been designed and constructed
for another purpose. Such existing structures shall include, but not be
limited to utility poles, water towers, and municipally owned towers.[Added
3-12-2001 by Ord. No. 01-5]
BASEMENT — A building story partly below and partly above grade, having
at least 1/2 its height above grade, when measured in compliance with the
definition of "story." (Also, see "cellar.")
BASIC STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — Any enlargement of a building,
whether by existing on any side or by increasing in height, any change in
the use or classification of a main building or the moving of a building from
one location to another.
The merging of adjacent properties into a single unit of ownership or
use.
A.
B. The property so merged, considered as a unit.
§ 95-11 WATER § 95-11
94:427
BED-AND-BREAKFAST HOME — A home occupation that provides one to
six rooms (limited to two persons or one family per unit/room) for occasional
paying guests on an overnight basis for periods not to exceed 14 days with
breakfast being available on premises at no additional cost. A bed-andbreakfast
home is allowable only in a building originally constructed as a
single-family detached dwelling.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST INN — A tourist home that provides four to 16 guest
rooms (limited to two persons or one family per unit/room) for paying guests
on an overnight basis for periods not to exceed 14 days with breakfast
being available on premises at no additional cost. A bed-and-breakfast inn
is allowable in any building, provided that no guest rooms are on the first
floor.
BLOCK — A tract of land, being a lot or a group of lots, bounded by streets,
public parks, railroad rights-of-way, watercourses, boundary lines of the
Borough or by any combination thereof on all sides.[Added 3-2-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-6]
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The duly elected governing body of the Borough
of East Greenville in the County of Montgomery and Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
BUILDING — Any structure, whether built conventionally or in a manner
generally referred to as "mobile," "modular" or "manufactured," and having
enclosed walls and roof, permanently located on the land, the ordinary use
of which requires people to enter the structure. (See "accessory building"
and "principal building.")
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A building subordinate to the principal building
on the same lot therewith and used for purposes customarily incidental to
those of the principal building.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The aggregate of the maximum horizontal crosssection
areas of all buildings on a lot, taken at their greatest outside
dimensions on the ground floor, including all attached structures, except
steps and terraces at a lower plane or planes than the majority of the
first floor area of the principal building. (Cornices, eaves and gutters are
excluded, while porches, breezeways and carports are included.)
BUILDING LINE — The line parallel to the street line at a distance
therefrom equal to the depth of the front yard required for the district in
which the lot is located, provided that in the case of a lot where the side
lines are not parallel, the building line shall be at that point where minimum
lot width first coincides with the required lot width, but in no case closer to
the street line than the required front yard.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted the principal
use of the lot on which it is located.
CELLAR — A building story partly below and partly above grade, having
at least 1/2 its height below grade, when measured in compliance with the
definition of "story." (Also, see "basement.")
§ 95-11 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-11
94:428
CIRCULATION — Provision made for traffic within or through buildings,
outside areas and communities.
CLUB, FRATERNAL INSTITUTIONAL — A principal building used for the
meeting place of an organized group of citizens such as a veterans
organization, fraternal organization, business organization, service
organization and the like, in which activities are limited to members of the
organization and their guests and which may also provide living quarters
for caretakers and transient quarters for members; also includes fraternity
house, lodge and residential club.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water
or a combination of land and water within a development site designed
and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of the development, not
including streets, off-street parking areas and areas set aside for public
facilities. Common open space shall be substantially free of structures but
may contain such improvements as are in the development plan as finally
approved and as are appropriate for the recreation of residents.
COMMUNITY —
COMPLETION — The act of bringing to a condition of physical
completeness and readiness for use and occupancy.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The East Greenville Borough Comprehensive
Plan and amendments thereto, including maps, charts and/or descriptive
matter officially adopted by the Borough Council, indicating
recommendations for the continuing development of the borough and
including all elements required by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code (Act 247).87
CONDITIONAL USE — A form of permitted use, authorized by this chapter
and by Section 603(c)(2) of the Municipalities Planning Code,88 under the
jurisdiction of the Borough Council. The Borough Council is empowered to
grant permission for conditional uses, consistent with the public interest, in
compliance with the standards and procedures established in this chapter,
following thorough examination of the proposal and hearing and under any
reasonable safeguards necessary to implement the purposes and intent of
this chapter and to protect the general welfare.
CONDOMINIUM — An estate in real property consisting of an undivided
interest in a portion of a parcel together with a separate interest in a space
within a structure. This form of ownership may be applied in residential,
professional office, limited industrial and commercial land uses.
A body of persons having common interests and privileges, living in the
same locality.
A.
B. A political subdivision.
87.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
88.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 95-11 WATER § 95-11
94:429
CONSTRUCTION — The materials and methods of fabricating the various
elements of a structure or building.
CONVERSION — The remodeling or alteration of a structure so as to
accommodate more apartment units (or dwelling units) than were originally
intended. Conversion would then include the alteration of a nonresidential
structure into a dwelling unit for at least one family; the modification of a
single-family structure so as to accommodate two or more dwelling units;
and the alteration of a multifamily structure so as to accommodate more
units than originally intended.
COURT — An open, unoccupied space bounded on two or more sides by the
exterior walls of a building or by exterior walls or lot lines.
CUL-DE-SAC — A minor street with entrance and exit at the same end.
CURB ELEVATION OR CURB LEVEL — The elevation of the top of a curb at
a given point with a reference to a designated datum.
DAY-CARE FACILITY, ADULT — Any premises operated for profit or not
for profit in which older adult living services, as defined herein, are
simultaneously provided for four or more adults who are not relatives of the
operator. The following types of adult day-care facilities are regulated by
this chapter:
DAY-CARE FACILITY, CHILD89 — Any dwelling, building or portion thereof
in which child care services are provided, including any on-site outdoor play
area. Child day-care facilities shall be further differentiated by the following
three classifications:
INNER COURT — A court enclosed on all sides by exterior walls of a
building or exterior walls and lot lines on which walls are allowable.
A.
OUTER COURT — A court enclosed on not more than three sides by
exterior walls of a building or by exterior walls and lot lines on which
walls are allowable, with one side or end open to a street, driveway,
alley or yard.
B.
ADULT DAY-CARE HOME — Any adult day-care facility in which
services are provided to between four and eight adults and where the
day-care areas are being used as a family residence.
A.
ADULT DAY-CARE CENTER — Any adult day-care facility in which
services are provided to eight or more adults and where the day-care
areas are not being used as a family residence.
B.
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — Any premises or dwelling unit other than
the child's own home where the child care areas are being used as a
family residence, operated for profit or not for profit, in which child
day care is provided at any one time on a regular basis for four, five or
six children who are not relatives of the caregiver. Day-care service for
children in this type of facility is different from baby-sitting.
A.
89.Editor's Note: See also § 95-156A.
§ 95-11 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-11
94:430
DEED — A written instrument whereby an estate in real property is
conveyed by a grantor to a grantee.
DENSITY — The number of units (persons, families or dwellings) per acre
or square mile.
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH (DOH) — The Department of Health of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any agency or successor thereto.[Added
7-16-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-03]
DEVELOPABLE ACRE — The developable acreage shall equal the gross
acreage minus the following:
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with
the permission of such landowner who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development, including a
planned residential development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants
relating to use, location and bulk buildings and other structures, intensity of
use or density of development streets, ways and parking facilities, common
open space and public facilities. The phrase "provisions of the development
plan" shall mean the written and graphic materials referred to in this
definition.
DWELLING TYPES — For the purposes of this chapter, the following are the
definitions of the various types of dwelling units:
GROUP DAY-CARE HOME — A facility in which care is provided for
more than six but fewer than 11 children at any one time, where the
child care areas are being used as a family residence.
B.
DAY-CARE CENTER — A facility which is licensed to provide care for
seven or more children at any one time, where the child care areas are
not being used as a family residence.
C.
A. DEED RESTRICTION — A restriction on the use of a property in a deed.
WARRANTY DEED — A deed in which, either expressly or by
implication, the grantor guarantees that the title which he undertakes
to transfer has not been previously conveyed by him or her and is free
from defects and that the property is unencumbered except as stated
and, for himself or herself and heirs, agrees to defend and protect
the grantee against any loss which may be suffered by reason of the
existence of any other title or interest in the property existing at the
time the deed was executed and not excepted therein.
B.
All land contained within the existing, legal rights-of-way of all roads
abutting or running through the land proposed for subdivision or land
development.
A.
B. All slopes of 15% or greater.
All wetlands, one-hundred-year floodplain and alluvial soils as defined
by the Soil Survey of Montgomery County of 1967.
C.
§ 95-11 WATER § 95-11
94:431
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING UNIT — A building designed
for and occupied exclusively as a residence for only one family and not
attached to any other building or dwelling units.
A.
TWO-FAMILY BUILDING — A residential building containing two
dwelling units and which is not attached to any other building. A twofamily
building counts as two dwelling units for density purposes and
includes the following:
TWIN (SINGLE-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED) — A two-family building
with dwelling units placed side by side, with each occupying the
total space from ground to roof and joined to each other by a
vertical, common party wall, but otherwise surrounded by yard
areas. When lotted, each dwelling unit may be on a separate lot,
with the common boundary between the two lots running along
the common party wall. Separate ingress and egress is provided to
each unit.
(1)
DUPLEX (TWO-FAMILY DETACHED) — A two-family building with
one dwelling unit placed above the other so that they share a
common horizontal partition. When lotted, a duplex shall be
entirely on one lot. Separate ingress and egress is provided to each
unit.
(2)
B.
SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLING UNIT — A dwelling unit
having its own independent outside access, with no other dwelling
units located directly and totally above or below it and having party
walls in common with at least one but not more than three adjacent
similar dwelling units and located in a building comprised of at least
three dwelling units. This dwelling type shall include, but not be limited
to, dwelling units commonly known as "townhouses," "row houses,"
"triplexes," "quadruplexes" and "multiplexes."
C.
MULTIFAMILY — A detached residential building containing three or
more dwelling units characterized as follows:
The dwelling units may share outside access and internal hallways,
lobbies and similar facilities.
(1)
The dwelling units are generally located entirely above or below
one another.
(2)
Each dwelling unit is usually contained on only one floor of the
building.
(3)
The dwelling units cannot be individually lotted, but instead, share
the lot or tract on which the building containing them is located.
(4)
The development is usually under one operating unit, as a rental or
condominium development.
(5)
D.
APARTMENT — A single dwelling unit in a multifamily building; a single
dwelling unit in a duplex may also be referred to as an "apartment."
E.
§ 95-11 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-11
94:432
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms with cooking and sanitary facilities
provided solely for the living purposes of one family.
EASEMENT — A vested or acquired right to use land other than as a tenant,
for a specific purpose, such right being held by someone other than the
owner who holds title to the land.
ELECTRIC SUBSTATION — An assemblage of equipment for purposes other
than generation or utilization, through which electric energy in bulk is
passed for the purposes of switching or modifying its characteristics to
meet the needs of the general public, provided that in residential districts
an electric substation shall not include rotating equipment, storage or
materials, trucks or repair facilities, housing or repair crews, offices or
places of business.
MOBILE HOME — A single-family detached dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, which may not meet local building codes but
does meet the standards of the United States Department of Housing
and Urban Development, as indicated by the Structural Engineering
Bulletin(s) provided to the Borough Council by the applicant. It shall
be contained in one unit (called a "single-wide") or in two or more
units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again
being separated for repeated towing (called a "double-wide"), which
arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and
incidental unpacking and assembly operations and constructed so that
it may be used with or without a permanent foundation, including any
roofed addition such as extra rooms, covered patios, porches, etc.
F.
MODULAR HOME — A dwelling unit for permanent occupancy, made
by assembling one or more factory-produced, three-dimensional
sections into one integral building, not capable of easily being
separated for repeated towing, whose construction materials must
conform to those of conventionally built units, as required by the
borough's Building Code90 and must be placed on a permanent
foundation. A copy of the Structural Engineering Bulletin(s) must be
provided to the Borough Council, indicating approval of the dwelling or
its components by the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development.
G.
HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY — Those housing units designed for and
intended for occupancy exclusively by those persons over the age of
62 who are unable to maintain or afford existing housing units in the
general community. Such units shall include those projects developed
under applicable federal and/or state housing assistance programs.
Such housing units shall contain appropriate safety features pertinent
to the needs of their residents and ancillary recreational and other
community facilities as an integral part of their development concept.
Furthermore, the developer of such housing units in the Borough of
East Greenville must guarantee that said units will be occupied solely
by elderly residents as defined above.
H.
90.Editor's Note: See Ch. 35, Building Construction.
§ 95-11 WATER § 95-11
94:433
FAMILY — Any number of individuals living together as a single
housekeeping unit and doing their cooking on the premises, when said
individuals are related by blood, marriage or adoption, including any
number of foster children under the care of the same; or no more than five
unrelated individuals living together as a single, nonprofit housekeeping
unit and doing their cooking on the premises, except when an application
for a special exception to enable a greater number of unrelated individuals
to occupy a dwelling unit is reviewed and approved by the Zoning Hearing
Board, as provided for in this chapter. (This definition shall not apply
to the occupants of a club, fraternity house, lodge, residential club,
boardinghouse, group home or rooming house.)
FLAG LOT — A lot which conforms in all respects to the dimensional
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located, except that the
only road frontage and access is limited to an access strip.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — Gross floor area shall be the floor area within the
perimeter of the outside walls of the building under consideration, without
deduction for hallways, stairs, closets, thickness of walls, columns or other
features.
FRONTAGE — The extent of a building or of land along a public road or a
public waterway.
GARAGE —
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION — Any land area, including structures
thereon, or any building or part thereof that is used for the sale of gasoline
or other motor vehicle fuel, including convenience items for consumption,
and which may or may not include facilities for lubricating, washing, or
otherwise servicing motor vehicles but which shall not include painting or
body and fender repairs.[Amended 3-12-2001 by Ord. No. 01-4]
GROUP HOME — A residential facility used as living quarters by any
number of unrelated persons requiring special care and their attendant
adult supervisors, specifically designed to create a residential setting for
the mentally and physically handicapped (as a permitted use) or for other
similar uses (as a special exception). The individuals may be either transient
PRIVATE — An accessory building or a part of a principal building used
for the storage of motor vehicles owned and used by the owner or
tenant of the premises and for the storage of not more than two motor
vehicles owned and used by persons other than the owner or tenant of
the premises.
A.
PUBLIC — A building, other than a private or storage garage, one or
more stories in height, used solely for the commercial storage, service
or repair of motor vehicles.
B.
STORAGE — A building, not a private or public garage, one story
in height, used solely for the storage of motor vehicles (other than
trucks), but not for the service or repair thereof nor for the sale of fuel,
accessories or supplies.
C.
§ 95-11 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-11
94:434
or permanent residents. Any number of handicapped persons, as defined in
Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended by the Fair Housing
Amendments Act of 1988, have the right to occupy a dwelling unit in the
same manner and to the same extent as any family unit.
HEIGHT OF BUILDING — A building's vertical measurement from the
mean level of ground surrounding the building to a point midway between
the highest and lowest points of the roof, provided that chimneys, spires,
towers, elevator penthouses, antennas, tanks and similar projections shall
comply with the provisions of § 95-162 of this chapter.
HEIGHT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER — The vertical distance
measured from the ground level to the highest point on a
telecommunications tower, including antennas mounted on the
tower.[Added 3-12-2001 by Ord. No. 01-5]
HOME OCCUPATION — Any lawful occupation or business activity
performed for financial gain which is conducted in whole or in part by
a resident(s) from his/her primary residence, where the occupation is
secondary and incidental to the use of the dwelling for living purposes and
the residential character of the dwelling is maintained. Home occupations,
to the extent permitted under § 95-155 of this chapter, shall be considered
an accessory use to all residential properties.
HOTEL — A building used for the purpose of furnishing for compensation
more or less temporary lodging to the public, with or without meals and
having lodging accommodations for 10 or more persons.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE COVERAGE — The land area covered by buildings
and paved surfaces which do not permit water to penetrate into the soil.
Buildings, parking, driveways, walks, courts, pools (swimming and
ornamental) and patios are included unless constructed of pervious or
porous materials, as determined by the borough.
IMPROVEMENT — A structure or public utility or any other installation or
physical change made in a property with a view to increasing its value,
utility or beauty.
JUNKYARD — A lot, land or structure or part thereof used primarily for the
collection, storage and sale of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal or discarded
material or for the collection, dismantling, storage and salvaging of
machinery or vehicles not in running condition and for the sale of parts
thereof.
LAND DEVELOPMENT —
Any of the following activities:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure; or
(a)
(1)
A.
§ 95-11 WATER § 95-11
94:435
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee, if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other persons having a
proprietary interest in land.
LANDSCAPE — A part of the earth's surface or the view of a portion of land
or land and water as seen from any given point.
LANDSCAPE CONSTRUCTION — The alteration of existing ground
conditions together with construction and development of ground features,
including minor structures.
LANDLOCKED LOT — A designated parcel, tract, or area of land lawfully
assigned a separate tax parcel identification number by the Montgomery
County Board of Assessment office, that does not have frontage on a street
or alley.[Added 6-4-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-01]
LIVING AREA — The gross floor area of any dwelling unit, providing there
exists a minimum ceiling height of seven feet six inches and exclusive
of garages, basements and attics unless finished and available for human
habitation as opposed to the mere storage of goods and materials.[Added
3-2-1998 by Ord. No. 98-6]
LOADING, UNLOADING SPACE — A space, accessible from a street or way,
in a building or a lot, for the temporary use of the vehicles, while loading or
unloading merchandise or materials.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land with street frontage
established by a plat or otherwise as permitted by law and to be used,
developed or built upon as a unit.
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of or for the purpose of
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features.
(b)
(2) A subdivision of land.
Conversion of an existing dwelling unit into more than one dwelling
unit.
(3)
(4) The addition of buildings or rides within an amusement park.
(5) The addition of a building accessory to a nonresidential use.
The addition of a building accessory to a residential use shall be
excluded from the definition of land development.
B.
LOT AREA — The total horizontal area of the lot lying within the lot
lines, provided that no area of land lying within any street line shall be
deemed a portion of any lot area; the area of any lot abutting a street
shall be measured to the street line only.
A.
§ 95-11 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-11
94:436
MEDICAL MARIJUANA — Marijuana for certified medical use as set forth in
the Medical Marijuana Act.[Added 7-16-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-03]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA ACT — The Pennsylvania Medical Marijuana Act,
Act 16 of 2016, 35 P.S. § 10231.101, et seq.[Added 7-16-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-03]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY — A person, including a natural
person, corporation, partnership, association, trust, or other entity or any
combination thereof which holds a permit issued by the Pennsylvania
Department of Health to dispense medical marijuana. The term includes
the facility from which medical marijuana is dispensed. The term does not
include a health care medical marijuana organization under Chapter 19 of
the Medical Marijuana Act.[Added 7-16-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-03]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA GROWER/PROCESSOR — A person, including a
natural person, corporation, partnership, association, trust, or other entity
or any combination thereof which holds a permit from the Department
of Health to grow and process medical marijuana. The term includes the
facilities in which medical marijuana is grown and processed. The term does
not include a health care medical marijuana organization under Chapter 19
of the Medical Marijuana Act.[Added 7-16-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-03]
MOBILE HOME — See definition under "dwelling type."
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved
with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary
for the installation of a mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has
been so designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile home
lots for the placement of mobile homes.
MOTOR COURT OR MOTEL — A building or a group of two or more
detached or semidetached buildings containing rooms or apartments having
separate ground floor entrances provided directly or closely in connection
with automobile parking or storage space serving such rooms or
apartments, which building or group of buildings is designed, intended
or used principally for the providing of sleeping accommodations for
automobile travelers and is suitable for occupancy at all seasons of the year.
NONCONFORMING LOT, STRUCTURE OR USE — A lot, structure or use
which lawfully existed prior to enactment of the ordinance or amendment
with which it does not conform.
LOT LINE — A property boundary line of any lot held in single and
separate ownership, except that in the case of any lot abutting a street,
the lot line for such portion of the lot as abuts the street shall be
deemed to be the same as the street line and shall not be the center line
of the street or any other line within the street line even though such
may be the property boundary line.
B.
LOT WIDTH — The width of a lot measured at the ultimate right-of-way
line.
C.
§ 95-11 WATER § 95-11
94:437
PAPER ALLEY — A public or privately owned right-of-way that is designated
on the Borough's official map or in the Montgomery County Board of
Assessment's official record, on which no new dwellings, stores or other
principal buildings are intended to front, serving as the secondary means
of access to two or more properties, but that has not yet been constructed.
The depicted right-of-way is intended to be built to a width of less than 25
feet.[Added 6-4-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-01]
PAPER STREET — A public or privately owned right-of-way that is
designated on the Borough's official map or in the Montgomery County
Board of Assessment's official record, that is intended to serve as a means
of vehicular and pedestrian travel, and furnish access to abutting properties
and space for sewers and public utilities, but has not yet been constructed.
The depicted right-of-way is intended to be built to a width of 25 feet or
greater.[Added 6-4-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-01]
PARKING LOT — Any area which is used for the storage of motor or other
vehicles.
PARKING SPACE — A reasonably level space, with a width of not less than
10 feet and having an area of not less than 200 square feet, available for
the parking of one motor vehicle, exclusive of passageways, driveways or
other means of circulation or access, and in compliance with the provisions
of the East Greenville Borough Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.91[Amended 3-2-1998 by Ord. No. 98-6; 3-12-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-4]
PARKING SPACE, ALL-WEATHER — A parking space surfaced with
impervious paving or, at the discretion of the Borough Council, on
application of the property owner or Borough Zoning Officer and upon
recommendation of the Planning Commission, for valid reason, some other
surfacing material. (See "porous paving.")
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS — Measures and standards by which the
suitability of a proposed use can be measured by the extent of its external
effect.
POROUS PAVING — Any suitable paving material that permits full or partial
absorption of stormwater into the underlying soil layer. For specifications
see the East Greenville Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.92
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot in which the area or dimension is
nonconforming.
A.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or part of a structure
manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable use or extent
of use provisions in this chapter; includes, but is not limited to,
nonconforming signs.
B.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use of land or of structure which does
not comply with the applicable use provisions in this chapter.
C.
91.Editor's Note: See Ch. 85, Subdivision and Land Development.
92.Editor's Note: See Ch. 85, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 95-11 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-11
94:438
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — An office for a physician, lawyer, dentist,
architect, professional engineer, planner or other such profession, but not
including real estate office or beauty shop, and provided that no goods,
equipment, merchandise or material associated with such practices may be
displayed, stored or sold on the lot area on which the structure is located.
PROPERTY LINE — A recorded boundary of a lot. Any property line which
abuts a street or other public right-of-way shall be measured from the rightof-
way.
PROVIDER — A person, not a public utility, who is licensed by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) to provide telecommunications service
to the public.[Added 3-12-2001 by Ord. No. 01-5]
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the
Borough Council or other borough agency, intended to inform and obtain
public comment prior to taking action, in accordance with the provisions of
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.93
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to public notice under the Act
of July 3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84), known as the "Sunshine Act."94 It includes
any prearranged gathering of an agency which is attended or participated
in by a quorum of the members of the agency, held for the purpose of
deliberating agency business or taking official action.
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the borough. Such notice
shall state the time and place of the hearing and particular nature of the
matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be
more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than seven
days from the date of the hearing.
PUBLIC UTILITIES FACILITY — A building or structure and its equipment,
used for the transmission and exchange of telephone, radio, gas, power,
sewer and water facilities; provided, however, that in a residential district
these shall not include business facilities, storage or materials, trucks or
repair facilities or the housing of repair crews. This term shall include
electric utility poles, towers, lines, signs, transformer banks and
substations.
PUBLIC UTILITY — A company regulated by the Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission. Cellular telecommunications companies and other companies
not defined as a "public utility" by the Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission shall not be considered a public utility.[Added 3-12-2001 by
Ord. No. 01-5]
PUBLIC UTILITY TRANSMISSION TOWER — A structure, owned and
operated by a public utility electric company regulated by the Pennsylvania
Public Utility Commission, designed and used to support overhead
electricity transmission lines.[Added 3-12-2001 by Ord. No. 01-5]
93.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
94.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 271 et seq.
§ 95-11 WATER § 95-11
94:439
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN — A commercial use which dispenses food and
drink, ready for consumption, to customers who place and receive their
order without leaving their cars or other motor vehicles; also included are
restaurants in which a drive-in facility provides only a portion of the sales.
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — Any restaurant which is characterized by one
or more of the following features:
ROOMING HOUSE (BOARDINGHOUSE) — A building used for the purpose
of a residence for one family in which the resident rents rooms within
the building, or in a building accessory thereto, to not more than six
nontransient persons, with or without the provisions of table board for such
persons.
SANITARY SEWER FACILITY — A public sanitary sewer system or a
comparable common package sanitary sewer facility approved by the
appropriate governmental health agency.
SATELLITE USE — A commercial establishment in a shopping center,
located independent of other buildings and frequently near the road
frontage of the center. These uses are often ancillary to large stores in the
center, but may also include commercial uses such as gas stations or fastfood
restaurants.
SHADE TREE — Any tree growing within or upon, or the branches of
which spread above or over, the streets and highways of East Greenville,
or within or upon any other property in which the Borough has ownership
interest.[Added 8-26-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04]
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of commercial establishments, planned
and developed as an integrated architectural and functional unit providing
convenient on-site parking and controlled, common vehicular and
pedestrian access.
SIGN — A structure, building wall or other outdoor surface or any device
used for visual communication which is used for the purpose of bringing
the subject thereof to the attention of the public or to display, identify and
publicize the name and product or services of any person, exclusive of
supporting members that bear no message.95
A. Orders are placed and received at a central counter.
B. Order are frequently packaged for takeout.
Orders may be consumed at tables or booths within the facility, which
must be cleared by the customers.
C.
D. Waiter/waitress service is not provided.
E. Menu selections are limited.
Disposable containers and utensils are used rather than reusable dishes
and table service.
F.
95.Editor's Note: See also § 95-131.
§ 95-11 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-11
94:440
SINGLE AND SEPARATE OWNERSHIP — The ownership of a lot by one or
more persons, partnerships or corporations, which ownership is separate
and distinct from that of any adjoining lot.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A form of permitted use, authorized by this
chapter, under the jurisdiction of the Zoning Hearing Board. The Zoning
Hearing Board is empowered to grant permission for special exceptions,
consistent with the public interest, in compliance with provisions of Article
XVII of this chapter.
STEALTH TOWER — A telecommunications tower designed to blend into
the landscape or appear inconspicuous through its design. Examples
include, but are not limited to, those telecommunications towers designed
as a tree, flagpole or some architectural feature of a building.[Added
3-12-2001 by Ord. No. 01-5]
STORY — The vertical distance between two successive finished floor
surfaces; for the topmost story, between the top of its ceiling joists and the
finished floor below or, if no ceiling, from the top of the roof rafters.
STREET LINE — The dividing line between a lot and the outside boundary
or right-of-way line of a public street, road or highway legally opened or
officially plotted or between a lot and a privately owned street, road or way
over which the owners or tenants of two or more lots each held in single and
separate ownership have the right-of-way; also known as "ultimate right-ofway
line."
STREET or ROAD — A public or privately owned right-of-way serving as a
means of vehicular and pedestrian travel and furnishing access to abutting
properties and space for sewers and public utilities. Includes streets,
avenues, boulevards, roads, highways, freeways, parkways, lanes, alleys,
viaducts, and other ways. When the term is used in the area or dimensional
regulations of any zoning district created hereby, it shall be limited to those
rights-of-way having an improved macadam surface of not less than 25 feet
in width for the entire length of the block upon which the property whose
compliance with a particular regulation at issue abuts.[Amended 3-2-1998
by Ord. No. 98-6; 6-4-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-01]
STREET TREE — Any tree located within the ultimate right-of-way of any
street or highway in East Greenville.[Added 8-26-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-04]
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — Any change in or addition to the supporting
or structural members of a building, such as the bearing walls, partitions,
columns, beams or girders or any change which would convert an existing
building into a different structure or adapt it to a different use or which in
the case of a nonconforming use would prolong the life of such use.
STRUCTURE —
Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary location on or
in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
A.
§ 95-11 WATER § 95-11
94:441
STUDIO — A room or rooms used by an artist, musician or person of similar
calling in which such person practices his calling or teaches the same to not
more than two persons at one time.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by
any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land,
including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate
or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs or devisers,
transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided, however,
that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels
of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of access
or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A structure designed and constructed to support
an antenna array or micro facility, and may include a utility pole, a
monopole, self-supporting (lattice) or guy wire support tower, and other
similar structures.[Added 3-12-2001 by Ord. No. 01-5]
TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA — Any device used for the
transmission or reception of radio, television, wireless telephone, pager,
commercial mobile radio service or any other wireless telecommunications
signals, including without limitation omnidirectional or whip antennas and
directional or panel antennas, owned or operated by any person or entity
licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to operate such
device. This definition shall not include private residence mounted satellite
dishes or television antennas or amateur radio equipment, including
without limitation ham or citizen band radio antennas.[Added 3-12-2001
by Ord. No. 01-5]
TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT BUILDING — An unmanned
building containing telecommunications equipment required for the
operation of telecommunications antennas and covering an area on the
ground not greater than 250 square feet.[Added 3-12-2001 by Ord. No.
01-5]
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER — A structure other than a building,
such as a monopole, self-supporting or guyed tower, designed and used
to support telecommunications antennas.[Added 3-12-2001 by Ord. No.
01-5]
TELEPHONE CENTRAL OFFICE — A building and its equipment erected
and used for the purpose of facilitating transmission and exchange of
telephone or radio telephone messages between subscribers and other
business of the telephone company.
TOURIST HOME — A dwelling which provides four to 16 guest rooms
(limited to two persons or one family per unit/room) for paying guests on
an overnight basis for periods not to exceeds 14 days, with breakfast being
available on premises at no additional cost.
Any form or arrangement of building materials involving or providing
proper support, bracing, tying, anchoring or other protection against
the forces of the elements.
B.
§ 95-11 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-11
94:442
TRAILER — A vehicle without motive power which may be towed on public
highways by a passenger automobile without a special hauling permit,
which is designed for human occupancy under transient circumstances such
as trucks or camping, travel, water sports or other recreation and having
a body width not exceeding eight feet and a body length not exceeding 32
feet.
ULTIMATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — See "street line."
USES —
VARIANCE — The granting of permission by the Zoning Hearing Board to
use or alter land or structures which requires a variation from the strict
application of a requirement of this chapter. Variances are granted only in
the case of exceptionally irregular, narrow, shallow or steep lots or other
exceptional physical conditions, whereby strict application of regulations
would result in practical difficulty and unnecessary hardship. Variances are
granted only if specific requirements of Article XVII are met.
WALLS —
COMMERCIAL USE — Use predominantly for trade or commercial
service purposes.
A.
INDUSTRIAL USE — Use of manufacturing purposes, often
accompanied by warehouse, freight yard, docks, etc.
B.
LAND USE — The process of extracting economic or social gain from
the land, i.e., the process through which a use value is created.
C.
NONCONFORMING USE — Preexisting use that does not agree with
the regulations of the district, as set forth herein.
D.
RESIDENTIAL USE — Use for purposes related to the residential
character of the property.
E.
BEARING WALL — A wall which supports any vertical load in addition
to its own weight.
A.
COMMON WALL — A wall owned by one party but jointly used by two
parties, one or both of whom is entitled to such use under the provisions
of a lease.
B.
DRY WALL — A wall of stone or other durable material laid without
mortar.
C.
FIRE WALL — A wall which subdivides a building to restrict the spread
of fire. It starts at the foundation and extends continuously through all
stories to and above the roof.
D.
FOUNDATION WALL — Any bearing wall or pier below the first-floor
construction.
E.
PARAPET WALL — That part of an exterior, party or fire wall extending
above the roofline.
F.
§ 95-11 WATER § 95-11
94:443
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICE — Any personal wireless
service as defined by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, which include
FCC licensed commercial wireless telecommunication services. Such
services include the following: cellular, personal communication services
(PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio
(ESMR), paging and similar services that currently exist or that may be
developed in the future.[Added 3-12-2001 by Ord. No. 01-5
WRITTEN CONSENT — A document signed and dated by an owner of real
estate giving approval to a specific request by a petition, provided that the
same is formally presented within 90 days of the date of signing of such
consent.
YARD — The area(s) of a lot which must remain free of buildings or other
structures and may be used as lawn or planted area, parking or driveway
space, in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. "Yard" is further
defined as follows:
YARD LINE — A line which locates and delineates the minimum yard
setback requirements, measured from the front, rear and side lot lines.
ZONING — Division of all of the land on an entire political subdivision into
districts having different regulations pertaining to use of land and height,
area, bulk and use of buildings and yard requirements. Zoning is effected
by local ordinance under the police power of the state granted by specific
legislation, generally termed an "enabling act."
§ 95-12. (Reserved)
§ 95-13. (Reserved)
PARTY WALL — A wall used jointly by two parties under easement
agreement and erected at or upon a line separating two parcels of land
that may be held under different ownership.
G.
RETAINING WALL:
(1) Any wall subjected to lateral pressure other than wind pressure.
(2) A wall built to support a bank of earth.
H.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending the full width of the lot along the
street line and extending in depth from the street line to the nearest
point of any structure on the lot. On a corner lot, the front yard shall
apply to both street frontages.
A.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending the full width of the lot along the rear
lot line and extending in depth from the rear lot line to the nearest point
of any structure on the lot.
B.
YARD, SIDE — A yard extending the full depth of the lot along a side lot
line and extending in width from such side lot line to the nearest point
of any structure on the lot.
C.
§ 95-11 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-14
94:444
§ 95-14. (Reserved)
§ 95-15. (Reserved)
§ 95-16. (Reserved)
§ 95-17. (Reserved)
§ 95-18. (Reserved)
§ 95-19. (Reserved)
§ 95-14 WATER § 95-19
94:445

ARTICLE III
Establishment of Districts
§ 95-20. Classes of districts.
For the purpose of this chapter, the borough is hereby divided into classes
of districts which shall be designated as follows:
R-1 Low-Density Residential District
R-2 Medium-Density Residential District
R-3 High-Density Residential District
R-4 Multifamily Residential District
BC Borough Commercial District
BR Borough Residential District
LI Limited Industrial District
IN Institutional District
§ 95-21. Zoning Map.
The locations and boundaries of such districts shall be as shown upon the
map attached to and hereby made a part of this chapter,96 which shall be
designated "Zoning Map of the Borough of East Greenville," hereinafter
referred to in this chapter as "Zoning Map." Said map and all the notations,
references and other data thereon shall be as much a part of this chapter as
if fully described herein.
§ 95-22. District boundaries.
The boundaries between districts are, unless otherwise indicated, either the
center lines of streets, lanes, watercourses and rights-of-way of power lines
and other public utilities or such lines extended or lines parallel thereto.
Where the boundaries of a single district are indicated as including directly
opposite sides of a street, land, lake or watercourse or right-of-way of a
power line or other public utility for any portion of its length, the district
so indicated shall be construed to apply to the entire bed of such street,
lane, lake or watercourse or right-of-way of such power line, railroad or
other public utility lying within such portion of its length. Where uncertainty
exists as to the location of any said boundaries as shown on the Zoning Map,
the following rules shall apply:
A. Where a district boundary is indicated as approximately following the
center line of a street, lane, lake or watercourse or right-of-way of a
power line or other public utility, such center line shall be construed to
be such boundary.
96.Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the borough offices.
§ 95-20 WATER § 95-22
94:447
§ 95-23. Federal, state or borough-owned property.
Whenever federal, state or borough-owned property or property owned by
any federal or state agency or any political subdivision thereof is included
in one or more zoning districts, it shall be subject to the provisions of this
chapter only insofar as permitted by the Constitution and laws of the United
States of America and of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. In the case of
municipally owned property, the provisions of this chapter shall not apply.
§ 95-24. (Reserved)
§ 95-25. (Reserved)
§ 95-26. (Reserved)
§ 95-27. (Reserved)
§ 95-28. (Reserved)
§ 95-29. (Reserved)
B. Where a district boundary is indicated as approximately following a lot
line or other property lines, such lot line shall be construed to be such
boundary.
C. Where a district boundary divides a lot or runs through undivided
property, the location of such boundary, unless otherwise specified by
figures on the Zoning Map, shall be determined by the use of the scale
appearing on said map.
D. Where figures are shown on the Zoning Map between a street and a
district boundary, they shall indicate that the district boundary runs
parallel to the street line at a distance therefrom equivalent to the
number of feet so indicated, unless specified. Where scaled distances
do not agree with such figures, the figures shall control.
§ 95-22 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-29
94:448
ARTICLE IV
R-1 Low-Density Residential Districts
§ 95-30. Declaration of legislative intent.
In expansion of the declaration of legislative intent and the statement of
community development objectives contained in Article I, §§ 95-2 and 95-3,
the specific intent of this district is to:
§ 95-31. Permitted uses.
In the R-1 District, a building may be erected or used or occupied and a lot
may be used or occupied for any of the following purposes and no other:
§ 95-32. Area regulations.
A. Promote the maintenance, stability and continued viability of the
borough's low-density residential neighborhoods; and
B. Provide for appropriate infill and new development, along with
appropriate redevelopment.
A. Single-family detached dwelling.
B. Public park, playground and other outdoor recreational areas not
operated commercially for profit.
C. Religious, educational, municipal and similar institutions, in compliance
with Article XI of this chapter.
D. Family day-care home or group day-care home, as a special exception in
compliance with § 95-156 of this chapter.
E. Accessory uses, in compliance with § 95-155 of this chapter.
A. Minimum lot area shall be 15,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width at street line shall be 80 feet.
C. Maximum building coverage shall be 20% of lot area.
D. Maximum impervious surface coverage shall be 35% of lot area.
E. Yards. Front, side and rear yards shall be provided on each lot as
follows:
(1) Front yard: one yard not less than 36 feet in depth, measured from
the ultimate right-of-way to the building line. Front yard
requirements may be modified as per § 95-153 if applicable.
(2) Side yards:
(a) For every dwelling, two yards not less than 25 feet in
aggregate width and neither less than 10 feet; except that in
§ 95-30 WATER § 95-32
94:449
§ 95-33. Height regulations.
No principal building shall exceed 30 feet in height, provided that such
height limit may be exceeded by one foot for each foot by which the width of
each side yard is increased beyond the minimum side yard requirements, up
to a maximum height of 35 feet. In the case of architectural features that are
associated with institutional uses such as spires or bell towers, the thirtyfive-
foot limit may be exceeded. Accessory uses may not exceed a maximum
of 15 feet.
§ 95-34. Design standards.
§ 95-35. (Reserved)
§ 95-36. (Reserved)
§ 95-37. (Reserved)
§ 95-38. (Reserved)
§ 95-39. (Reserved)
the case of a corner lot, the yard abutting a street shall be
equal to the minimum required front yard or the average
existing front yard for a distance of 100 feet along said street.
(b) For every other building other than a dwelling, two yards,
neither less than 15 feet; except that in the case of a corner lot,
the yard abutting a street shall be equal to the required front
yard or the average existing front yard for a distance of 100
feet along said street.
(3) Rear yard: one yard not less than 75 feet in depth.
F. No residential dwelling shall be less than 1,500 square feet in gross
living area. Any section of any room in which the ceiling height is lower
than seven feet six inches shall not be included in overall square-foot
calculation of living area.
A. Parking in the front yard area is limited to one space per building lot. All
other parking shall be in the side or rear yard areas.
B. The siting of parking spaces in the side and rear yard is required when
an alley exists in the rear of a building lot.
§ 95-32 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-39
94:450
ARTICLE V
R-2 Medium-Density Residential Districts
§ 95-40. Declaration of legislative intent.
In expansion of the declaration of legislative intent and the statement of
community objectives contained in Article I, §§ 95-2 and 95-3, the specific
intent of this district is to:
§ 95-41. Permitted uses.
In the R-2 District, a building may be erected or used or occupied and a lot
may be used or occupied for any of the following purposes and no other:
§ 95-42. Area regulations.
A. Provide reasonable standards of performance;
B. To promote the maintenance, stability and continued viability of the
borough's medium-density single-family and two-family residential
neighborhoods; and
C. To provide for infill and new development, along with appropriate
redevelopment.
A. Single-family detached dwelling.
B. Single-family semidetached dwelling (twin), provided that the dwelling
with which it has a party wall in common is erected at the same time.
C. Public park, playground and other outdoor recreational areas not
operated commercially for profit.
D. Religious, educational, municipal and similar institutions, in compliance
with Article XI of this chapter.
E. Family day-care home or group day-care home, in compliance with
§ 95-156 of this chapter.
F. Accessory uses, in compliance with § 95-155 of this chapter.
A. Lot area. Minimum lot areas shall be regulated by the following
schedule:
Type of Building Lot Area
(square feet)
Single-family semidetached (per
unit)
5,250
Single-family detached and other
permitted structures (per unit)
11,000
§ 95-40 WATER § 95-42
94:451
§ 95-43. Height regulations.
No building shall exceed 30 feet in height, provided that such height limit
may be exceeded by one foot for each foot by which the width of each
side yard is increased beyond the minimum side yard requirements, up to
B. Lot width. Each lot shall have a width at the street line of not less than
35 feet for a semidetached dwelling and 65 feet for detached dwellings
and other permitted structures.
C. Building area. For a single-family detached dwelling, a maximum of
30% of the lot area may be occupied by buildings. For a single-family
semidetached dwelling, a maximum of 35% of the lot may be occupied
by buildings
D. Maximum impervious surface coverage. For a single-family detached
dwelling no more than 45% of the lot area and for a single-family
semidetached dwelling no more than 50% of the lot are shall be covered
by impervious surfaces.
E. Yards. Front, side and rear yards shall be provided on each lot as
follows:
(1) Front yard: one yard not less than 30 feet in depth, measured from
the ultimate right-of-way to the building line. Front yard
requirements may be modified as per § 95-153 if applicable.
(2) Side yards:
(a) In the case of a detached dwelling, two yards not less than 20
feet in aggregate width and neither less than nine feet, except
that in the case of a corner lot, the yard abutting a street shall
be equal to the minimum required front yard or the average
existing front yard for a distance of 100 feet along said street.
(b) In the case of a semidetached dwelling, one side yard, the
width of which shall be not less than 15 feet, except that in the
case of a corner lot, the yard abutting a street shall be equal to
the minimum required front yard or the average existing front
yard for a distance of 100 feet along said street.
(c) For every other building other than a dwelling, two yards,
neither less than 15 feet, except that in the case of a corner lot,
the yard abutting a street shall be equal to the minimum
required front yard or the average existing front yard for a
distance of 100 feet along said street.
(3) Rear yard: one yard not less than 65 feet in depth.
F. No residential dwelling shall be less than 1,500 square feet in gross
living area. Any section of any room in which the ceiling height is lower
than seven feet six inches shall not be included in the overall squarefoot
calculation of living area.
§ 95-42 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-43
94:452
a maximum height of 35 feet. In the case of architectural features that are
associated with institutional uses such as spires or bell towers, the thirtyfive-
foot limit may be exceeded. Accessory uses may not exceed a maximum
of 15 feet.
§ 95-44. Design standards.
§ 95-45. (Reserved)
§ 95-46. (Reserved)
§ 95-47. (Reserved)
§ 95-48. (Reserved)
§ 95-49. (Reserved)
A. The siting of parking spaces in the side and rear yard is required when
an alley exists in the rear of a building lot.
B. If no alley exists, parking in the front yard area is limited to space per
lot for single-family detached and single-family semidetached.
§ 95-43 WATER § 95-49
94:453

ARTICLE VI
R-3 High-Density Residential Districts
§ 95-50. Declaration of legislative intent.
In expansion of the declaration of legislative intent and the statement of
community objectives contained in Article I, §§ 95-2 and 95-3, the specific
intent of this district is to:
§ 95-51. Permitted uses.
In the R-3 District, a building may be erected, altered or used and a lot may
be used or occupied for any of the following purposes and no other:
§ 95-52. Area regulations.
A. Provide reasonable standards of performance and to promote the
maintenance, stability and continued viability of the borough's highdensity
single-family and two-family residential neighborhoods; and
B. Provide for infill and new development, along with appropriate
redevelopment.
A. Single-family detached dwelling.
B. Single-family semidetached dwelling (twin), provided that the dwelling
with which it has a party wall in common is erected at the same time.
C. Two-family detached dwelling (duplex).
D. Single-family attached dwelling, provided that such row dwellings shall
be constructed in series of not more than eight dwelling units and that
all units of the series shall be constructed at the same time.
E. Public park, playground and other outdoor recreational areas not
operated commercially for profit.
F. Religious, educational, municipal and similar institutions, in compliance
with Article XI of this chapter.
G. Family day-care home or group day-care home, in compliance with
§ 95-156 of this chapter.
H. Accessory uses, in compliance with § 95-155 of this chapter.
A. Lot area. Minimum lot areas shall be regulated by the following
schedule:
§ 95-50 WATER § 95-52
94:455
Type of Dwelling Lot Area
(square feet)
Single-family detached 9,000
Single-family semidetached (per
unit)
5,250
Single-family attached (per unit) 2,000
Two-family detached (per
building)
10,500
B. Lot width. Each lot shall have a width at the building line of not less
than 50 feet for a detached building, 30 feet for a semidetached
building, 20 feet for an attached building and 60 feet for a two-family
detached building.
C. Yards. Front, side and rear yards shall be provided on each lot as
follows:
(1) Front yard: one yard not less than 20 feet, measured from the
ultimate right-of-way to the parallel building line.
(2) Side yards.
(a) In the case of a detached dwelling or other permitted uses,
there shall be two side yards, the aggregate of which shall be
not less than 15 feet and neither side yard shall be less than six
feet; except that in the case of a corner lot, the yard abutting a
street shall be not less than 15 feet in width.
(b) In the case of semidetached dwellings, there shall be one side
yard, the width of which shall be not less than 10 feet.
(c) In the case of attached dwellings, each end unit shall have one
side yard of not less than nine feet in width, unless such end
unit is located on a corner lot, in which case a yard of not less
than 10 feet in width shall be provided. [Amended 3-2-1998
by Ord. No. 98-6]
(d) In the case of a two-family detached dwelling, there shall be
two side yards, the aggregate shall not be less than 20 feet and
neither side yard shall be less than eight feet; except that in
the case of a corner lot, the yard abutting the street shall not
be less than 20 feet in width.
(3) Rear yard: one yard not less than 25 feet in depth.
D. No residential dwelling shall be less than 1,250 square feet in gross
living area. Any section of any room in which the ceiling height is lower
than seven feet six inches shall not be included in the overall squarefoot
calculation of living area. [Amended 5-7-2001 by Ord. No. 01-6]
§ 95-52 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-52
94:456
§ 95-53. Height regulations.
The maximum height regulations shall be the same as those in R-2
Residential Districts for all permitted uses as described in § 95-43.
§ 95-54. Design standards.
§ 95-55. (Reserved)
§ 95-56. (Reserved)
§ 95-57. (Reserved)
§ 95-58. (Reserved)
§ 95-59. (Reserved)
E. Building area. Not more than 35% of the area of each lot may be
occupied by buildings, except in the case of attached dwellings, where
the maximum shall be 40%.
F. Impervious surface coverage (percent of lot). Not more than 50% of the
area of each lot may be covered by impervious surface.
A. The siting of parking spaces in the side and rear yard is required when
an alley exists in the rear of a building lot.
B. If no alley exists, parking in the front yard area is limited to one space
per lot for single-family detached and single-family semidetached. All
other parking spaces shall be in the side or rear yard.
§ 95-52 WATER § 95-59
94:457

ARTICLE VII
R-4 Multifamily Residential Districts
§ 95-60. Declaration of legislative intent.
In expansion of the declaration of legislative intent and statement of
community development objectives contained in Article I, §§ 95-2 and 95-3,
of this chapter, the specific intent of this district is to:
§ 95-61. Permitted uses.
In the R-4 Multifamily District, a building may be erected, altered or used
and a lot may be used or occupied for any of the following uses and no other:
§ 95-62. Density and dimensional regulations for multifamily
development.
A. Encourage the logical and timely development of land for multifamily
development in accordance with the objectives, policies and proposals
of the Comprehensive Plan;
B. Permit a variety of housing types which conforms to the intent of the
Comprehensive Plan and this chapter;
C. Assure the suitable design of the multifamily development in order to
ensure compatibility with surrounding neighborhoods;
D. Ensure that multifamily development will constitute a residential
environment of sustained desirability and stability; and
E. Permit the continued development and/or redevelopment of multifamily
apartments in selected areas of the borough and to provide for new
construction or conversion of existing apartments into elderly housing.
A. Multifamily development (garden apartments).
B. Mid-rise multifamily development for use as housing for the elderly
when authorized by the borough as a conditional use in compliance with
§ 95-156 of this chapter and in compliance with § 95-65 of this article.
C. Mobile home parks, when authorized by the borough as a conditional
use in compliance with § 95-156 of this chapter and in compliance with
§ 95-60B of this article.
D. Public park, playground and other outdoor recreational areas not
operated commercially for profit.
E. Religious, educational, municipal and similar institutions, in compliance
with Article XI of this chapter.
F. Parking facilities associated with any permitted use and in compliance
with Article XIII of this chapter.
G. Accessory uses, in compliance with § 95-155 of this chapter.
§ 95-60 WATER § 95-62
94:459
§ 95-63. Height regulations.
Maximum height shall be 35 feet for principal building or buildings, 20 feet
for accessory buildings when used for common purposes and 15 feet for all
other accessory uses.
§ 95-64. Development regulations.
A. Maximum density shall be 12 dwelling units per developable acre.
B. Minimum lot area shall be two acres.
C. Minimum lot width shall be 300 feet.
D. Maximum building coverage:
(1) One-story building: 30% of lot area.
(2) Two-story building: 25% of lot area.
(3) Three-/four-story building: 15% of lot area.
E. Maximum impervious surface coverage shall be 60% of lot area.
F. Minimum required building setbacks.
(1) Minimum distance from the ultimate right-of-way lines of streets
shall be 60 feet.
(2) Minimum distance from all other property lines shall be 40 feet.
(3) Minimum distance between buildings. The distance between
elements of buildings forming courts and courtyards shall not be
less than 1.5 times the height of the taller building. Minimum
distance between corners shall be 25 feet.
A. Overall plan. The proposed development shall be constructed in
accordance with an overall plan and shall be designed as a unified
architectural unit with appropriate landscaping.
B. Staging of development. If the development is to be carried out in
stages, each stage shall be planned so that the foregoing requirements
and the intent of this chapter shall be fully complied with at the
completion of each stage. Each stage of development shall comprise an
entire building, with related parking and landscaped areas.
C. Lighting facilities. Lighting facilities shall be required for the safety and
convenience of residents. These facilities shall be arranged in a manner
which will protect streets and neighboring properties from
unreasonable glare or hazardous interference of any kind.
D. Buffer area. The R-4 Multifamily Residential District shall have a
permanent landscaped planting that meets the requirements of the
East Greenville Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance97 and is
§ 95-62 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-64
94:460
§ 95-65. Mid-rise multifamily development.
Mid-rise multifamily development, which is permitted under § 95-61B
herein when authorized by the Borough Council as a conditional use as
housing for the elderly, shall comply with the following standards and
criteria:
at least 20 feet in depth, designed for screening from view and access
any use which is contiguous to said district.
E. Recreation area. Recreation areas and facilities shall be required for
the comfort and convenience of the district residents. The area shall be
a minimum of 20% of the net acreage of the site and meet the following
requirements:
(1) Open space acreage shall not include front yard, parking or
driveway setbacks; and
(2) Open space requirements shall be in one contiguous parcel.
A. Maximum density shall be 20 units per developable acre.
B. Maximum building coverage shall be 25% of lot area.
C. Maximum impervious surface coverage shall be 60% of lot area.
D. Maximum height shall be four stories or 45 feet for the principal
building or buildings, 20 feet for accessory buildings when used for
common purposes and 15 feet for all other accessory uses.
E. Common area and facilities. A minimum of 30% of the total lot area
shall be devoted to common areas and facilities. No less than 50% of
this area shall be maintained as open space usable for recreation and
leisure activities of prospective residents of housing for the elderly. The
remaining portion may be used for plazas, arcades, pedestrianways and
other facilities (excluding roads, access driveways and parking areas)
available for use by residents of the development and the general
public. In addition, a developer of housing for the elderly shall be
required to provide a community room, indoor recreation area or
similar facility within every principal residential building. All
information regarding common areas and facilities shall be shown on
the plan.
F. Parking. Parking shall meet the requirements as specified in Article XII.
G. Safety and convenience features. All proposed housing for the elderly
shall comply with the applicable provisions of the most recent edition of
the Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards (UFAS).
97.Editor's Note: See Ch. 85, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 95-64 WATER § 95-65
94:461
§ 95-66. Mobile home parks.
Mobile home parks, which are permitted under § 95-61C herein when
authorized by the Borough Council as a conditional use, shall comply with
the following standards and criteria:
H. Occupancy by the elderly. The applicant shall guarantee that any
development constructed under the provisions of § 95-62 of this chapter
shall be used as elderly housing as defined in this chapter.
(1) The guaranty shall be in a form acceptable to the Borough Council,
upon recommendation by the Borough Solicitor.
(2) The guaranty shall be a covenant running with the land, applicable
to the applicant and his heirs, successors and assigns.
A. Maximum density shall be six units per developable acre.
B. Minimum lot size shall be 5,000 square feet for lots with single-wide
units; 6,500 square feet for lots with double-wide units.
C. Minimum lot width at the ultimate right-of-way of any street or the
curbline of any driveway, common parking area or private street shall
be 50 feet for lots with single-wide units; 60 feet for lots with doublewide
units.
D. Maximum building coverage shall be 30% of mobile home lot area.
E. Maximum impervious surface coverage shall be 65% of mobile home lot
area.
F. Minimum required setbacks.
(1) Minimum distance between a mobile home unit and the ultimate
right-of-way line of any street or the curbline of any driveway,
common parking area or private street shall be 25 feet.
(2) Minimum distance between a mobile home unit and all tract
boundaries shall be 40 feet.
(3) Minimum distance between mobile home units shall be 25 feet.
(4) Minimum distance between a mobile home unit and any side or
rear lot line of a mobile home lot shall be 25 feet.
G. Common open space. At least 20% of the tract area of the mobile home
park shall be in common open space, no more than 1/3 of which may be
required buffer area. The location and design of the common open
space shall comply with the applicable provisions of the East Greenville
Subdivision and Land development Ordinance.98
98.Editor's Note: See Ch. 85, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 95-65 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-66
94:462
§ 95-67. Submission of plans.
In addition to the plan submission requirements in the East Greenville
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance,99 the following shall also be
required on plans for all developments in the R-4 Multifamily Residential
District:
§ 95-68. (Reserved)
§ 95-69. (Reserved)
H. Nonresidential units. No part of a mobile home park shall be used for
nonresidential purposes, except such uses that are required for the
direct servicing, recreation and well-being of the residents and for the
management and maintenance of the park (such as a store, laundromat
or office not exceeding 2,000 square feet).
I. Accessory uses. Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to
the maintenance, servicing and well-being of mobile home park
residents shall be permitted only as part of an approved development
plan for the site. Accessory uses shall be permitted on individual lots
and shall comply with § 95-153 of this chapter.
J. All mobile home parks shall comply with the provisions of §§ 95-62,
95-63 and 95-64 of this article which are not in conflict with the
provisions of § 95-66 of this article.
A. Architect's drawing: an architect's drawing showing the external
appearance of the proposed multifamily development with all related
landscaping and parking areas.
B. Plan requirements. Plans submitted for approval shall show the layout
of the total area and shall include, in addition to the requirements of the
East Greenville Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, the
following:
(1) The location, use, plan, dimensions and height of each building and
the total gross floor area contemplated.
(2) The floor area of each dwelling unit and the number of bedrooms in
each unit.
(3) The location of each stage and the schedule of stages.
99.Editor's Note: See Ch. 85, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 95-66 WATER § 95-69
94:463

ARTICLE VIII
BC Borough Commercial Districts
§ 95-70. Declaration of legislative intent. [Amended 3-12-2001 by
Ord. No. 01-4]
In the expansion of the declaration of legislative intent contained in Article
I, the intent of the Borough Commercial District is to encourage the
retention and the future development of traditional Main Street commercial
uses and neighborhood services. Furthermore, it is the intent of this article
to preserve the existing streetscape of individual blocks through flexible
regulations designed to promote existing building setbacks. The specific
goals along the Main Street Commercial District are to:
§ 95-71. Permitted uses.
In the Borough Commercial District, a building may be erected, altered or
used and a lot may be used or occupied for any of the following uses and no
other:
A. Preserve the historic architecture of the area and encourage the
retention of existing buildings by permitting a variety of commercial,
office, and residential uses which are compatible with the existing
structural types, lot sizes, and visual and physical characteristics of the
Borough Commercial District;
B. Provide a pedestrian friendly environment to foster a less vehicular
intensive linkage throughout the Commercial District;
C. Provide safe and convenient vehicular access and parking;
D. Provide opportunities and flexible standards for comercial enterprises
to assist in the establishment of a viable and flourishing Business
District; and
E. Prohibit strip-type and highway-oriented commercial appearance,
incongruous architectural styles, excessive building or impervious
coverage, and nonessential curb cuts.
A. Business and professional offices.
B. Bank or financial institutions; however, drive-in windows are not
permitted unless authorized as a conditional use and in compliance
with § 95-73.
C. Retail establishment for the sale of dry goods, variety merchandise,
clothing, food, baked goods, beverages, flowers, plants, drugs,
hardware, books, furnishings or related items. The term "retail
establishment" shall include a medical marijuana dispensary in
accordance with § 95-174. [Amended 7-16-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-03]
§ 95-70 WATER § 95-71
94:465
D. Sale and repair of watches, clocks, optical goods, musical, professional,
electronic, computer or related scientific instruments.
E. Personal service shop: barbershop or beauty shop, custom tailoring,
shoe repair or dry cleaning (provided that no cleaning operations are
performed on the premises).
F. Liquor store.
G. Video rental store.
H. Restaurants, cafeterias or taverns, not to include drive-in restaurants.
I. Municipal or government office; public utility office.
J. Studio for dance, fitness, music, art or photography.
K. Undertaking or funeral establishments.
L. Clubs, lodges, fraternal organizations.
M. Educational, religious (including parsonage and church) or
philanthropic uses.
N. Public library.
O. Laundromat.
P. Antique sales, repairs and restoration.
Q. Bed-and-breakfast home as a conditional use in compliance with
§ 95-157a. [Amended 3-2-1998 by Ord. No. 98-6]
R. Bed-and-breakfast inn in compliance with § 95-157B but without need
for conditional use approval. [Amended 3-2-1998 by Ord. No. 98-6]
S. Hotel in compliance with § 95-157C. [Added 3-2-1998 by Ord. No.
98-6]
T. Pet shop. [Amended 3-2-1998 by Ord. No. 98-6]
U. Single-family detached, semidetached (twin) or attached dwellings,
developed pursuant to the dimensional standards of the Borough
Residential (BR) Districts. [Amended 3-2-1998 by Ord. No. 98-6]
V. Apartment conversions, provided that all residential units are located
above a commercial use. [Amended 3-2-1998 by Ord. No. 98-6]
W. Day-care center in accordance with the provisions of § 95-156 hereof.
[Amended 3-2-1998 by Ord. No. 98-6]
X. Any use of the same general character as the permitted uses above by
conditional use as specified in § 95-170 hereof. [Amended 3-2-1998
by Ord. No. 98-6]
§ 95-71 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-71
94:466
§ 95-72. Permitted use dimensional standards.
The following standards shall apply to all permitted uses in the BC District:
§ 95-73. Conditional uses.
Y. Accessory uses, in compliance with § 95-155 of this chapter. [Added
4-8-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-3]
A. The minimum lot size shall be 3,000 square feet.
B. The minimum lot width shall be 25 feet.
C. The building setback shall be 15 feet from the curbline of the public
street. However, where a building line has been established, then the
front setback shall be the building line of the majority of the buildings
on the block.
D. There shall be no side yard setback for buildings that share a party wall.
For buildings situated on a corner, the side yard setback shall be the
public sidewalk or 15 feet from the curbline of the public street,
whichever is greater. In all other situations, the minimum setback shall
be five feet.
E. The minimum rear yard setback shall be 25 feet.
F. The maximum impervious coverage cannot be more than 90% of the lot
area.
G. The maximum building height shall be 40 feet.
A. Drive-in fast-food restaurant/bank teller meeting the following
standards:
(1) A minimum of eight cars' stacking area shall be provided, including
the space at the pickup window.
(2) These spaces shall not interfere with other parking spaces or
internal circulation on the site.
B. Gasoline service station meeting the following standards:
(1) All activities except those performed at fuel or air pumps shall be
performed within an enclosed building.
(2) Fuel pumps shall be set back at least 25 feet from any ultimate
right-of-way.
(3) No paint spraying or body work shall be permitted.
C. Drive-in convenience store meeting the following standards:
(1) Fuel pumps, if provided, shall be set back at least 25 feet from any
ultimate right-of-way.
§ 95-71 WATER § 95-73
94:467
§ 95-74. Conditional use standards.
§ 95-75. Conditional use dimensional standards.
The following standards shall apply to conditional uses in the BC District:
§ 95-76. Parking requirements.
D. Parking lots, provided that they are secondary to the primary use.
A. All new buildings or structures shall be designed to compliment existing
buildings in terms of scale, massing, style, and material consistent with
the requirements of § 95-77. [Amended 3-12-2001 by Ord. No. 01-4]
B. No outside storage, except seasonal items (such as nursery stock,
produce, Christmas trees, etc.) shall be permitted.
C. Motor vehicles, provided that they are screened from adjacent
properties and streets, may be stored in rear or side yards only and the
storage area shall be landscaped according to the screen planting
requirements of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.100
D. The design of the entranceways/exitways and the parking lot shall be
satisfactory to the Borough Engineer.
A. The minimum lot size shall be 10,000 square feet.
B. The following standards shall apply only to gasoline service stations:
(1) The minimum lot width shall be 150 feet.
(2) The minimum front yard setback shall be 40 feet.
C. All other permitted use dimensional requirements shall apply to the
conditional uses; however, parking lots or garages shall also meet the
standards of § 95-72 of this chapter, and where there is a conflict, the
requirements of § 95-72 shall apply.
A. The following setbacks apply to all parking lots or areas where cars are
parked in the B-C District:
(1) From the rear property line: five feet.
(2) Edge of any cartway if located on an alley: none.
(3) From the side property line: five feet.
(4) From the building: five feet.
B. Parking lot design. All off-street parking spaces shall be located in the
side or rear areas of the lot. Parking spaces in the front yard are
specifically prohibited in the BC District.
100. Editor's Note: See Ch. 85, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 95-73 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-77
94:468
§ 95-77. Alteration and/or removal of existing buildings;
construction of new buildings. [Added 3-12-2001 by Ord. No. 01-4]
The alteration and/or removal of existing principal buildings and the
construction of new buildings for all uses within the BC District shall be
permitted by conditional use subject to compliance with the standards set
forth below.
A. Expansion and/or alteration of principal buildings.
(1) Expansions to existing buildings shall only be permitted to the rear
and sides of the principal building. Expansions to the front of the
building are not permitted.
(a) Any expansions done to the rear of the building must conform
in scale and architectural design to the existing building.
(b) Expansions to the side of the building must conform in scale,
building materials, and architectural design to the front facade
of the existing building and be set back a minimum of 10 feet
from the front facade of the existing building.
(c) The rooflines of all additions shall be similar or complementary
to those of the existing building.
(2) An existing principal building that faces the street shall not be
expanded toward the street except to permit an open front porch
consistent with the architectural design of the front facade of the
building.
(3) Applicants shall submit architectural drawings for the evaluation of
the proposed principal building expansion, including building
elevations and colored renderings. The Borough Council may
approve a building expansion different from the existing building,
provided that it complements the existing building and does not
detract from the intent of this article to retain the village
atmosphere of Main Street.
B. Removal of existing principal buildings. An applicant and/or owner shall
not remove an existing principal building within the BC District unless
the Borough Council is satisfied that the building is not suitable for the
proposed use according to the following criteria:
(1) The applicant demonstrates to the Borough that the existing
principal building is structurally unsound. The applicant shall
submit a written report from a structural engineer or architect who
has evaluated said structure.
(2) The building cannot be reasonably modified to accommodate
access for handicapped individuals. The applicant will submit a
written report listing all restrictions and estimated costs to modify
said structure. The report shall be prepared by a structural
engineer, signed, and sealed.
§ 95-77 WATER § 95-77
94:469
§ 95-78. (Reserved)
§ 95-79. (Reserved)
(3) An applicant shall not remove an existing principal building until
the Borough Council has approved a land development plan for the
subject property on which the building is located, subject to the
following criteria:
(a) The replacement building is located in approximately the same
location as the building proposed to be removed.
(b) The area of the existing building shall not be utilized for
parking; but shall be used for a replacement building or
landscaping/open space.
(c) Replacement buildings shall be similar in general appearance,
size, scale, and bulk and building material to the removed
principal building or similar to the predominate architecture of
the area. Applicants shall submit architectural drawings for
the evaluation of the proposed building, including building
elevations and colored renderings. The Borough Council may
approve a new building different from the existing building,
provided that it complements the existing building and does
not detract from the intent of this article to retain the village
atmosphere of Main Street.
(4) Buildings which have been identified by either the state, county, or
the Borough of East Greenville or have been placed on the National
Register of Historic Places as having historic significance shall not
be removed. Any building expansions proposed for a building
determined to be historically significant shall comply with § 95-80A
of this chapter.
C. Construction of a new principal building. New principal buildings may
be constructed on any empty lot, provided that the lot and building
conform in all respects to the requirements of this zoning district,
provided the following conditions are met:
(1) The new building shall be similar in size, scale, general
appearance, and building materials to one or more buildings
located on adjoining lots or to an existing historic building within
the Borough.
(2) Applicants shall submit architectural drawings for the evaluation of
the proposed building, including building elevations and colored
renderings. The Borough Council may approve a new building
different from the existing buildings located on adjoining lots,
provided that it complements the existing buildings and does not
detract from the intent of this article to retain the village
atmosphere of Main Street.
§ 95-77 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-79
94:470
ARTICLE IX
BR Borough Residential Districts
§ 95-80. Declaration of legislative intent. [Added 3-12-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-4]
In the expansion of the declaration of legislative intent contained in Article
I and in conjunction with the goals of the Main Street Commercial District,
the intent of the Borough Residential District is to:
§ 95-81. Permitted use.
In the Borough Residential District, a building may be erected, altered or
used and a lot may be used or occupied for any of the following uses and no
other:
§ 95-82. Conditional uses.
Conditional uses are permitted in detached or semidetached only:
A. Encourage the retention of the village atmosphere along Main Street by
preserving the existing buildings and landscaped areas to the greatest
extent possible;
B. Permit residential uses and conditionally allow limited office and
commercial conversions;
C. Maintain the existing residential streetscape of Main Street through
regulations that allow these conversions, provided that facades and
porches are preserved or improved;
D. Provide a pedestrian friendly environment to foster a less vehicular
intensive linkage throughout the commercial area; and
E. Prohibit strip-type and highway-oriented commercial appearance,
incongruous architectural styles, excessive building or impervious
coverage, and nonessential curb cuts.
A. Single-family detached dwellings.
B. Single-family semidetached dwellings.
C. Single-family attached dwellings, provided that no one row may contain
more than eight units and all these units are constructed at the same
time.
D. Religious, educational, municipal and similar institutions, in compliance
with Article XI of this chapter.
E. Accessory uses, in compliance with § 95-155 of this chapter. [Added
4-8-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-3]
A. Business or professional office.
§ 95-80 WATER § 95-82
94:471
§ 95-83. Development regulations. [Amended 3-2-1998 by Ord. No.
98-6]
The following standards shall apply to all uses in the BR District:
B. Retail establishment for the sale of clothing, drugs, flowers, antiques;
sale and repair of jewelry, watches, clocks, optical goods, electronic
equipment (including calculators and computers) or musical
professional or scientific instruments or related items.
C. Personal service shop, including tailor, barber, beauty salon, shoe
repair, dressmaking or similar shop.
D. Restaurant (excluding drive-in and fast-food).
E. Studio for dance, music, art or photography.
F. Undertaking or funeral establishment.
G. Antique sales, repair and restoration.
H. Bed-and-breakfast home as a conditional use and in compliance with
§ 95-157.
A. Minimum lot size:
Type of Dwelling Lot Area
(square feet)
Single-family detached 9,000
Single-family semidetached (per
unit)
5,250
Single-family attached (per unit) 2,000
B. Minimum lot width. Each lot shall have a width at the building line of
not less than 50 feet for a detached building, 30 feet for a semidetached
building and 20 feet for an attached building.
C. Front yard setback shall be 15 feet from the face of the curb of the
public street to any portion of the building, including the porch.
D. There shall be no side yard setback for buildings that share a party wall.
For buildings situated on a corner, the side yard setback shall be the
public sidewalk or 15 feet from the face of the curb of the public street,
whichever is greater. In all other situations the minimum setback shall
be 5 feet.
E. The minimum rear yard setback shall be 25 feet.
F. The maximum impervious coverage shall be 90% of lot area.
G. The maximum building height shall be 40 feet.
§ 95-82 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-84
94:472
§ 95-84. Conditional use standards. [Amended 3-12-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-4]
§ 95-85. Parking lot requirements. [Amended 3-12-2001 by Ord. No.
01-4]
§ 95-86. Alteration and/or removal of existing buildings;
construction of new buildings. [Added 3-12-2001 by Ord. No. 01-4]
The alteration and/or removal of existing principal buildings and the
construction of new buildings for all uses within the BR District shall be
permitted by conditional use subject to compliance with the standards set
forth below:
A. All conditional uses must have their primary facade oriented toward
Main, Second, and Fifth Streets.
B. The conditional use must preserve, utilize and maintain an existing
building consistent with the requirements of § 95-80 of this chapter. If
an existing building is demolished, then no conditional use will be
permitted.
C. The conditional use must preserve any existing front yard as
landscaped open space. The only impervious coverage in the front yard
shall be sidewalks or pedestrian access paths. The landscaping shall be
of the type traditionally found in the Main Street area (shade trees,
foundation plantings, grass, etc.).
D. All refuse areas shall be screened from the view of adjacent streets or
residential districts by a landscape screen buffer and/or an opaque
fence or wall at least six feet high and not more than eight feet high in
conjunction with landscape material.
E. Lighting facilities shall be arranged in a manner that will protect the
street and neighboring properties from direct glare or hazardous
interference of any kind.
A. Parking lot design. All required parking spaces shall be located in the
side or rear yard areas of the lot. Parking spaces in the front yard area
are specifically prohibited within the BR Borough Residential District.
B. The following setbacks apply to all parking lots or areas where cars are
parked in the BR District:
(1) From the rear property line: five feet.
(2) Edge of the cartway if located on an alley: none.
(3) From the side property line: five feet.
(4) From the side or rear wall of the main building: five feet.
A. Expansion and/or alteration of principal buildings.
§ 95-84 WATER § 95-86
94:473
(1) Expansions to existing buildings shall only be permitted to the rear
and sides of the principal building. Expansions to the front of the
building are not permitted.
(a) Any expansions done to the rear of the building must conform
in scale and architectural design to the existing building.
(b) Expansions to the side of the building must conform in scale,
building materials, and architectural design to the front facade
existing building and be set back a minimum of 10 feet from
the front facade of the existing building.
(c) The rooflines of all additions shall be similar or complementary
to those of the existing building.
(2) An existing principal building that faces the street shall not be
expanded toward the street except to permit an open front porch
consistent with the architectural design of the front facade of the
building.
(3) Applicants shall submit architectural drawings for the evaluation of
the proposed principal building expansion, including building
elevations and colored renderings. The Borough Council may
approve a building expansion different from the existing building,
provided that it complements the existing building and does not
detract from the intent of this article to retain the village
atmosphere of Main Street.
B. Removal of existing principal buildings. An applicant and/or owner shall
not remove an existing principal building within the BR District unless
the Borough Council is satisfied that the building is not suitable for the
proposed use according to the following criteria:
(1) The applicant demonstrates to the Borough that the existing
principal building is structurally unsound. The applicant shall
submit a written report from a structural engineer or architect who
has evaluated said structure.
(2) The building cannot be reasonably modified to accommodate
access for handicapped individuals. The applicant will submit a
written report listing all restrictions and estimated costs to modify
said structure. The report shall be prepared by the structural
engineer, signed, and sealed.
(3) An applicant shall not remove an existing principal building until
the Borough Council has approved a land development plan for the
subject property on which the building is located, subject to the
following criteria:
(a) The replacement building is located in approximately the same
location as the building proposed to be removed.
§ 95-86 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-86
94:474
§ 95-87. (Reserved)
§ 95-88. (Reserved)
§ 95-89. (Reserved)
(b) The area of the existing building shall not be utilized for
parking, but shall be used for a replacement building or
landscaping/open space.
(c) Replacement buildings shall be similar in general appearance,
size, scale, and bulk and building material to the removed
principal building or similar to the predominate architectural
style of the area. Applicants shall submit architectural
drawings for the evaluation of the proposed building, including
building evaluations and colored renderings. The Borough
Council may approve a replacement building different from the
existing building, provided that it complements the existing
building and does not detract from the intent of this article to
retain the village atmosphere of Main Street.
(4) Buildings which have been identified by either the state, county, or
the Borough of East Greenville as having historic significance or
have been placed on the National Register of Historic Places shall
not be removed. Any building expansions proposed for a building
determined to be historically significant shall comply with § 95-85A
of this chapter.
C. Construction of a new principal building. New principal buildings may
be constructed on any empty lot, provided that the lot and building
conform in all respects to the requirements of this zoning district and
the following conditions are met:
(1) The new building shall be similar in size, scale, general
appearance, and building materials to one or more buildings
located on adjoining lots or to an existing historic building within
the Borough.
(2) Applicants shall submit architectural drawings for the evaluation of
the proposed building, including building elevations and colored
renderings. The Borough Council may approve a new building
different from the existing buildings located on adjoining lots,
provided that it complements the existing buildings and does not
detract from the intent of this article to retain the village
atmosphere of Main Street.
§ 95-86 WATER § 95-89
94:475

ARTICLE X
LI Limited Industrial Districts
§ 95-90. Declaration of legislative intent.
In expansion of the declaration of legislative intent and the statement of
community development objectives contained in Article I, §§ 95-2 and 95-3,
of this chapter, the specific intent of this district is to:
§ 95-91. Applicability of provisions.
In Limited Industrial Districts, the regulations prescribed in this article
shall apply.
§ 95-92. Permitted uses.
In the LI Limited Industrial District, a building may be erected, altered or
used and a lot may be occupied for any of the following uses and no other:
A. Provide for the orderly and planned development and redevelopment of
office, research and development and laboratory use, as well as a
variety of nonpolluting, small-scale industries; and
B. Provide performance standards, setback regulations and buffering
requirements to minimize traffic congestion, noise, glare, pollution, fire
hazards and safety hazards, and in general to ensure that the type and
scale of office and industrial development will cause minimal, if any,
negative impacts on surrounding neighborhoods.
C. Encourage adaptive reuse of existing buildings for residential use to
increase neighborhood vitality while preserving the historic character
of structures and the industrial architectural heritage in the LI Limited
Industrial District. [Added 4-25-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-01]
A. Scientific or industrial research, engineering, training, testing,
experimental laboratory or similar establishment.
B. Administrative or corporate offices.
C. Public or governmental utility building or use, including storage yard,
repair shop or similar use.
D. Printing, publishing, lithography or similar processes.
E. Manufacturing, fabrication, assembly, processing and packaging of
natural and man-made materials, chemicals, synthetics and other
organic and inorganic products, including medical marijuana being
grown and processed by a medical marijuana grower/processor in
accordance with § 95-174, except those specifically prohibited in
Subsection L. [Amended 7-16-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-03]
F. Warehouse, storage or distribution center.
§ 95-90 WATER § 95-92
94:477
G. Contractor's office and storage.
H. Lumberyard.
I. Municipal uses, in compliance with Article XI of this chapter.
J. Adult uses, as defined in Article II of this chapter.
K. Auto body repair shop having all paint spraying and body work
performed within an enclosed building vented and sound insulated in
accordance with relevant governmental regulations. [Added 3-2-1998
by Ord. No. 98-6]
L. Any use of the same general character as the above permitted uses,
except that the following uses are specifically prohibited: [Amended
3-2-1998 by Ord. No. 98-6]
(1) Abattoir, meat-packing, tanning, curing or storage of leather,
rawhides or skins; manufacture or processing of fertilizer, wood
pulp, disinfectants, or soap.
(2) Lime kilns, flour mills, manufacture of cement.
(3) Foundries, manufacture or processing of asphalt.
(4) Any other use which is determined by the Borough Council and the
Borough Engineer as noxious or offensive by reason of odor, dust,
fumes, smoke, gas, vibration, illumination or noise, or which may
be dangerous to the public health, welfare or safety.
M. Accessory use on the same lot and customarily incidental to any of the
above permitted uses and in compliance with the provisions of § 95-155
of this Code, including: [Amended 3-2-1998 by Ord. No. 98-6]
(1) Storage within an enclosed building or fenced area.
(2) Repair shop or maintenance facilities normally required for the
conduct of industrial operations.
(3) Cafeteria, recreation facility or other service facility located within
a permitted use and operated solely for the occupants of the
buildings.
(4) Family day-care or group day-care home, in compliance with
§ 95-156 of this code.
N. When approved as a conditional use, telecommunications towers,
according to the provisions of § 95-172, herein. [Added 3-12-2001 by
Ord. No. 01-5]
O. Multifamily residential as an adaptive reuse of an existing building in
the LI Limited Industrial District, according to the standards of
§ 95-102, and any other applicable standards herein. [Added
4-25-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-01]
§ 95-92 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-93
94:478
§ 95-93. Performance standards.
All permitted uses in this district shall comply with the performance
standards contained in Article XV, § 95-158, of this chapter.
§ 95-94. Design and equipment of buildings.
Buildings constructed or used for manufacturing, when otherwise permitted
under the provisions of this chapter, shall be of such design, size and
location as shall provide adequate and safe control of odors, glare, heat,
vibration, radioactivity or electrical disturbance, dust, dirt, fly ash, fumes,
vapors and/or gases, and all such buildings shall be so equipped prior to
use that reasonable and adequate provision is made for ventilation, heating
and/or air conditioning designed and operable for the protection of all
employees and other persons having occasion to occupy or work in or within
200 feet of such buildings. The required standards shall be at least the
minimum standards fixed by the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and
Industry, the Pennsylvania Department of Health and the United States
Department of Health pertaining to hazardous industries and occupations.
§ 95-95. Outdoor storage.
A. No flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be stored in
bulk above ground; provided, however, that tanks or drums of fuel
directly connecting with energy devices, heating devices or appliances
located on the same lot as the tanks or drums of fuel are excluded from
this provision.
B. All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, raw materials and products and all
fuel and all raw materials and products stored outdoors shall be
enclosed by a fence adequate to prevent the access of children and
other members of the general public and to conceal the facilities from
any adjacent properties.
C. No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or
manner that they may be transferred off the lot by natural causes or
forces.
D. All material or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which
constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible by or otherwise
attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors only in closed,
sealed containers.
E. No materials or wastes of any form may be stored in a floodplain area.
F. Outdoor storage and refuse areas shall be set back 30 feet from
abutting properties that have residential or institutional uses or zoning
and 20 feet from all other abutting properties.
G. Outdoor storage and refuse areas are not permitted in the setback area
measured from the ultimate right-of-way line.
§ 95-93 WATER § 95-96
94:479
§ 95-96. Power facilities.
Every use requiring power shall be so operated that the service lines,
substation, etc., shall conform to the most acceptable safety requirements
recognized by the Pennsylvania Bureau of Labor and Industry and shall be
so constructed, installed, etc., as to be an integral part of the architectural
features of the plant or, if visible from abutting residential properties, shall
be concealed by coniferous planting.
§ 95-97. Industrial wastes and sewage.
No use shall be conducted in such a way as to discharge any treated or
untreated sewage or industrial waste except such as is found acceptable
to and accepted by the Upper Montgomery Joint Authority for sewage
treatment and/or treatment and disposal in accordance with regulations of
the Pennsylvania Department of Health, the Pennsylvania Sanitary Water
Board, the Department of Environmental Resources and the County
Department of Health and in conformity with pertinent ordinances of the
borough. All sewage requirements for any use within the Industrial District
shall be met by the public sewer system.
§ 95-98. Water supply.
All water requirements for any use within the Industrial District shall be
met from the public water system.
§ 95-99. Height regulations. [Amended 8-26-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-04]
The maximum height of buildings and other structures erected or enlarged
in this district shall be 40 feet, except that such height may be increased
to a maximum of 60 feet or such increased height as may be warranted
when approved by the Zoning Hearing Board, provided that for every foot
of height in excess of 40 feet there shall be added to each yard requirement
one corresponding foot of width or depth and provided that structures that
are over 40 feet are not regularly used by people, such as chimneys, water
towers, wind energy systems, communication antennas, etc.
§ 95-100. Area regulations.
A. Floor area ratio. The total floor area of principal and accessory
buildings shall not exceed 50% of the lot area.
B. Lot area. No limited industrial lot shall be less than 40,000 square feet.
C. Building area. Principal and accessory buildings shall not occupy more
than 40% of total lot area.
D. Yard requirements (excluding parking areas).
(1) Front yard. The front yard shall be 30 feet in depth from the
ultimate right-of-way line.
§ 95-96 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-100
94:480
§ 95-101. Submission of plans.
(2) Side yards. Side yards shall be 25 feet wide each. No industrial
building shall be located closer than 100 feet to any residential
district, nor any parking area closer than 50 feet to any residential
district. In the case where the industrial use abuts a residential or
institutional use or district, a minimum landscape buffer of 25 feet
shall be landscaped with trees, shrubs and grasses. All landscaping
and buffering shall be done in compliance with the East Greenville
Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.101 Where
the side yard abuts an existing railroad right-of-way, the side yard
setback may be reduced to five feet and loading docks may extend
into this setback area.
(3) Rear yard. The rear yard shall be 50 feet in depth, subject to the
exception above in Subsection D(2). Where the rear yard setback
abuts an existing railroad right-of-way, the rear yard setback may
be reduced to five feet and loading docks may extend into this area.
E. Minimum lot width at street line shall be 200 feet.
F. Maximum impervious surface coverage shall be 75%.
G. Maximum building height shall be 40 feet. However, structures not
intended for human occupancy may exceed this limit in compliance with
§ 95-99 of this chapter.
A. Plans for any industrial use shall be submitted to the Planning
Commission prior to the issuance of any zoning permit or certificate of
occupancy as provided in §§ 95-182, 95-183 and 95-184, shall meet all
requirements as specified in the East Greenville Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance102 and shall include the following:
(1) A description of the proposed industrial operations in sufficient
detail to indicate the effects of those operations in producing traffic
congestion, noise, glare, air pollution, water pollution, fire hazards
or safety hazards.
(2) Engineering and architectural plans for the treatment and disposal
of sewage and industrial waste.
(3) Engineering and architectural plans for the handling of any excess
traffic congestion, noise, glare, air pollution, water pollution, fire
hazard or safety hazard.
(4) Designation of the fuel proposed to be used and any necessary
architectural and engineering plans for controlling smoke.
101. Editor's Note: See Ch. 85, Subdivision and Land Development.
102. Editor's Note: See Ch. 85, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 95-100 WATER § 95-101
94:481
§ 95-102. Multifamily conversion standards. [Added 4-25-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-01]
(5) The proposed number of shifts to be worked and the maximum
number of employees on each shift.
(6) Any other pertinent data or evidence that the Planning Commission
may require.
B. The Planning Commission shall review all plans for industrial uses
submitted to it and shall submit these plans with recommendations
thereon to the Borough Council for final approval.
C. Upon receipt of plans for any industrial use and recommendations
thereon by the Planning Commission, the Borough Council shall have
the power of approval or disapproval of these plans. The Secretary of
the Borough Council shall notify, in writing, the Zoning Officer of the
Council's final decision and any special conditions agreed upon
regarding any industrial use.
A. A building proposed for conversion to multifamily residential must have
been constructed in or before 1940 as indicated in the Montgomery
County Board of Assessment Appeals records or other historical
records.
B. Density and dimensional standards. The following density and
dimensional standards shall apply to multifamily residential
conversions.
(1) A maximum density of 20 dwelling units per developable acre shall
be permitted.
(2) The minimum building size for conversion shall be 75,000 square
feet.
(3) The minimum lot area shall be two acres.
(4) Principal and accessory buildings shall not occupy more than 20%
of the total lot area of the tract.
(5) Yard requirements stated in § 95-100 shall apply except that all
buildings existing as of the date of adoption of this section shall be
deemed nonconforming buildings and shall have nonconforming
status as to yard areas and setbacks pursuant to the provisions of
Article XIV of the Zoning Ordinance.
(6) The maximum impervious coverage shall be 75%.
(7) Height requirements stated in § 95-99 shall apply except that all
buildings existing as of the date of adoption of this section shall be
deemed nonconforming buildings and shall have nonconforming
status as to height pursuant to the provisions of Article XIV of the
Zoning Ordinance.
§ 95-101 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-102
94:482
(8) The density and dimensional requirements stated herein shall
supersede the provisions of § 95-100.
(9) Developable acreage calculation relating to density, building
coverage and impervious coverage shall be calculated based upon
the gross acreage included within the lot area of the tract without
regard to the zoning district boundaries.
C. Design standards.
(1) Exterior building materials shall be maintained or replaced with
like materials in order to retain or preserve the historic visual
character of the building.
(2) All building additions shall be located on the rear or side facade
and shall be compatible with the existing building in appearance,
size, scale, and materials.
(3) The storage of refuse shall be provided inside the building or within
an outdoor area enclosed by either walls or an opaque fence that is
architecturally compatible with the primary building in terms of
scale and building materials.
D. General development regulations. The proposed development shall be
constructed in accordance with an overall site plan and shall be
designed with appropriate landscaping, common open space, lighting,
pedestrian circulation, and parking areas.
(1) Pedestrian circulation.
(a) An internal pedestrian walkway, not less than five feet in width,
shall provide a direct link from the public sidewalk or street
right-of-way to the principal pedestrian entrance of the
residential building(s).
(b) Sidewalks shall be handicapped accessible.
(2) Common open space.
(a) A minimum of 20% of the total lot area shall be devoted to
common open space. No less than 25% of this area shall be
maintained as open space usable for recreation and leisure
activities of prospective residents of the development. The
remaining portion may be used for plazas, arcades, pedestrian
ways, and other facilities (excluding roads, access driveways,
and parking areas) available for use by residents of the
development.
(b) In addition, the developer shall give consideration to the
provision of indoor community areas, laundry facilities, fitness
facilities, and other amenities necessary for the comfort and
convenience of residents of the development. Common
facilities shall be maintained by the owner of the multifamily
§ 95-102 WATER § 95-102
94:483
§ 95-103. through § 95-109. (Reserved)
development or by an association established pursuant to the
provisions of the Uniform Condominium Act, 68 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 3101, et seq. or the Uniform Planned Community Act, 68
Pa.C.S.A. § 5101, et seq.
(3) Exterior lighting shall be designed to prevent glare onto adjacent
properties. Pedestrian pathways shall be clearly marked and welllit.
(4) Parking.
(a) Any building proposed for conversion to multifamily residential
use must be provided with 1.7 parking spaces per dwelling
unit; the requirement stated herein shall supersede the
provisions of § 95-121.
(b) All parking areas and drive aisles shall be set back a minimum
of five feet from the property line. The requirement stated
herein shall supersede the provisions of § 95-124I.
(c) Parking spaces shall have the minimum dimensions of nine feet
by 18 feet.
E. Plan submission requirements. In addition to any other applicable
requirements, the following information shall be shown on the plans
submitted for approval as part of the land use application.
(1) Total number of dwelling units.
(2) Floor area (in square feet) of all multifamily dwelling units.
(3) Number of bedrooms per dwelling unit.
(4) Total number of off-street parking spaces.
(5) Exterior vertical and horizontal building dimensions.
(6) Landscape design and streetscape improvements.
F. Traffic impact study. All development proposals with an expected
number of trips per day exceeding 1,000 shall require a traffic impact
study. All development proposals with an expected number of trips per
day exceeding 500 but less than 1,000 shall require a traffic impact
assessment providing information for levels of service at access
driveways, alleys, adjoining intersections, and the nearest intersection
of the primary access alley and a public street. If, after assessment, it is
determined there is a degradation in the level of service of two or more
levels of service at any intersection, driveway, or alley, the applicant
must undertake mitigation action acceptable to the Borough's engineer.
The requirement stated herein shall supersede the provisions of
§ 95-168C(1), C(1)(a), C(2) and C(3).
§ 95-102 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-103
94:484
ARTICLE XI
IN Institutional Districts
§ 95-110. Declaration of legislative intent.
In expansion of the declaration of legislative intent and the statement of
community development objectives contained in Article I, §§ 95-2 and 95-3,
of this chapter, the specific intent of this district is to:
§ 95-111. Applicability of provisions.
In all IN Institutional Districts, the regulations prescribed in this article
shall apply.
§ 95-112. Permitted uses.
A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot may be used or
occupied for any of the following purposes and no other:
A. Ensure that institutional and recreational facilities are suitably
designed and situated to protect the character of adjacent residential
properties.
B. Ensure that institutional development will take place only when served
by adequate public facilities, services and streets.
C. Provide appropriate standards for the creation and expansion of
institutional and recreational uses in the borough.
D. Maintain and protect the desirable benefits which recreational uses,
open space and scenic/natural resources have throughout the
community.
A. Any use permitted in R-1 Residential Districts.
B. Churches, chapels or other places of worship and their adjunct
residential dwellings.
C. Colleges, universities and theological schools.
D. Institutional headquarters for educational, fraternal, professional,
religious and other nonprofit organizations, including municipal uses.
E. Convents and monasteries.
F. Medical and surgical hospitals, sanatoriums eleemosynary institutions.
G. Institutions for the care of the aged or children.
H. Day-care center in accordance with the provisions of § 95-156 hereof.
I. Schools: private, nursery, elementary, junior high and senior high,
including nonboarding and boarding.
§ 95-110 WATER § 95-112
94:485
§ 95-113. Conditional use.
§ 95-114. Area regulations.
J. Cemetery, nonprofit.
K. Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses,
including but not limited to agriculture, offices of staff doctors,
residences of institutional employees and recreational facilities.
L. Off-street parking, subject to the requirements of Article XII.
M. Signs, subject to the requirement of Article XIII.
A. The following are permitted as conditional uses, pursuant to the
conditional use standards as per Article XVIII of this chapter:
(1) Tennis court swimming pool, ice skating rink, play field and like
recreational uses, provided that such recreational facilities are
conducted out-of-doors and are primarily used for owner, guests,
membership or patron participation.
B. The proposed conditional use shall meet the following development
requirements as well as the provisions of Article XVIII of this chapter:
(1) On-site parking. Adequate on-site all-weather parking shall be
provided for the accommodation of all persons customarily using
the facilities afforded.
(2) Access. All ingress and egress roads shall be paved and be a
minimum of 20 feet wide.
(3) Lighting. Lighting facilities shall be required on all roadways,
cartways and pathways and other areas where deemed necessary
for safety and convenience of the users.
(4) Control of noise. At no point on the boundary of a residential
district shall the level of sound from a recreational use be such as
to disturb the residential environment of the adjacent residences.
(5) Control of glare. Any operation producing glare shall perform in
such a manner as to be completely imperceptible from any point
beyond the lot lines.
(6) Convenience facilities. Toilet facilities, drinking fountain and
seating accommodations shall be provided for accommodation of
all persons customarily using the recreation area.
(7) All buildings shall be a minimum of 25 feet from any other building
and/or property line.
A. Lot area. No institutional lot shall be less than 40,000 square feet.
§ 95-112 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-114
94:486
§ 95-115. Submission of plans.
B. Building area. Not more than 35% of the area of each lot may be
occupied by buildings.
C. Yards.
(1) Front yard. The minimum depth of a front yard shall be not less
than 50 feet, measured from the ultimate right-of-way.
(2) Side yards. For each building there shall be two side yards of not
less than 25 feet each.
(3) Rear yard. For each building there shall be a rear yard of at least 50
feet.
(4) Residential district setbacks. All setbacks between any use within
the Institutional District that adjoins a Residential District shall
have a minimum setback of 50 feet and include landscaping and
buffering in compliance with the provisions of the East Greenville
Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.103
D. Minimum distance between structures on the same lot shall be 25 feet.
When, from a functional standpoint, a grouping or clustering of
buildings is practical, this distance may be reduced when approved by
the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception, in accordance with
the provisions of Article XVI of this chapter.
E. Minimum parking and service area setbacks.
(1) Minimum distance from property line abutting a residential district
shall be 25 feet.
(2) Minimum distance from all other property lines shall be 10 feet.
(3) These setback areas shall include landscaping and buffering.
F. Maximum impervious surface coverage shall be 65% of lot area.
G. Maximum building height shall be 40 feet. However, structures not
intended for human occupancy may exceed this limit up to 60 feet, by
conditional use, in compliance with the provisions of § 95-150 of this
chapter, provided that the front, side and rear yard setbacks are
increased by one foot for every one foot of structure height over 40 feet.
A. Plans for any IN District institutional use shall be submitted to the
Planning Commission prior to the issuance of any zoning permit and
shall meet the requirements as specified in the East Greenville
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance104 and, in addition, shall
include the following:
103. Editor's Note: See Ch. 85, Subdivision and Land Development.
104. Editor's Note: See Ch. 85, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 95-114 WATER § 95-115
94:487
§ 95-116. (Reserved)
§ 95-117. (Reserved)
§ 95-118. (Reserved)
§ 95-119. (Reserved)
(1) A plot plan of the lot showing the location of all present and
proposed buildings, drives, parking lots and other constructional
features on the lot and all buildings, streets, alleys, highways,
streams and other topographical features of the lot.
(2) A description of the institutional operation in sufficient detail to
indicate the effects of these operations in producing traffic
congestion, noise, glare or other safety hazards.
(3) Engineering and architectural plans for the treatment and disposal
of sewage.
(4) Any other pertinent data that the Planning Commission may
require.
B. The Planning Commission shall review all plans submitted to it and
shall submit these plans with recommendations thereon to the Borough
Council for final approval.
C. The Borough Council shall have the power of approval or disapproval of
these plans and its Secretary shall notify, in writing, the Zoning Officer
of the Council's final decision and any special conditions agreed upon.
§ 95-115 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-119
94:488
ARTICLE XII
Off-Street Parking and Loading
§ 95-120. Declaration of legislative intent.
In expansion of the declaration of legislative intent and the statement of
community development objectives contained in Article I, §§ 95-2 and 95-3,
of this chapter, it is the specific intent of this article to:
§ 95-121. Off-street parking requirements.
Any building or other structure erected, altered or used and any lot used
or occupied for any of the following purposes shall be provided with the
minimum number of parking spaces as set forth below, together with
adequate driveways and street access. When a use is not specifically listed
below, the requirements of the most similar use shall apply. For any parking
area (except those associated with single-family dwellings) exceeding five
vehicle capacity; and in connection with which the combined lot coverage
(building plus parking, maneuvering and driving areas) shall exceed 35% of
the lot area: paving, if desired by the owner or occupant, shall be done with
porous paving as defined and specified in the Borough Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.105
A. Set reasonable standards and provide reasonable controls to assure
sufficient parking capacity for the uses or potential uses of land in the
borough;
B. Provide flexibility in the implementation of these standards by
permitting construction of a reduced number of parking spaces under
appropriate conditions;
C. Prevent hazards to public safety caused by the intrusion and congestion
of parking upon public rights-of-way;
D. Provide a pedestrian-friendly environment to foster a less vehicular
intensive linkage throughout the Commercial District;
E. Provide safe and convenient vehicular access and parking.
A. Dwelling unit, single-family detached: two all-weather parking spaces
for each dwelling unit, located on the same lot therewith.
B. Dwelling unit, elderly housing, two-family, multifamily dwelling (studio,
efficiency or one-bedroom units): two per dwelling unit; may be lowered
to 1.5 per dwelling unit by conditional use.
C. Rooming house: two spaces, plus one space per rental unit all-weather
parking space for each room for rent, located on the same lot therewith
or on land adjacent thereto.
105. Editor's Note: See Ch. 85, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 95-120 WATER § 95-121
94:489
D. For any of the following uses the required parking spaces shall be
located on the same lot therewith or on land adjacent thereto:
(1) Church, school, theater, public auditorium, assembly or meeting
room or other similar place of public or private assembly: one
parking space for every four seats provided for public assembly.
(2) Stadium or other similar place of assembly: one parking space for
every four seats.
(3) Hospital, institutional home, convalescent home or sanatorium: one
space per two beds, plus one per employee on largest shift.
(4) Community center, library, museum or other similar place: one
parking space for every 800 square feet of gross floor area.
(5) Residential club: one parking space for every two occupants, plus
one parking space for every 100 square feet of gross floor area in
public use.
(6) Medical/dental office: one space per 250 square feet of gross floor
area.
(7) Motor vehicle service/repair: three spaces per service bay.
E. For any of the following uses the required parking spaces shall be
located on the same lot therewith except as provided in § 95-122 below:
(1) Retail store or shops, including a medical marijuana dispensary:
one space per 250 feet of gross floor area. [Amended 7-16-2018
by Ord. No. 2018-03]
(2) Department store or supermarket: one space per 250 square feet
gross floor area.
(3) Indoor theater: one parking space for every four seats.
(4) Hotel, tourist homes, motel or automobile court: one parking space
for each rental unit.
(5) Office building: one space per 250 square feet of gross floor area.
(6) Restaurant, cafe or tearoom: one parking space for every 50 square
feet of gross floor space.
(7) Laboratory or any industrial establishment, including a medical
marijuana grower/processor: whichever is greater, one space per
employee on large shift or per 450 square feet of gross floor area.
[Amended 7-16-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-03]
(8) Other commercial buildings: one parking space for every 1,000
square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof, except when
otherwise authorized as a special exception, consistent with the
requirements set forth herein for comparable establishments.
§ 95-121 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-121
94:490
§ 95-122. Parking held in reserve.
If the number of spaces required by § 95-121 of this article is substantially
larger than the number of spaces anticipated by the applicant, than the
concept of parking held in reserve may be used to avoid unnecessary paving
while ensuring adequate area for potential parking demands.
(9) Open areas used for commercial purposes: one parking space for
every 1,500 square feet of area or fraction thereof.
A. Suitable area must be available on the site for 100% of the parking
required by § 95-121 above.
B. The number of spaces which must be paved initially may be reduced by
up to 50% by the Borough Council, upon the recommendation of the
Borough Engineer.
C. Suitable area must be reserved for the balance of the total number of
spaces required by § 95-121. The total number of spaces shall be
constructed by the applicant if and when determined necessary by the
Borough Council and recommendation of the Borough Engineer. The
reserved spaces may be constructed with porous paving as defined in
the Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.106 The
Council may require the installation of these parking spaces under the
following conditions:
(1) Evidence of a continued overflow of parking as installed by the
applicant.
(2) Reevaluation of necessary parking capacity upon a change in status
of use, ownership, number of employees and/or size of building or
land area used.
D. A financial guaranty shall be provided by the applicant to cover the cost
of installation of the parking spaces held in reserve, for a period of one
year following installation of the initially constructed parking spaces.
The type and dollar value of the guaranty must be approved by the
Borough Council upon recommendation of the Borough Solicitor and
Engineer.
E. To qualify for the use of the reserve parking concept, the applicant shall
demonstrate that the number of spaces required by § 95-115 herein is
substantially larger than the number of spaces anticipated by providing
evidence supporting reduced parking needs to the Borough Planning
Commission and Engineer for their review and recommendation to
Borough Council.
106. Editor's Note: See Ch. 85, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 95-121 WATER § 95-123
94:491
§ 95-123. Reduction of nonresidential requirements by conditional
use.
The parking spaces required in § 95-121D herein may be located elsewhere
than on the same lot when authorized by the Borough Council, subject to
the following conditions:
§ 95-124. Design requirements for parking lots in all districts.
All parking lots in industrial, commercial, residential retail or shopping
center districts shall be operated and maintained in accordance with all of
the following requirements:
A. The owners of two or more establishments shall submit with their
application for conditional use a site plan showing joint use and location
of a common off-street parking area.
B. Some portion of the common off-street parking area shall lie within 250
feet of an entrance, regularly used by patrons, into the buildings served
thereby. This distance may be increased by applying for a conditional
use.
C. The Zoning Hearing Board may, in its discretion, reduce the required
aggregate amount of required parking space upon determination that
the greater efficiency is effected by joint use of a common parking area,
but in no case shall the ratio of total off-street parking area to total sales
floor area be reduced less than 25%.
A. They shall not be used for the sale, repair or dismantling of any
vehicles, equipment, materials or supplies.
B. They shall be properly graded for drainage and surfaced with concrete,
asphaltic concrete, asphalt, porous paving, oil or any dust-free
surfacing and shall be maintained in good condition, free of weeds,
dust, trash and debris.
C. They shall be provided with entrances and exits so located as to
minimize traffic congestion and the effect of headlight glare.
D. They shall be provided with wheel or bumper guards located and
arranged so that no part of any parked vehicles will extend beyond the
boundaries of the parking lot.
E. Lighting facilities shall be so arranged that they neither unreasonably
or unnecessarily disturb occupants of adjacent residential properties
nor interfere with traffic by reason of either location or glare.
F. A planting strip 15 feet in width shall be provided along each property
line of a nonresidential district which is opposite or adjacent to a
residential district, in which shall be planted a hedge of evergreens or
other suitable shrubbery so arranged as to minimize noise, glare and
dust from all parking facilities. Proposed landscaping shall meet all
§ 95-123 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-124
94:492
§ 95-125. Required off-street loading and unloading space.
In addition to required off-street parking, off-street loading spaces shall be
required for all commercial, wholesale and industrial uses requiring the
regular delivery or shipping of goods, merchandise or equipment. Off-street
loading areas shall comply with the following:
§ 95-126. Shared parking.
requirements as specified in the East Greenville Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.107
G. There shall be no more than one attendant shelter building containing
not more than 50 square feet of gross floor area and set in a distance of
not less than 20 feet from any boundary of the parking lot which abuts a
residential district.
H. No parking area shall abut directly upon a public street.
I. All parking areas shall be set back a minimum of five feet from the legal
right-of-way.
J. Each property shall have not more than one accessway on each street
on which the property abuts; each accessway shall be not more than 30
feet wide.
A. Required loading areas shall not be used for the storage of vehicles or
materials or for off-street parking.
B. The location and size of loading areas shall be adequate for the safe
parking of trucks, and maneuvering space shall be provided so that
ingress and egress can be accomplished on the lot without backing onto
a public street.
C. Two or more establishments may use a common loading area if it meets
the requirements of Subsection B above.
A. The parking spaces required under § 95-121 above may be reduced
when two or more establishments share the same parking areas,
whether on the same lot or abutting lots, according to the following
formula:
(1) Calculate the minimum amount of parking required for each land
use as if it were on a separate lot.
(2) To determine peak parking requirements, multiply each amount by
the corresponding percentages in Table One108 for each of the five
time periods.
(3) Calculate the column total for each time period.
107. Editor's Note: See Ch. 85, Subdivision and Land Development.
108. Editor's Note: Said Table One is on file in the borough offices.
§ 95-124 WATER § 95-126
94:493
§ 95-127. through § 95-129. (Reserved)
(4) The column total with the highest value is the shared parking
requirement.
B. When shared parking is used, sufficient area shall be set aside for the
remainder of the required spaces, according to the requirements of
§ 95-121 above.
§ 95-126 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-127
94:494
ARTICLE XIII
Signs
[Amended 9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-03]
§ 95-130. Purpose.
It is recognized that signs perform an important function in identifying
properties, businesses, services, residences, events, and other matters of
interest to the public. The intent of this article is to regulate all signs within
the Borough of East Greenville to ensure they are appropriate for their
respective uses and in keeping with the appearance of the affected property
and surrounding environment and to protect the public health, safety, and
general welfare by:
§ 95-131. Definitions.
A. Setting standards and providing controls that permit reasonable use of
signs and enhance the character of the Borough.
B. Prohibiting the erection of signs in such numbers, sizes, and designs
and locations as may create a hazard to pedestrians and motorists.
C. Preserving property values.
D. Avoiding excessive competition for large or multiple signs, so that
permitted signs provide adequate identification and direction while
minimizing clutter, unsightliness, and confusion.
E. Encouraging sign design that builds on the traditional town image and
visual environment the Borough seeks to promote.
A. General definitions relating to signs:
ABANDONED SIGN — A sign structure that has ceased to be used, and
the owner intends no longer to have used, for the display of sign copy.
AWNING — An architectural projection or shelter projecting from and
supported by the exterior wall of a building and composed of a covering
of rigid or nonrigid materials and/or fabric on a supporting framework
that may be either permanent or retractable, including such structures
that are internally illuminated by fluorescent or other light sources.
BEACON LIGHTING — Any source of electric light, whether portable or
fixed, the primary purpose of which is to cast a concentrated beam of
light generally skyward as a means of attracting attention to its location
rather than illuminate any particular sign, structure, or other object.
CANOPY — A multisided overhead structure or architectural projection
supported by attachments to a building on one or more sides and
either cantilevered from such building or also supported by columns
at additional points. The surface(s) and/or soffit of an attached canopy
may be illuminated by means of internal or external sources of light.
See also "marquee."109
§ 95-130 WATER § 95-131
94:495
COPY — Those letters, numerals, figures, symbols, logos and graphic
elements comprising the content or message of a sign, excluding
numerals identifying a street address only.
FESTOON LIGHTING — An external means of illumination comprised
of a group of strung bulbs.
FOOTCANDLE — A unit of measurement of light, where one footcandle
equals approximately the amount of light produced by a candle at a
distance of one foot. It is equivalent to one lumen per square foot.
A footcandle is measurable with an illuminance meter, also known as
"light meter."
FRONTAGE — The length of the property line(s) of any single premises
along either a public way or other properties on which it borders.
INTENSITY — This is the candlepower, or concentration, of light
emitted in a given direction from an entire sign.
LUMEN — A unit of luminous flux (power); a measure of the power of
light as perceived by the human eye.
SIGN — A structure, building wall, other outdoor surface, or any device
used for visual communication visible from a public place, which is used
for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of the
public or to display, identify, publicize the name and product or service
of any person, organization, or business.
SIGN AREA —
SIGN FACE — The part of a sign that is or can be used to identify,
advertise and communicate information for visual representation,
which attracts the attention of the public for any purpose. This
definition shall include any background materials, panel, trim and color
used that differentiates the sign from the building or structure on which
The "area of a sign" shall mean the area of all lettering, wording,
and accompanying designs, logos, and symbols, together with the
background on which they are displayed (whether such
background is open or enclosed), but excluding any supporting
framework and bracing which are solely incidental to the display
itself, provided that the same do not contain any lettering, wording,
or symbols.
(1)
Where the sign consists of individual letters, designs or symbols
attached to a building, awning, wall, or window, the area shall be
that of the smallest rectangle which encompasses all of the letters,
designs, and symbols.
(2)
Where a sign consists of an identical double-face, only one side
shall be considered in the calculation of area, but if the interior
angle formed by the two faces is greater than 45°, then both sides
of the sign shall be considered in the calculation of area.
(3)
109. Editor's Note: See the definition of "marquee sign" under "sign types."
§ 95-131 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-131
94:496
is placed. The sign structure shall not be included, provided that no
message, display or symbol is designed and included as part of the
structure.
DOUBLE-FACED SIGN — A sign with two identical faces of equal sign
areas that are back to back.
SIGN HEIGHT — The distance from the highest portion of the sign to
the mean grade at the base of the sign.
SIGN TYPES —
ADVERTISING SIGN — An off-premises sign that advertises or
otherwise directs attention to a commodity, business, industry, home
occupation, or other similar activity which is sold, offered, or
conducted elsewhere than on the lot upon which the sign is located,
for example, billboard.
ANIMATED SIGN — A sign with action or motion, flashing, or color
changes requiring electrical energy, but not including windowdisplayed
computer monitors or wind-actuated elements such as
flags, banners, or novelty items, for example, reader board.
AWNING SIGN — A sign painted on, printed on, or attached flat
against the surface of an awning.
BILLBOARD — See "off-premises sign" and "outdoor advertising
sign."
BUSINESS SIGN — An on-premises sign that advertises or otherwise
directs attention to a business, commodity, service, industry, or other
activity which is sold, offered, or conducted, other than incidentally,
on the premises upon which the sign is located or to which it is
affixed.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — Any sign that is designed and erected for the
purpose of providing direction and/or orientation for pedestrian or
vehicular traffic.
DIRECTORY SIGN — A sign on which the names and location of the
occupants or the use of a building is given, including office building
and religious directories.
ELECTRONIC DISPLAY SCREEN — A sign, or portion of a sign, that
displays an electronic image or video, which may or may not include
text. This definition includes television screens, plasma screens,
digital screens, flat screens, LED screens, video boards, and
holographic displays or other technologies of a similar nature.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER — Any sign or portion of a sign
that uses changing lights to form a sign message or messages in
text form wherein the sequence of messages and the rate of change
is electronically programmed and can be modified by electronic
processes.
EXTERIOR SIGN — Any sign placed outside a building.
§ 95-131 WATER § 95-131
94:497
FLASHING SIGN — See "animated sign."
FREESTANDING SIGN — A self-supporting sign resting on or
supported by means of poles or standards, either on the ground or
on the roof of a building.
GROUND SIGN — See "freestanding sign."
IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign whose copy is limited to the name
of a building, institution, or person and/or to the activity or
occupation being identified.
ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign that is lighted by internal or external
illumination.
INCIDENTAL SIGN — A sign used in conjunction with equipment
or other functional elements of a use or operation. These shall
include, but not be limited to, drive-through window menu boards,
signs on automatic teller machines, gas pumps, vending machines,
or newspaper delivery boxes.
INTERIOR SIGN — Any sign placed within a building, but not
including window signs as defined by this chapter. Interior signs,
with the exception of window signs as defined, are not regulated by
this chapter.
LED/DIGITAL SIGN — A sign that utilizes digital or video lightemitting
diodes (LEDs) or similar electronic methods to create a
changeable image display area.
MARQUEE SIGN — Any sign attached to or supported by a marquee
structure.
MENU BOARD — A freestanding sign oriented to the drive-through
lane for a restaurant that advertises the menu items available from
the drive-through window and which has no more than 20% of the
total area for such a sign utilized for business identification.
MONUMENT SIGN — A sign attached to a brick, stone, or masonry
wall or structure that forms a supporting base for the sign display.
MURAL SIGN — Artwork applied to the wall of a building, which
covers all or most of the wall and depicts a scene or event of natural,
social, cultural, or historic significance.
NONILLUMINATED SIGN — Any sign that is not lighted.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — A sign which has a valid permit, was
erected prior to the effective date of this chapter or any subsequent
amendment hereto and which does not otherwise conform to the
provisions of this article.
NONRESIDENTIAL BUSINESS SIGN — An on-premises sign that
advertises or otherwise directs attention to a business, commodity,
service, industry, or other activity which is sold, offered, or
conducted, other than incidentally, on the premises upon which the
sign is located, or to which it is affixed.
§ 95-131 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-131
94:498
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — A sign structure advertising an
establishment, merchandise, service, or entertainment which is sold,
produced, manufactured, or furnished at a place other than on the
property on which said sign is located; a sign which advertises or
otherwise directs attention to an activity not on the same lot where
the sign is located, for example, billboards, outdoor advertising,
subdivision directional sign, and real estate sign.
ON-PREMISES SIGN — A sign which advertises or otherwise directs
attention to an activity on the same lot where the sign is located.
OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN — A permanent sign erected,
maintained or used in the outdoor environment for the purpose
of the display of commercial or noncommercial messages not
appurtenant to the use of, products sold on, or the sale or lease of
the property on which it is displayed.
PAINTED WALL SIGN — Any sign which is applied with paint or
similar substances on the face of a wall.
PARALLEL WALL SIGN — A sign mounted parallel to a wall or other
vertical building surface, but does not extend beyond the edge of any
wall, roofline, or other surface to which it is mounted and does not
project more than 10 inches from the surface to which it is mounted.
PERSONAL EXPRESSION SIGN — A sign which displays an
individual's political, religious, or personal belief.
PORTABLE SIGN — Any sign, including vehicular signs, not
permanently attached to the ground or building.
PROJECTING WALL SIGN — Any sign mounted to a wall or other
vertical surface other than a parallel sign, but does not project more
than seven feet from the surface to which it is mounted, nor project
above the wall, roofline, or surface to which it is mounted, nor in any
way interfere with normal pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
REVOLVING SIGN — Any sign which revolves 180° or more.
ROOF SIGN — A sign erected upon or above a roof or parapet wall of
a building and which is wholly or partly supported by that building.
SNIPE SIGN — A permanent or temporary sign or poster affixed to a
street sign, municipal sign, government sign, park sign, tree, fence
or utility pole or upon rocks or natural features.
TIME AND TEMPERATURE SIGN — Electronic signs which display
the time and/or temperature in a digital format. The time and
temperature may be displayed together, or the time and temperature
may be shown on displays which alternate at no less than five-second
intervals. Each image must be static, with no animation, scrolling,
or movement. A time-and-temperature sign may be constructed only
when incorporated into a permitted freestanding or monument sign.
The time-and-temperature sign may occupy no more than 20% of the
permitted freestanding or monument sign.
§ 95-131 WATER § 95-131
94:499
TRAILER SIGN — Any sign which is erected upon a structure having
wheels or rollers facilitating movement from one location to another.
VEHICULAR SIGN — Any vehicle and/or trailer to which a sign is
affixed in such a manner that the carrying of the sign is no longer
incidental to the vehicle's purpose but becomes the primary purpose
of the vehicle.
WINDOW SIGN — A sign mounted or painted on a window or inside
a structure, such that it is intended to be seen through a window
from the outside.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign which advertises community or civic
projects, construction projects, real estate for sale or lease, a
commercial grand opening, or other special events on a temporary
basis. The following types of signs shall be considered temporary signs:
BANNER SIGN — A temporary sign intended to be hung either with
or without frames, possessing characters, letters, illustrations or
ornamentations applied to paper, plastic, or fabric of any kind.
National flags, flags of political subdivisions, and symbolic flags of any
institution or business shall not be considered banners for the purpose
of this chapter.
CONSTRUCTION SIGN AND/OR ARTISAN SIGN — Any sign giving the
name or names of principal contractors, subcontractors, architects,
and lending institutions responsible for construction on the site where
the sign is placed.
DEVELOPMENT SIGN — An on-premises sign on a building or lot
which announces the nature, purpose, or name of the prospective
building/enterprise.
POLITICAL SIGN — A temporary sign used in connection with a local,
county, state, or national election or referendum.
PORTABLE SIGN — Any sign not permanently attached to the ground
or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported,
including, but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by
means of wheels; signs converted to A- or T-frames; menu and
sandwich board signs; balloons used as signs; umbrellas used for
advertising; and signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and
visible from the public right-of-way, unless said vehicle is used in the
normal day-to-day operations of the business. Portable signs shall not
be illuminated unless a conditional use is granted by Borough Council.
REAL ESTATE SIGN — A temporary sign which advertises the sale,
lease, or rent of the property on which the sign is placed. Open-house
signs for property which is for sale shall be considered real estate
signs.
SPECIAL EVENTS SIGN — On-premises window signs, banners, or
commemorative flags which advertise a grand opening or other special
event.
§ 95-131 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-131
94:500
§ 95-132. Applicability.
Any signs erected or maintained after the effective date of this chapter shall
conform to the following regulations.
§ 95-133. Permit required; fee.
STREET BANNER SIGN — Any banner which is stretched across and
hung over a public right-of-way.
SUBDIVISION SIGN — An on-premises or off-premises directional sign
advertising to the public the name of the subdivision project and the
nature of the product offered.
WINDOW SIGN — Any sign affixed to or visible through a window and
intended to be viewed from the outside.
A. Sign permits. It shall be unlawful to erect, construct, or significantly
alter any sign, which requires a sign permit, without first filing with
East Greenville Borough an application in writing, in order to obtain a
formal permit.
B. Signs not requiring sign permits:
(1) Government signs (i.e., traffic signs, parking signs, etc.).
(2) Legal notices of a governmental agency.
(3) Public monument, plaque, historic identification sign erected by a
government agency.
(4) Government flag, insignia, or decorative banners.
(5) Directional signs, provided that they do not contain advertising
(including logos), do not exceed four square feet, and do not
obstruct the sight triangles at internal intersections on the
premises.
(6) Personal expression signs, provided that they are not illuminated
and are either freestanding, wall or window signs. Such signs may
not exceed four square feet and, in the case of freestanding signs,
four feet in height.
(7) Public service and information signs advertising availability of
public restrooms, telephones, or similar public conveniences, not
exceeding three square feet in area.
(8) Address signs, not exceeding two square feet.
(9) Nameplates and identification signs, provided that characters do
not exceed three inches in height and an area not exceeding two
square feet.
§ 95-131 WATER § 95-133
94:501
§ 95-134. General sign regulations for all districts.
In all districts the following sign regulations shall apply:
(10) Vending machine signs, where a product name is an integral
component of the vending machine, provided that the machine is
not placed in the front yard of a property.
(11) Incidental signs, provided that the aggregate area of incidental
signs on a property does not exceed four square feet; incidental
sign area in excess of four square feet shall be included in the
calculation of a property's permitted sign area.
(12) Home security signs, not exceeding one square foot.
(13) Temporary political signs.
(14) Real estate signs.
(15) Yard sale signs.
(16) Barbershop poles.
C. Sign permit review. The Building Inspector or Zoning Officer shall
either approve or deny the application or refer the application back to
the applicant in any instance where insufficient information has been
submitted.
D. Fees. All applications for permits for the erection, construction, or
alteration of signs shall, at the time of making application, be paid to
the Borough, in accordance with the respective fee schedule adopted by
the Borough Council from time to time.
A. Prohibited signs. It shall be unlawful, upon or after the effective date of
this chapter or amendment thereto, for any person, firm or corporation
to erect any of the following signs within the Borough of East
Greenville:
(1) Any sign or object with flashing or intermittent lighting, revolving,
moving, sound-producing or animated parts, with the exception of
signs that display time and/or temperature exclusively, barber
poles, on-premises electronic message centers and on-premises
LED/digital signs.
(2) Beacon lighting.
(3) Festoon lighting.
(4) Flashing, moving or reflective signs.
(5) Illuminated temporary signs.
(6) Snipe signs.
(7) Revolving signs, except barbershop poles.
§ 95-133 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-134
94:502
(8) Roof signs.
(9) Trailer signs.
(10) Vehicular signs in residential areas.
(11) Political signs on Borough property.
(12) Signs erected without the permission of the property owner or
authorized agent.
(13) Signs that exhibit statements, words or pictures of obscene or
pornographic subjects as determined by the Borough.
(14) Any sign inconsistent with this article.
B. No sign shall be placed in such a position as to endanger traffic on a
street by obscuring a clear view or by confusion with official street
signs or signals.
C. No sign, other than official Borough street or directional signs, street
banner signs, or political signs shall be erected or maintained within
the "legal street right-of-way."
D. No sign shall be erected or maintained so as to prevent free ingress and
egress to or from any door, window or fire escape.
E. Property owners shall assume the cost of relocating any sign within the
"ultimate right-of-way" of a street which is widened.
F. Materials. Sign materials should be consistent with and complement
the original construction materials and architectural style of the
building facade on which they are to be displayed. All signs, excluding
awning and window signs, shall be constructed only of wood, metal,
stone or other appropriate material with painted, engraved or raised
messages. Plastic sign inserts shall be permitted for internally lit signs.
G. Illumination standards for all signs except electronic message centers
and LED/digital signs:
(1) Signs may be illuminated, unless otherwise specified herein,
consistent with the following standard:
(a) Where permitted, illumination may be:
[1] External. Illumination of any sign shall be so shielded that
the source of the light shall not be visible from any point
off the lot on which the sign is erected and so that only the
sign is directly illuminated. The source of light must be
concealed by translucent covers.
[2] Internal. Sign lettering may be backlit with an opaque
background material or backlit pin lettering or neon
lighting.
§ 95-134 WATER § 95-134
94:503
(b) Neon lighting is not permitted in residential districts.
(c) No more than 0.5 footcandle of light shall be detectable along
the boundary of any adjacent property.
(d) Illumination of signs shall be subject to the National Electrical
Code.
H. Sign location requirements:
(1) No sign shall be placed in such a position as to endanger traffic on a
street by obscuring view or by interfering with official street signs
or signals, by virtue of position or color.
(2) Yard requirements. No portion of any freestanding sign, business
sign, or advertising sign may be located within the side or rear yard
setback or within the required buffer zone when located adjacent to
a residential district.
(3) Public use areas. No sign, except official traffic signs or those
approved by East Greenville Borough, is permitted within the
cartway of the right-of-way.
(4) No freestanding sign may occupy a designated parking area or
intended parking area, loading, walkways, cartways, driveways,
fire lane, easement, or area designated for any other use.
(5) No projecting sign shall extend into the cartway of the right-of-way
or be less than 10 feet above a pedestrianway.
(6) No wall sign shall project more than 12 inches beyond the building.
(7) Signs, not including historical markers and banners approved by
the Borough, shall be affixed to a utility pole or structure, lighting
standard, parking meter, park bench, tree, shrub, rock, or natural
object except plaques of a maximum one square foot.
I. Construction of signs.
(1) Every sign permitted in this article must be kept in good condition
and repair as determined by the Borough Zoning Officer.
(2) A sign using electricity shall be installed in conformance with the
Borough's electrical code. All signs not attached to a building shall
be connected by underground service only.
J. Any sign which does not so conform to the provisions of this section at
the time of adoption of the ordinance is hereby declared a
nonconforming sign.
K. Removal of signs:
(1) The Borough shall have the authority to require the removal and/or
demolition of signs under the following circumstances:
§ 95-134 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-134
94:504
§ 95-135. Signs permitted in residential districts.
For any one lot located in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, and BR Districts, the
following number and types of signs are permitted:
(a) When it is determined that the sign has deteriorated to the
point of becoming a danger to the public.
(b) When a sign is erected without an approved sign permit.
(c) When a sign is erected which does not comply with the
requirements of this chapter.
(d) A nonconforming sign, which has not been removed or brought
into conformity under the provisions of this chapter.
(2) In all of the above circumstances, the removal procedure will be
initiated by a letter to the owner or lessee by the Zoning Officer
requiring the removal of such sign within 30 days.
(3) Owner's or lessee's remedial action for each circumstance:
(a) Deteriorated/hazardous sign: rehabilitation/repair of sign
within 30 days.
(b) No sign permit: obtain permit within 30 days.
(c) Prohibited sign or nonconforming signs required to be brought
into conformity: made to conform to ordinance within 30 days.
A. Official street and traffic signs, and any signs required by law.
B. Professional, accessory use, home occupation or name signs on the
same lot with, and indicating the name, profession or activity of the
occupant of the dwelling, provided that the area of any one side shall
not exceed two square feet, and provided that not more than one such
sign shall be erected for each permitted use or dwelling.
C. All signs in the BR District shall be limited on any one side to a
maximum of 12 square feet in area and four feet in height. Only one
sign shall be erected on any one street frontage of any property in
single and separate ownership.
D. Signs for a permitted institutional use, including schools, churches,
hospitals, sanitariums, clubs or other institutions of a similar nature, on
the same lot therewith, for the purpose of displaying the name of such
institution and its activities or services, provided that the area on any
one side of such sign shall not exceed 20 square feet and 10 feet in
height, and provided that not more than two such signs shall be erected
on any one street frontage of any property in single and separate
ownership.
(1) Each institutional building is permitted one wall sign for purposes
of identification, not to exceed 10 square feet in area.
§ 95-134 WATER § 95-135
94:505
E. For residential developments containing more than 10 units, one
freestanding identification sign per external street frontage not
exceeding 15 square feet in area and four feet in height for a
freestanding sign and six feet in height for a monument sign. The sign
shall be aesthetically compatible with the structure.
F. Trespassing signs and signs indicating private ownership of roadways
or other property, on the same premises therewith, provided that the
total area of any one side of such sign shall not exceed four square feet.
G. Real estate signs as follows:
(1) For advertising the sale or rental of the premises upon which the
sign is erected, provided that the total area on any one side of such
signs on any one street frontage of any property in single or
separate ownership shall not exceed nine square feet.
(2) For advertising, on the premises, the sale or development of homes
within a subdivision, provided that the area of any one side of any
such sign shall not exceed 35 square feet, and provided that not
more than two such signs shall be erected within any such
subdivision.
H. Directional subdivision sign (off-premises), provided that the area of
any one side of any such sign shall not exceed six square feet, and
provided that such signs shall be spaced at intervals of not less than
500 feet of street frontage. A maximum of three off-premises directional
signs shall be permitted for one development. Permission must be
obtained in advance from the property owner where the sign is to be
placed. Signs may not be erected more than 60 days prior to the
beginning of the actual construction of the project and shall be removed
within 10 days after the date of the sale or rental of the final unit in such
development.
I. Temporary signs of contractors, mechanics, painters and artisans
erected and maintained on the premises where the work is being
performed during the period in which such work is being performed,
provided that the area of any one side of any such sign shall not exceed
12 square feet, and provided that not more than one such sign shall be
erected on any property in single and separate ownership, and provided
that such sign shall be removed upon completion of the work.
J. For sale of agricultural products, signs indicating the name of the
owner or occupant and the product sold, provided that the total sign
area shall not exceed 16 square feet.
K. Open-house signs (on- and off-premises). There shall be a maximum of
one on-premises open house sign for each property line of street
frontage.
L. Signs which advertise public auctions for the disposal of real estate,
property, or merchandise.
§ 95-135 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-135
94:506
§ 95-136. Signs permitted in commercial and industrial districts.
For any one lot located in the Borough commercial or industrial districts,
the following number and types of signs are permitted:
(1) Signs shall not exceed nine square feet in area, at a maximum
height of six feet, and shall be placed only on the property where
the stated auction is being conducted.
(2) Signs may be erected not earlier than 60 days prior to the
advertised auction and shall be removed within 10 days after the
auction.
M. Political signs. Political signs may be erected not earlier than 30 days
before the date of the election. All political signs shall be removed
within seven days after the election date.
A. One freestanding business or identification sign per street frontage.
(1) At gas stations, one additional freestanding sign per street frontage
for advertising gas prices only.
B. One of the following types of signs for each side of the building which
faces a street or a parking lot located on the same property:
(1) Identification sign.
(2) Painted wall sign.
(3) Permanent window sign.
(4) Projecting wall sign.
C. Awning signs. For single-use properties, one awning sign is allowed on
the ground floor only for each side of the building which faces a street
or a parking lot located on the same property. For multiple-use
properties, one awning sign is allowed for each use located on the
ground floor only for each side of the building which faces a street or a
parking lot located on the same property.
D. Parallel wall signs. For single-use properties, one parallel wall sign is
allowed for each side of the building which faces a street or a parking
lot located on the same property. For multiple-use properties, two
parallel wall signs are allowed for each side of the building which faces
a street or a parking lot located on the same property.
E. One marquee sign is allowed only for theater uses. If the property
containing the theater use fronts on more than one street, the marquee
sign must face the street with the highest street classification.
F. Incidental signs for the convenience and safety of the public (for
example, signs identifying parking areas, telephones, restrooms, etc.)
not to exceed four square feet in size and containing no advertising.
§ 95-135 WATER § 95-136
94:507
G. One of the following types of temporary signs for a given thirty-day
period only:
(1) Portable signs.
(2) Special event signs.
H. Real estate signs, which shall be removed within seven days after the
sale or lease of the property.
I. Electronic message centers and LED/digital signs.
(1) Prohibited signs. Any sign or object with flashing or intermittent
lighting, revolving, moving, sound-producing or animated parts,
with the exception of signs that display time and/or temperature
exclusively, barber poles, on-premises electronic message centers
and on-premises LED/digital signs.
(2) Location. For commercial premises located in the BC District, one
electronic message center or one LED/digital sign attached to a
permitted on-premises freestanding sign shall be allowed per
premises.
(3) Size.
(a) No freestanding electronic message center shall exceed 40% of
the total allowable sign face area for any on-premises
freestanding sign.
(b) An LED/digital sign, where utilized, shall be constructed as
part of a permitted on-premises freestanding sign, provided
that no digital/LED sign exceeds 35 square feet in area.
(4) Height. The maximum heights of electronic message centers and
digital/LED signs shall conform to the standards as specified in
§ 95-137A.
(5) Structure. The LED/digital sign posts must be a minimum 10 inches
in diameter.
(6) Message display for both electronic message centers and digital/
LED signs.
(a) Animation, streaming video, or text or images which flash,
pulsate, move, or scroll are prohibited.
(b) One message/display may be brighter than another, but each
individual message/display must be static in intensity.
(c) The display must transition by changing instantly, with no
transition graphics (i.e., no fade-out or fade-in).
(d) Each message displayed must be static or depicted for a
minimum of one minute before a new message appears.
§ 95-136 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-136
94:508
(e) The sign shall contain a default design which shall freeze the
sign message in one position if a malfunction should occur.
(f) Each complete message must fit on one screen (i.e., no
scrolling or incomplete messages permitted).
(g) The letter height in messages must be at least 12 inches if all
caps or 11 inches if the message contains lowercase and
uppercase letters.
(h) Any sign which causes glare is prohibited.
(i) The addition of any electronic message center or digital/LED
sign to a nonconforming sign is prohibited.
(7) Sign illumination.
(a) Light emitted by signs and other sources on a property must
not exceed a level of 0.5 footcandle when measured at the
property line.
(b) A light illuminating a sign shall be so arranged that the point
source of light is not visible from any point off the lot and so
that only the sign is illuminated thereby.
(c) The intensity of light provided for illumination shall be the
minimal amount necessary to reasonably observe the sign after
dusk at a maximum distance of 500 feet from the sign. Where
sign illumination interferes with the perception of nighttime at
surrounding residential properties, the intensity shall be
reduced.
(d) Signs or sign lighting resembling traffic signals is prohibited
within 100 feet of a public right-of-way or within 200 feet of a
traffic control device, whichever is greater.
(e) LED/digital sign lighting intensity limits.
[1] Lighting from a LED/digital sign must not exceed 0.3
footcandle over ambient light conditions. Measurement
technique: At least 30 minutes past sunset, use a
footcandle meter to record the ambient light reading for
the area. This is done while the electronic display screen is
off or displaying all black copy. The reading should be
taken with the meter aimed directly at the electronic
display screen at a distance of 100 feet. Turn on the
electronic display screen to full white copy and take
another reading. If the difference between the readings is
0.3 footcandle or less, the brightness is properly adjusted.
[2] Each LED/digital sign shall be equipped with automatic
day/night dimming software (using photocell technology),
§ 95-136 WATER § 95-136
94:509
§ 95-137. Dimensional standards.
to reduce the illumination intensity of the sign as ambient
lighting conditions change.
[3] The sign may not display light of such intensity or
brilliance to cause glare, impair the vision of an ordinary
driver, or constitute a nuisance.
(8) Off-premises advertising signs. Off-premises advertising signs may
not be electronic message centers and/or LED/digital signs.
(9) Hours of operation. Signs shall not be illuminated more than 1/2
hour before the time at which the premises is open to the public or
more than 1/2 hour after the time at which the premises is closed to
the public or 10:00 p.m., whichever is later.
(10) Content. The display may only be used to advertise goods and
services sold on-premises, for time and temperature, and for public
service announcements. A minimum of 50% of the messages shall
consist of announcements affecting the public health, safety, and
welfare; announcements by the Borough, County, or other
government entity, civic institutions, charitable, cultural, athletic,
social, fraternal, or religious organizations. East Greenville-based
events and East Greenville-related information should receive
priority over announcements regarding events or organizations
based outside the Borough. The Code Enforcement Officer shall
monitor that this requirement is met. The owner must register with
AMBER Alert™.
J. Other signs permitted in residential districts according to the
regulations of § 95-135.
A. Freestanding signs shall not exceed 35 square feet in area (16 square
feet for signs advertising gas prices) and must be set back a minimum
of 10 feet from the curbline of the frontage street or outer edge of the
shoulder and outside the legal right-of-way. The maximum height,
including supports, is 12 feet.
(1) Multi-use or multitenant buildings. Where the freestanding sign is
to be shared by two or more uses or tenants, the maximum sign
area calculated in Subsection A above may be increased by 25% for
each additional use/tenant in excess of one use/tenant. The total
sign area for all uses or tenants shall not exceed a maximum of 45
square feet.
(a) Conditional use. For properties that have a minimum street
frontage of 80 feet, additional sign area of a maximum of 55
square feet may be requested by applicant(s) if demonstrated
to Borough Council that sign can be set back a minimum of 20
feet from the curbline of the frontage street or outer edge of
the shoulder and outside the legal right-of-way.
§ 95-136 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-137
94:510
B. The maximum area of a marquee sign, painted wall sign, parallel wall
sign or awning sign shall be 100 square feet. However, the total area of
painted wall signs, parallel wall signs, signs affixed to awnings and any
signs affixed to the inside or outside of windows may not exceed 25% of
the area of the wall, including windows and cornices, to which they are
attached.
C. The maximum area of a projecting wall sign shall be 30 square feet.
(1) The sign shall not project more than seven feet from the surface to
which it is mounted, nor project over the wall, roofline, or surface
to which it is mounted.
(2) The outermost portion of a projecting sign shall project no closer
than five feet form a curbline or shoulder of a public street.
(3) There shall be a minimum clearance of 10 feet between the bottom
of the projecting sign and a public sidewalk or walkway.
D. Special event signs, banners, portable signs or commemorative flags for
businesses announcing a grand opening, going-out-of-business sale or
other special promotional event shall comply with the following
standards:
(1) The area of the special event sign, banner, portable sign or
commemorative flag shall not exceed 25 square feet.
(2) The property or business shall display only one special event sign,
banner, portable sign or commemorative flag at any one time.
(3) A special event sign, banner or commemorative flag for a business
shall be displayed no more than four times during the calendar year
for periods of time not exceeding 30 calendar days. Portable signs
may be displayed only once during the calendar year for a period of
time not exceeding 30 calendar days.
(4) Special event signs or banners for public or quasi-public events
shall comply with the following standards:
(a) Such banners shall be affixed to a building or some other
appropriate sturdy structure.
(b) The permitted size of any street banner shall be determined on
a case-by-case basis by Borough Council.
(c) If the banner is to be strung across a state-owned road, the
sponsoring organization must receive necessary approvals
from the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PADOT).
(d) If the banner is to be strung on utility poles, the sponsoring
organization must receive necessary approvals from the PPL
Corporation.
§ 95-137 WATER § 95-137
94:511
§ 95-138. Off-premises advertising signs.
(e) Signs or banners shall not be posted earlier than one month
prior to the advertised event and must be removed within five
days after the day of the event.
(5) A maximum of two off-premises directional signs, not exceeding six
square feet in area and six feet in height, shall be permitted for any
special event, provided that permission has been obtained from the
property owner where the sign is to be placed.
A. Off-premises advertising signs are permitted only in the Industrial
District as a conditional use pursuant to conditional use regulations of
this chapter, provided that:
(1) If the provisions with respect to location, use, size or height of signs
are more restrictive in the building code110 adopted by the Borough
of East Greenville or any Acts of Assembly of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PADOT), those
restrictions shall take precedence over the regulations and
conditions as set forth in this Zoning Ordinance.
(2) An off-premises sign may be double-faced with two advertising
surfaces. However, both surfaces shall be the same size and shape,
and the total length of the sign structure shall not exceed 20 feet
and the total height of the copy areas shall not exceed 18 feet, with
a total copy area not exceeding 100 square feet.
(3) Off-premises signs may not be attached or painted on a building.
(4) Off-premises signs shall be located 75 feet from the ultimate rightof-
way or 100 feet from any property line.
(5) An open space of not less than four feet shall be maintained
between the lower edge of the off-premises sign display surface and
the ground.
(6) No portion of the supporting structure shall be visible above any
advertising display area.
(7) No off-premises sign shall be located closer than 500 feet to the
nearest off-premises sign on the same side of the highway,
regardless of the size of the sign.
(8) No off-premises sign shall be allowed within 500 feet of the nearest
public or private elementary, middle or high school or religious
institution.
(9) All off-premises signs shall be erected on permanent footings or
support structures designed by a registered structural engineer.
110. Editor's Note: See Ch. 35, Building Construction.
§ 95-137 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-138
94:512
§ 95-139. Nonconforming signs.
(10) The applicant for any sign permit shall present a written statement
from the owner of the property, duly notarized, that the applicant
has the right to use the property to erect a sign as well as maintain
the sign during the time that the sign is erected. The owner must
further verify in writing that it will, at its sole cost and expense,
cause the sign to be removed at such time as there is no further use
of the sign.
(11) The applicant, at his sole expense, will remove any off-premises
sign if the sign remains without bona fide advertisement, which
shall not include rental of the sign space, for 90 days, or if the right
to use the property has expired for any reason whatsoever.
A. Signs legally in existence at the time of the adoption of this chapter,
which do not conform to the requirements of this chapter, shall be
considered nonconforming signs.
B. All such nonconforming signs shall be removed or altered so as to be in
conformity with the standards contained herein at such time when:
(1) East Greenville Borough approves an application for a sign permit
in cases where the nonconforming sign is to be significantly
altered. Changes to the sign copy or the replacement of a sign
panel of an existing establishment's nonconforming sign shall not
be considered a significant alteration. If more than 50% of a sign is
damaged, it shall be repaired to conform to this chapter.
(2) The property in which the nonconforming sign is located submits a
subdivision or land development application requiring municipal
review and approval.
(3) The property in which the nonconforming sign is located undergoes
a change of land use requiring the issuance of either a use and
occupancy permit or a change of use and occupancy permit by East
Greenville Borough.
C. To determine the legal status of existing signs, in each of the three
cases listed in § 95-139B, the applicant shall submit the following
information to the Borough Zoning Officer:
(1) Type(s) of existing sign(s) located on the property.
(2) The area and height of all signs.
(3) For freestanding signs, the distance the outermost portion of the
sign is set back from the curbline or shoulder.
(4) Type of sign illumination.
(5) The material of which the sign is constructed.
§ 95-138 WATER § 95-139
94:513
(6) The building length along public street frontage.
D. Prior to the events listed in § 95-139B, nonconforming signs may be
repainted or repaired up to 50%, the sign copy may be changed, or sign
panels may be replaced, provided that such actions do not increase the
dimensions of the existing sign nor in any way increase that extent of
the sign's nonconformity.
E. Under that following conditions, nonconforming signs shall be exempt
from the provisions of § 95-139B:
(1) The nonconforming sign possesses documented historic value.
(2) The nonconforming sign is of a unique nature or type of virtue of its
architectural value or design.
(3) For a change of use when a business name is retained.
§ 95-139 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-139
94:514
ARTICLE XIV
Nonconforming Structures, Uses and Lots
§ 95-140. Nonconforming status.
All buildings, structures, uses of land, uses of buildings, lots and signs which
do not conform to all of the applicable regulations of the district in which
they are located or other applicable requirements of this chapter shall be
considered as nonconforming, provided that:
§ 95-141. Nonconforming classifications.
Nonconforming status shall be classified as follows:
§ 95-142. Nonconforming regulations.
The following regulations shall govern all properties to which
nonconforming status is applied:
A. They lawfully existed on the date of passage of this chapter; or
B. They lawfully existed on the date of passage of a text or map
amendment to this chapter, which amendment caused the
nonconforming status.
A. Nonconforming use. The existing lawful use of land and/or buildings
and/or structures upon the land which does not conform to any of the
permitted uses of the district in which it is located.
B. Nonconforming building or structure. Any existing lawful building or
structure that does not conform to the height, location, size, bulk or
other dimensional requirements of the district in which it is located.
This does not include signs.
C. Nonconforming lot. Any existing lawful lot which does not conform to
the area and/or width requirements for lots in the district in which it is
located.
D. Nonconforming sign. Any sign, signboard, billboard or advertising
device existing at the time of the passing of this chapter that does not
conform in use, location, height or size with the regulations of this
chapter shall be considered a nonconforming sign and shall also be
governed by the requirements of Article XIII of this chapter.
E. Temporary nonconforming use. A temporary nonconforming use, which
will benefit the public health or welfare or promote proper development
of a district in conformity with the intent of this chapter, may be
permitted for a period of not more than 100 days on the approval of an
application for a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board, in
accordance with the provisions of Article XVI of this chapter.
§ 95-140 WATER § 95-142
94:515
A. Nonconforming status shall continue and a property may continue to be
used as nonconforming until it complies with the requirements of this
chapter.
B. Change of use. [Amended 8-3-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-05]
(1) A nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming
use which is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district
in which the property is located, and is no more detrimental than
the existing nonconforming use, by special exception granted by
the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the provisions of
Article XVII of this chapter.
(2) A nonconforming use shall not be changed to another
nonconforming use which is less appropriate to the district in
which the property is located and/or is more detrimental than the
existing nonconforming use.
(3) If a nonconforming use is changed to a conforming use, then the
previous nonconforming status shall become null and void in
accordance with § 95-142C below.
C. Discontinuance. A nonconforming use, when discontinued, may be
resumed any time within one year from such discontinuance, but not
thereafter, unless a variance is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board in
accordance with Article XVII of this chapter. The resumption may be of
the same use or another nonconforming use which is equally
appropriate or more appropriate to the district in which it is located,
but shall not be less appropriate or more detrimental than the previous
nonconforming use.
D. Physical expansion. Physical expansion of a nonconforming building or
building housing a nonconforming use shall be permitted only one time
and shall be limited to 25% of the gross floor area of the existing
building.
E. Extension or expansion. A nonconforming use, building or structure,
not including signs, may be extended or expanded in compliance with
all of the following:
(1) The parcel on which extension or expansion occurs shall include
only that lot, held in single and separate ownership, on which the
use, building or structure existed at the time it became
nonconforming. Expansion onto adjoining lots is prohibited.
(2) Nonconforming use of a building may be extended throughout the
building only in compliance with § 95-142E(6) of this chapter.
(3) A building which houses a nonconforming use may be expanded
only in compliance with § 95-142E(6) of this chapter.
(4) A nonconforming use may be extended to a new building on the
same lot only in compliance with § 95-142E(6) of this chapter, and
§ 95-142 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-142
94:516
provided that the nonconforming use continues in the existing
building.
(5) A nonconforming building may be expanded only in compliance
with § 95-142E(6) of this chapter.
(6) In addition to § 95-142A, B, C and D above, nonconforming uses
must comply with the following:
(a) Extension and/or expansion, as permitted in § 95-142E(1), (2),
(3), (4) and (5) above, shall be permitted by conditional use
only to the extent that all new construction shall comply with
the dimensional standards of the district in which the use is
located or the district in which the use is permitted, whichever
is more restrictive.
(b) In addition, when a nonconforming use is expanded, the
applicant must comply with all the performance standards of
the district in which the use is permitted or the district in
which the use is located, whichever is more restrictive. The
performance standards include, but are not limited to, the
following:
Type of Use Standards
Parking Performance standards
Landscaping Lighting
Signage Building and impervious
coverage
(c) In cases where a building is nonconforming as to front, side or
rear yard setback, an addition may be built on a line with the
existing building as long as it does not create an additional
encroachment into a required yard. Any further encroachment
with regard to required setbacks will require a variance.
[1] Expansion shall not be permitted to extend closer to the
road ultimate right-of-way than the front wall of the
existing dwelling closest to the road.
[2] Expansion shall not be permitted to create a new violation
of the minimum side yard setback. An existing dwelling
that violates the side yard may be expanded to the rear
along the side yard building setback established by the
wall of the existing building.
[3] An existing dwelling that violates the rear yard may be
expanded to the sides along the rear yard building setback
established by the rear wall of the existing building.
F. Additional building regulations. The following regulations apply to
buildings:
§ 95-142 WATER § 95-142
94:517
(1) When new ordinance provisions are adopted and affect planned
construction which has not been completed:
(a) Buildings under construction as of the date of adoption of new
ordinance provisions, to the extent of completion of footings,
may be completed as nonconforming buildings, provided that
valid building permits have been issued for those buildings.
(b) Buildings not yet under construction shall be built in
conformance to the new ordinance provisions.
(c) The use or uses of buildings governed by Subsection F(1)(a)
and/or (b) above shall comply with the permitted uses for the
district in which they are located.
(2) Nonconforming primary structures damaged or destroyed by fire,
explosion, accident or calamity (as contrasted to deterioration due
to time or neglect) may be reconstructed and used as before,
provided that:
(a) The reconstructed building shall not exceed the dimensions of
the damaged or destroyed building, including height, width,
depth and volume.
(b) Building reconstruction shall be started within one year from
the date the building was damaged or destroyed and shall be
carried out without interruption.
(c) The building will pose no hazards to safety by virtue of its
location.
(3) Legally condemned nonconforming buildings shall not be rebuilt or
used except in conformance with this chapter.
G. Development of nonconforming lots. A single-family detached dwelling
unit may be constructed on a nonconforming lot in a residential district
in accordance with the dimensional requirements of the district. Relief
from dimensional requirements which present a hardship may be
sought through the Zoning Hearing Board variance procedure.
H. Contiguous undeveloped lots. Where two or more contiguous
undeveloped lots are held in single ownership within a subdivision
which has been duly recorded prior to the effective date of this chapter,
which lots are individually not of the required minimum area or width
for the district in which they are situated, such lots may be developed
only in groups thereof in order to provide the minimum lot area and
width required. When all lots in single ownership are combined and still
do not meet area and/or width requirements, they may be considered a
single nonconforming lot in accordance with § 95-142G of this chapter.
I. Nonconforming signs. If and when a nonconforming sign is replaced,
the new sign shall comply with the requirements of this chapter.
"Replacement" shall not include simply revising the text or color of the
§ 95-142 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-142
94:518
§ 95-143. Administration.
§ 95-144. Nonconforming signs.
Any sign, signboard, billboard or advertising device existing at the time of
passage of this chapter that does not conform in use, location, height or size
with the regulations of the district in which it is located shall be considered
a nonconforming use.
§ 95-145. Abatement of certain nonconforming uses.
All nonconforming uses of land shall be discontinued and all nonconforming
buildings or structures shall be torn down or otherwise made to conform
within 10 years of the adoption of this chapter in respect to junkyards,
commercial animal or stock yards and lumberyards not on the same lot with
sign, but shall refer to structural replacement and/or relocation of the
sign.
J. Conforming uses in nonconforming buildings or lots. The conversion of
one conforming use to another conforming use on a lot or in a building
that is nonconforming shall be permitted in accordance with the
provisions of Article XVI of this chapter.
A. Mapping and recording of nonconforming uses, structures and lots. The
Zoning Officer shall perform a survey of the borough and record and
map all uses, structures and lots nonconforming to the district
requirements set forth in this chapter. Such record and map shall be
available for inspection at the Borough Municipal Building. For each
property identified, the Zoning Officer shall have on file a written
record documenting the evidence and reasoning that led to the
assignment of nonconforming status. If the survey, record and map are
not done or are incomplete, the nonconforming status may be
determined when applications are filed with the borough.
B. Jurisdiction. In all matters pertaining to nonconforming status, the
Zoning Officer shall make the initial determination.
(1) The Zoning Officer may seek the advice of the Borough Solicitor
and/or others in making a determination.
(2) If it cannot be determined by means of positive documentation that
a use, structure or sign was in lawful existence at the time an
ordinance or amendment would have rendered it nonconforming,
the Zoning Officer must refuse to confer nonconforming status.
(3) If the applicant disagrees with the Zoning Officer's determination,
the applicant may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board as provided
in the Municipalities Planning Code (Pennsylvania Act 247, as
amended)111 and in this chapter.
111. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 95-142 WATER § 95-145
94:519
a plant sales facility or a factory. This section shall be not be deemed to
repeal or modify existing ordinances restricting junkyards or prohibiting
other nuisances.
§ 95-146. (Reserved)
§ 95-147. (Reserved)
§ 95-148. (Reserved)
§ 95-149. (Reserved)
§ 95-145 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-149
94:520
ARTICLE XV
Supplementary Provisions
§ 95-150. Effect of private covenants.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to render inoperative any
enforceable restriction established by covenants running with the land
and which restrictions are not prohibited by or are not contrary to the
regulations herein established.
§ 95-151. Lots of record.
A lot of record on the borough plan or of record title upon a plan or
separately described in a deed and recorded in the office of the Recorder
of Deeds of Montgomery County (at Norristown) and which is in single and
separate ownership at the time of the enactment of this chapter, where such
owner does not own adjoining land or lots and where it is not financially
feasible to acquire adjoining land or lots from other owners, may be used
for a use permitted in the district in which it is located upon a finding by the
Zoning Hearing Board that the lot size is reasonably close to the minimum
and maximum regulations under this article and that owners of lots within
300 feet thereof, after 20 days' notice and hearing, do not object or will not
be adversely affected thereby.
§ 95-152. Reduction of lot area.
No lot shall be so reduced that the area of the lot or the dimensions of the
required open spaces shall be less than herein prescribed by the chapter.
§ 95-153. Modification of front yards.
The front yard requirements for all residential districts may be modified in
accordance with the following conditions:
A. Where an unimproved lot of record is situated between two improved
lots on the same street frontage, the front yard requirement may be
modified to the extent that the front yard may match either the closest
or furthest existing front yard on either side of the unimproved lot,
provided that the structures located on the improved lots are within
100 feet of the unimproved lot.
B. Where an unimproved lot of record is situated between an improved lot
and an unimproved lot on the same street frontage, the front yard
requirement may be modified to the extent that the front yard may
match the front yard established by the existing improved lot.
C. Where an unimproved lot of record is situated between unimproved
lots, than the lot in question may match the existing setback of the
closest structure, on either side, within 100 feet. If there are no
structures located within 100 feet, than the existing front yard setback
shall apply.
§ 95-150 WATER § 95-154
94:521
§ 95-154. Visual obstructions at intersections.
On any lot, no wall, sign, fence or other structure shall be erected, altered
or maintained and no hedge, tree, shrub or other growth shall be planted
or maintained over three feet in height which will interfere with or obstruct
vehicular or pedestrian vision at any intersection of streets or any street
and crosswalk.
§ 95-155. Accessory uses.
Accessory uses authorized in this chapter shall include, but not by way of
limitation, the following:
A. Uses accessory to dwellings.
(1) Private garage or carport, private parking space, barn, shelter for
pets.
(2) Noncommercial swimming pool, either above or below ground, and
equipment or other recreational facilities.
(3) Private greenhouse, garden shed.
(4) Living quarters for household employees, caretakers and
watchmen.
(5) Home occupations, subject to the regulations in § 95-155B and C.
B. Home occupations. The following home occupations are permitted in all
districts dedicated to a residential use in any single-family detached,
semidetached or attached dwelling, provided that they comply with
requirements listed in Subsection E below and all other applicable
requirements of this chapter:
(1) Professional office or studio of a teacher, lawyer, artist, accountant,
landscape architect, minister, musician or practitioner of a similar
character.
(2) Custom dressmaking, millinery, tailoring, sewing of fabric for
custom apparel and custom home furnishings.
(3) Home catering, provided that all food is catered off the premises.
(4) Any office in which no customers shall visit the premises for
purposes of sales.
(5) Tutoring, limited to not more than two students at one time.
(6) Studio for fine arts or home crafts such as model making, rug
weaving, pottery, jewelry making. The studio shall not be used as a
gallery.
(7) Telephone answering or solicitation.
(8) Typing, word processing service.
§ 95-154 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-155
94:522
(9) Writing, computer programming.
(10) Mail order, provided that there are no retail sales from the site.
(11) Day-care as a home occupation is permitted only by conditional use
and pursuant to the requirements of § 95-156 of this article.
(12) Bed-and-breakfast home, pursuant to § 95-157 of this article.
(13) Any use of a similar type as the above.
C. Home occupation regulations.
(1) The office, studio or rooms used shall be located in the dwelling in
which the practitioner resides or in a building accessory thereto.
(2) No employees, assistants, helpers, subcontractors, etc., shall be
permitted except for persons residing with the practitioner, unless
authorized as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board, in
accordance with Article XVI of this chapter.
(3) Vehicular access improvements shall be provided by the
practitioner when a use generated more traffic than would
normally be expected for a residence, as determined by the
Borough Council, upon recommendation of the Borough Engineer.
(4) When more than two outside employees are permitted by the
Zoning Hearing Board and/or customers, patient, clients, etc., will
come to the property, the home occupation proposal and use shall
comply with the parking requirements in Article XII of this chapter
and the applicable requirements of the East Greenville Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance.112
(5) Home occupations shall not include commercial businesses,
hospitals, clinics, animal hospitals, beauty or barber shops,
tearooms, hotels, boardinghouses or any similar use, except as
otherwise provided in this article.
(6) Home occupations shall be conducted entirely within the residence
and the area used for home occupation shall not exceed 25% of the
gross floor area of the residence, except that the Zoning Hearing
Board may permit the use of an accessory structure or the use of
more than 25% of the residence by special exception, in accordance
with Article XVI of this chapter and where all other requirements of
this section are met.
(7) Home occupations shall be subject to an annually renewable permit
secured from the Zoning Officer or Borough Secretary.
(8) The home occupation shall otherwise comply with the
requirements of this chapter, including the following provisions:
112. Editor's Note: See Ch. 85, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 95-155 WATER § 95-155
94:523
§ 95-156. Child day-care facilities.
(a) There shall be no exterior displays of goods visible from the
outside.
(b) There shall be no storage of materials or products outside a
principal or accessory building or other structure.
(c) There shall be no changes to the structure.
D. Uses accessory to noncommercial recreational use: customary
recreational, refreshment and service uses and buildings in any
noncommercial recreational area.
E. Other accessory uses. Accessory uses other than those listed in this
section may be permitted in compliance with the requirements for
principal uses in the district in which they are located and to which they
are accessory.
F. Any building used for an accessory use which exceeds 750 square feet
shall be subject to a conditional use approval by the Borough Council
and shall be set back a minimum of five feet from any property line and
have a maximum height of 15 feet.
A. Definitions.113
CHILD DAY-CARE FACILITY114 — Any dwelling, building or portion
thereof in which child day-care services are provided, including any onsite
outdoor play area. Child day-care facilities shall be differentiated
by the following three classifications:
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — Any premises or dwelling unit other
than the child's own home where the child care areas are being
used as a family residence, operated for profit or not for profit, in
which child day care is provided at any one time on a regular basis
to four, five or six children who are not relatives of the caregiver.
Day-care service for children in this type of facility is different from
baby-sitting.
(1)
GROUP DAY-CARE HOME — A facility in which care is provided
for more than six but fewer than twelve children, at any one time,
where the child care areas are being used as a family residence.
(2)
DAY-CARE CENTER — A facility which is licensed to provide care
for seven or more children at any one time, where the child care
areas are not being used as a family residence.
(3)
B. General provisions. The following general provisions apply to each of
the three defined types of child day-care facilities. In addition, each
113. Editor's Note: See also §§ 95-11 and 95-131.
114. Editor's Note: See also the definition of "DAY-CARE FACILITY, CHILD" in § 95-11.
§ 95-155 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-156
94:524
type of child day-care facility shall comply with the specific individual
regulations for each type of facility.
(1) Categories included. The provisions of this section pertain to daycare
service for children by caregivers in family day-care homes,
group day-care homes and day-care centers, subject to Chapter 11,
Section 8A, 8B and 8C, of the Pennsylvania Department of Public
Welfare (DPW) Social Services Manual Regulations. Day-care
service for children shall include out-of-home child day-care
services for part of a twenty-four-hour day for children under 16
years of age by caregivers, excluding care provided by relatives.
Day-care service for children shall not include baby-sitting or day
care furnished in places of worship during religious services.
(2) Registration and licensing. Family day-care homes, as defined in
this chapter, must hold an approved and currently valid DPW
registration certificate. Group day-care homes and day-care
centers, as defined in this chapter, must hold an approved and
currently valid DPW license. In addition, all child day-care facilities
shall comply with all current DPW regulations, including those
standards governing adequate indoor space, accessible outdoor
play space and any applicable state or local building and fire safety
codes.
(3) Borough notification. Each operator of a newly established child
day-care facility shall notify the borough in writing, at least 60 days
prior to the initiation of such use, for the purpose of allowing the
borough to establish a record of the new land use. Already existing
licensed or registered facilities shall be required to notify the
borough of their operation at least 60 days after the enactment of
this chapter. In addition, the operator of any facility must certify
compliance with all aspects of this chapter and all other applicable
borough requirements.
(a) Family day-care homes must provide proof of an approved
DPW registration certificate at the time of initial notification to
the borough and must show proof of the registration renewal
every two years.
(b) Group day-care homes and day-care centers must provide
proof of an approved and currently valid DPW license at the
time of initial notification to the borough and must provide
proof of annual license renewal.
(4) Inspection. The operator of a family day-care home, group day-care
home or day-care center will allow the borough's Code
Enforcement Officer to enter the property during hours of
operation to inspect such use for compliance with the requirements
of this section and all other applicable borough ordinances.
(5) General safety. No portion of a child care facility shall be located
within a three-hundred-foot distance from any potentially
§ 95-156 WATER § 95-156
94:525
hazardous land use or activity which could pose a threat to the
safety and welfare of the children, staff and other occupants at the
facility. Hazardous land uses or activities include, but shall not be
limited to, gasoline service stations, heavy industrial operations,
storage of flammable or high-pressure underground pipelines,
truck or rail loading areas, etc.
(6) Hours of outside play. Outside play shall be limited to the hours
between 8:00 a.m. and sunset, as defined by the National Weather
Service.
(7) Outdoor play area. An outdoor play area, as required by DPW
regulations, shall be provided for any proposed child day-care
facility.
(a) On-site outdoor plan area. An on-site outdoor structured play
area or areas of high outdoor activity shall be located in yard
areas which provide adequate separation, safety and
protection from adjoining uses, properties and roadways. The
on-site outdoor play area shall not be located in the front yard.
The outdoor play area should be located immediately adjacent
to the child-care facility.
(b) Off-site outdoor play area. In accordance with DPW
regulations, a child day-care facility may utilize off-site play
areas in lieu of or as a supplement to an on-site play area.
These standards permit the use of off-site play areas which are
located within 1/2 mile distance of the facility, measured from
the property line of the facility. When the use of an off-site play
area is proposed, the applicant shall inform the borough about
the means of transportation that will be used to access the offsite
play area. For reasons of safety, when children will be
walked to an off-site play area, the route to the off-site play
area shall not involve the crossing of arterial or major collector
streets. Pedestrian access on sidewalks or improved walkways
shall be required.
(8) Altering exterior of residential structures. Any addition or
improvement to an existing residential structure or property for
purposes of child day care shall preserve its residential character.
The scale, bulk, height and roof pitch of any addition and the
building materials used shall be compatible with the existing
structure. Any improvements to the structure shall be in
compliance with all other applicable borough regulations relating
to building and/or zoning permits.
(9) Traffic impact study. Any proposed child day-care facility which will
generate 100 or more new trips during the morning or evening
peak hour shall be required to conduct a traffic impact study. The
traffic impact study shall be prepared in compliance with pertinent
state and borough regulations and ordinances.
§ 95-156 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-156
94:526
(a) Objective. The purpose of the traffic impact study is to provide
the local Planning Commission and governing body with
adequate information and data to properly assess:
[1] The impact of the proposed facility on the surrounding
road and street network as well as on streets and roads
providing immediate access to the proposed facility.
[2] The need for capital improvements to the existing
transportation network which will be needed to
accommodate the additional traffic generated by the
proposed facility.
[3] Traffic and/or pedestrian safety issues which may arise
from the proposed facility.
(10) Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area for any proposed child
day-care facility shall comply with the minimum lot area
requirements of the zoning district in which the proposed facility is
located.
C. Family day-care homes. Any proposed family day-care home shall
comply with the following standards in addition to the general
provisions for all types of day-care facilities in § 95-156B.
(1) Where allowed. Permitted by right. Family day-care homes may be
located by right in any zoning district that allows the following
types of dwelling units, subject to the standards of the zoning
district in which the unit is located and the following development
standards in this section, whichever are more restrictive:
(a) Single-family detached dwelling units.
(b) Two-family dwelling units (twins; no duplex apartments).
(c) Townhouse or row house dwelling units.
(2) Development standards. The following standards shall apply to all
proposed family day-care homes.
(a) Dropoff area. One on-site dropoff space for clients shall be
provided. An existing driveway or common parking lot space
may be used as the dropoff area if it can be demonstrated that
there is sufficient space available in the driveway that is not
otherwise occupied or committed to safely accommodate a
parked vehicle. If a driveway is used for the dropoff area and
the proposed use fronts an arterial or major collector street, an
on-site turnaround area shall be provided so that vehicles can
exit the site driving forward. In cases where the existing
driveway cannot function as a dropoff area, an on-site dropoff
space shall be provided. The dropoff area shall conform to the
borough dimensional standards for residential parking spaces.
§ 95-156 WATER § 95-156
94:527
[1] In cases where the dropoff area cannot be accommodated
on the site, the applicant shall demonstrate that there is
on-street parking or some other available parking area
located within 250 feet of the property line of the proposed
facility.
[2] The required dropoff area may be waived by the borough if
the applicant can demonstrate that the clients of the family
day-care home will walk to the facility, thereby eliminating
the need for additional parking.
(b) Fencing. If there are unsafe areas, such as open drainage
ditches, wells, holes, heavy street traffic, etc., in or near to an
outdoor play area, there shall be fencing of adequate height
(four-foot minimum) and sufficient design to restrict children
from these areas.
D. Group day-care home. Any proposed group day-care home shall comply
with the following standards in addition to the general provisions for all
types of child day-care facilities in § 95-156B.
(1) Where allowed. Group day-care homes may be located by special
exception in any zoning district that allows the following types of
dwelling units, subject to the standards of the zoning district in
which the unit is located and the following additional standards in
this section, whichever are more restrictive:
(a) Single-family detached dwelling units.
(b) Two-family dwelling units (twins; no duplex apartments).
(c) Townhouse or row house dwelling units.
(2) Conditional use standards.
(a) Minimum distance between facilities.
[1] Residential zoning districts. In order to avoid a
concentration of individual group day-care homes in
residential neighborhoods, group day-care homes shall be
located a minimum of 300 feet from each other as
measured from the respective property lines. This
dispersion requirement shall not apply in cases where a
proposed group day-care home is located within 300 feet
of a school facility or church which provides child day-care
services.
[2] Nonresidential zoning districts. No minimum distance
requirement applies.
(b) On-site parking. There shall be one additional on-site parking
space provided for each nonresident employee above the
required for the residential use. The parking space shall
§ 95-156 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-156
94:528
conform to the borough dimensional standards for residential
parking spaces.
(c) Dropoff area. A dropoff area shall be provided with sufficient
area to allow the temporary parking of two vehicles. An
existing driveway or common parking lot spaces may be used
for the dropoff area if it can be demonstrated that there is
sufficient space available in the driveway that is not otherwise
occupied or committed to safely accommodate two parked
vehicles. If a driveway is used for the dropoff area and the
proposed use fronts an arterial or major collector street, an onsite
turnaround area shall be provided so that vehicles can exit
the site driving forward. In cases where the existing driveway
cannot function as a dropoff area, two new on-site dropoff
spaces shall be provided. The dropoff area shall conform to the
borough dimensional standards for residential parking spaces.
[1] In cases where the on-site dropoff area cannot be
accommodated, the applicant shall demonstrate that there
is on-street parking or some other available parking area
located within 250 feet of the property line of the proposed
facility.
(d) Fencing of outdoor play area. In order to physically contain the
activity of children in the outdoor play area, there shall be
fencing of adequate height (four-foot minimum) and sufficient
design to retain children, along the perimeter of the outdoor
play area. When applicable, the fence may be located along
property lines.
(e) Signs.
[1] Residential zoning districts. Signs shall comply with
standards governing signs for home occupations.
[2] Nonresidential zoning districts. Signs shall comply with
the standards governing signs for the zoning district in
which the proposed use is located.
E. Day-care centers. Any proposed day-care center shall comply with the
following standards in addition to the general provision for all types of
child day-care facilities in § 95-156B:
(1) Where allowed. Child day-care centers are permitted by special
exception in any Commercial, Limited Industrial or Institutional
Zoning District and in any facility of nonprofit organizations,
subject to the regulations of the zoning district in which the
proposed use is located and both the development standards and
the special exception standards in this section, whichever are more
restrictive.
§ 95-156 WATER § 95-156
94:529
(2) Development standards. The following standards shall apply to all
proposed day-care centers:
(a) Minimum distance between facilities. A minimum distance of
500 feet is required between facilities in nonresidential zoning
districts.
(b) On-site parking for employees and clients. A minimum of one
on-site parking space shall be provided for each 300 square
feet of floor area dedicated to child-care.
(c) Dropoff area.
[1] Number of dropoff spaces. A minimum of one safe dropoff
space shall be provided for each 20 children that the
facility is licensed to accommodate.
[2] Dropoff area location and design. Whenever possible, the
dropoff area shall be located immediately adjacent to the
facility. The dropoff area should be designed in such a way
that pedestrians do not cross vehicular traffic lanes in any
parking area or driveway. The dropoff area may be either
as a part of the on-site parking area or the required dropoff
spaces may be designed as a part of a driveway providing
direct access to the day-care facility.
[a] When the dropoff area is incorporated into the on-site
parking area, the parking spaces nearest to the facility
shall be designated as dropoff space.
[b] When the dropoff area is incorporated into a driveway,
the dropoff spaces shall be located within a vehicle
turnout area 12 feet in width exclusive of the driveway
through traffic lane(s).
(d) Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided in order to create
a vegetative buffer from adjacent uses as well as to create an
aesthetically pleasing environment.
[1] Buffer standards for lots on which a proposed day-care
center is located.
[a] Vegetative buffers. A vegetative screen buffer may be
required when deemed necessary by the Zoning
Hearing Board to meet the intent and goals of this
chapter. Criteria to be considered will include but not
be limited to the nature and type adjacent uses, lot
size of the subject property as well as the adjacent
properties and the distance to adjacent buildings. The
following standards shall apply to buffers when
required by the Board.
§ 95-156 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-156
94:530
[i] Buffers shall contain combinations of evergreen
and deciduous vegetation. The planted buffer
shall be a minimum of 10 feet in width and six feet
in height at the time of installation. Earthen
berms may be provided in combinations with
vegetative material. Earthen berms shall not
exceed four feet in height nor exceed a maximum
slope of 3 to 1.
[ii] Continued maintenance of vegetative buffers shall
be the responsibility of the operator of the facility.
[iii] Opaque fences or walls used to meet the
requirement for fencing of outdoor play areas may
be used in place of part of the required vegetative
buffer material.
[2] Landscaping in outdoor activity areas. Existing or
proposed planting material shall be suitable in and around
areas used by children. No thorny, poisonous or other
hazardous plants shall be allowed in areas used by
children.
(e) Fencing of outdoor play area. In order to physically contain the
activity of children in the outdoor play area, there shall be
fencing of adequate height (four-foot minimum) and sufficient
design to retain children, along the perimeter of the outdoor
play area. When applicable, the fence may be located along
property lines.
(f) Play equipment setback. Play equipment in designated on-site
play areas shall be located at least 10 feet from an abutting
property line.
(g) Signs. Day-care center signs shall comply with standards
governing signs for the zoning district in which the proposed
use is located.
(h) Lighting. All pedestrian pathways shall be adequately lit for
safety and security if utilized during nondaylight hours.
Specific areas for lighting are entranceways, pedestrian access
to the outdoor play areas, sidewalks used in nondaylight hours,
dropoff areas, merchandise delivery areas and all parking lots.
(i) Entrance/exit accessibility. When located in a multi-use
building complex, day-care center entrances/exits shall be
provided direct access to the child day-care center so that
walking through other significant portions of the building is
avoided.
§ 95-156 WATER § 95-156
94:531
§ 95-157. Short duration rental property.
(j) Soundproofing. When colocated in any building employing
noisy operations, the Zoning Hearing Board may require
soundproofing of the child-care center to protect the children.
(3) Special exception standards. The Zoning Hearing Board shall
consider the following when reviewing a special exception
application for a proposed day-care center in Limited Industrial
Zoning Districts and in any facility of nonprofit organizations. The
borough may impose any other conditions necessary to mitigate
any potential adverse impact on users of the site and/or
surrounding area.
(a) Safety. There shall be no land use or activity within the vicinity
of the proposed day-care center which would pose a threat to
the health, safety and welfare of the users of the facility.
Specifically, there shall be no objectionable or unsafe levels of
noise, vibration, fumes, odors, dust, glare, heat, toxic gases,
electric or electronic interference, liquid wastes or sewage,
vehicular loading and unloading activities and any other
physical activity on sites within the vicinity of the proposed
day-care center.
(b) Choice of access streets. When streets of different
classifications are involved, the driveway shall provide access
to the street of lesser functional classification.
A. Bed-and-breakfast home. A bed-and-breakfast home may be operated
by conditional use as a home occupation in all residential districts,
subject to the following regulations:
(1) A bed-and-breakfast home is allowed only in a single-family
detached dwelling.
(2) A bed-and-breakfast home must be run as a home occupation and
shall not have more than six guest rooms.
(3) No guest can stay for more than 14 days.
(4) One off-street parking space for each guest bedroom shall be
provided in a side or rear yard, in addition to any other required
parking. There shall be no parking allowed in the front yard.
(5) Meal service for guests is limited to breakfast. Owners shall comply
with all federal, state and local requirements for the preparation,
handling and serving of food.
(6) Owner shall maintain a current guest register.
(7) Bed-and-breakfast accommodations may not sell alcoholic
beverages.
§ 95-156 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-157
94:532
(8) Any modifications, additions, alternations, fire escapes, etc., are
allowed only to the side and rear of the structure. The structure's
facade shall be maintained to appear as a single-family dwelling.
(9) Signs, pursuant to the sign ordinance requirements. [Amended
3-2-1998 by Ord. No. 98-6]
(10) Each bed-and-breakfast facility shall be equipped with smoke
detectors and fire extinguishers in accordance with the
requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and
Industry and with the Borough Fire Code. Guests shall be provided
with information regarding the floor plan of the building and the
location of emergency exits.
(11) No cooking is allowed in guest rooms.
(12) All bed-and-breakfast homes must be licensed by the borough, with
the license to be renewed each year.
(13) All bed-and-breakfast homes will be inspected yearly by the
borough's building inspectors.
(14) As a home occupation, no outside employees are permitted.
(15) A bed-and-breakfast use shall not be permitted on a lot with an
area less than 10,000 square feet.
B. Bed-and-breakfast inn. A bed-and-breakfast inn is permitted in the BC
District and is subject to the following regulations:
(1) No guest rooms are allowed on the first floor.
(2) No more than 16 guest rooms are allowed.
(3) No guest can stay for more than 14 days.
(4) Meal service for guests is limited to breakfast. Owners shall comply
with all federal, state and local requirements for the preparation,
handling and serving the food.
(5) Owner shall maintain a current guest register.
(6) Bed-and-breakfast accommodations may not sell alcoholic
beverages.
(7) Any modifications, additions, alternations, fire escapes, etc., are
allowed only to the side and rear of the structure.
(8) Signs, pursuant to the sign ordinance requirements for the BC
District.
(9) Each bed-and-breakfast facility shall be equipped with smoke
detectors and fire extinguishers in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry and with the
Borough Fire Code. Guests shall be provided with information
§ 95-157 WATER § 95-157
94:533
§ 95-158. Performance standards.
Unless otherwise noted, the following performance standards apply to all
uses in all districts in the borough:
regarding the floor plan of the building and the location of
emergency exits.
(10) No cooking is allowed in guest rooms.
(11) All bed-and-breakfast inns must be licensed by the borough, with
the license to be renewed each year.
(12) All bed-and-breakfast inns will be inspected yearly by the borough's
building inspectors.
C. Hotel. A hotel is permitted in the BC District and is subject to the
following regulations: [Added 3-2-1998 by Ord. No. 98-6]
(1) No guest rooms are allowed on the first floor.
(2) If meal service is provided, owners shall comply with all federal,
state and local requirements for the preparation, handling and
serving of food.
(3) The owner shall maintain a current guest register.
(4) Alcoholic beverages may be sold only in accordance with
regulations established by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board
and only in facilities licensed by that Board.
(5) New hotel buildings and additions to existing such structures shall
be designed to compliment surrounding buildings in scale,
massing, style and material.
(6) Each hotel shall be equipped with smoke detectors, fire
extinguishers and shall be structured in accordance with
requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and
Industry and the BOCA Code, the Building Code of the Borough of
East Greenville. Guests shall be provided with information
regarding the floor plan of the building and the location of
emergency exits.
(7) No cooking is allowed in guest rooms.
(8) All hotels will be inspected yearly by the Code Enforcement Officer
who will issue a license annually to each such facility found in
compliance with pertinent provisions of this Code. Without such
license, the facility may not operate.
A. Smoke control. Visible air contaminants shall not be emitted in such a
manner that the opacity of the emissions is equal to or greater than
10% for a period or periods aggregating more than three minutes in any
§ 95-157 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-158
94:534
one hour or equal to or greater than 30% at any time and shall comply
with PA Code Title 25, Chapter 127.A(7) or its most recent update.
B. Particulate, vaporous and gaseous emissions.
(1) No emission shall be made which can cause any damage to health,
to animals or vegetation or other forms of property or which can
cause any excessive soiling at any point.
(2) No emission of particulate matter shall exceed 0.0115 grams per
dry standard cubic foot, correct to 7% oxygen. Provisions must be
made to reduce dew point cycling and resulting damage to
particulate control devices.
(3) For measurement of the amount of particles in gases resulting from
combustion, standard correction shall be applied to a stack
temperature of 500° F. and 50% excess air.
C. Hazardous air emission. All emissions shall comply with National
Emissions Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants promulgated by the
United States Environmental Protection Agency under the Federal
Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. § 7412), as promulgated in 40 CFR Part 61 or
its most recent update.
D. Noise control. At no point within or at the boundary of a residence or
business district shall the sound-pressure level of any operation exceed
the described levels in the designated octave bands shown below for
the districts indicated. Objectionable noises, due to intermittence, beat
frequency or shrillness, shall be muffled so as not to become a nuisance
to adjacent uses:
SOUND LEVELS
Maximum Permitted Sound Maximum Permitted Sound
Octave Band
(cycles per second)
Level Along
Residential District
Boundaries
(decibels)
Level at Any Other
Point on the Lot
Boundary
(decibels)
0 to 75 72 79
75 to 150 67 74
150 to 300 59 66
300 to 600 52 59
600 to 1,200 46 53
1,200 to 2,400 40 47
2,400 to 4,800 34 41
Above 4,800 32 39
E. Odor control:
§ 95-158 WATER § 95-158
94:535
§ 95-159. Residential conversions.
The Zoning Hearing Board may grant a special exception for the conversion
of any existing single-family detached dwelling into no more than two
additional dwelling units in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and BR Districts, subject
to the provisions of Article XVI of this chapter and the following restrictions.
(1) No person shall cause, suffer or permit the emission into the
outdoor atmosphere of any malodorous air contaminants from any
source in such a manner that the malodorous are detectable
outside the property of the person where the source is being
generated.
(2) The prohibition on odors shall not apply to odor emissions arising
from the premises of a farm operation.
(3) Any process which causes an odor emission shall be operated in a
manner such that escaping odors are eliminated. Backup odor
reduction equipment shall be maintained to support primary odor
reduction equipment.
F. Glare and heat control. Any operation producing intense glare or heat
shall be performed within an enclosed building or behind a solid fence
in such manner as to be completely imperceptible from any point
beyond the lot lines.
G. Vibration control. No vibration which is discernible to the human sense
of feeling shall be perceptible at any point beyond the lot line.
H. Radioactivity and electrical disturbance control. There shall be no
activities which emit dangerous or harmful radioactivity. There shall be
no electrical disturbance (except from domestic household appliances)
adversely affecting the operation of any equipment located beyond the
property of the creator of such disturbance.
I. Fire and explosive hazards. Flammable and explosive materials shall be
stored, used and transported in accordance with applicable state and
federal regulations regarding such materials and associated storage
vessels.
A. Minimum unit size. The size of each existing or newly created dwelling
unit shall be a minimum of 400 square feet, plus 100 square feet for
each bedroom. For example:
Number of Bedrooms in
Unit
Minimum Square Footage Required
per Unit
0 (efficiency) 400
1 500
2 600
B. Number of units permitted.
§ 95-158 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-159
94:536
§ 95-160. Access to a public street. [Amended 6-4-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-01]
Except as set forth in § 95-175 of this chapter, each and every lot shall abut
a public street for at least 25 feet at the right-of-way line of the public street;
and said 25 feet must be usable for purposes of ingress and egress to the
lot unless otherwise stated.
§ 95-161. Public utilities.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be so construed as to limit or
interfere with the construction, installation, operation and maintenance of
(1) Minimum lot size. In order to qualify for a residential conversion,
the existing dwelling unit must be located on a parcel that meets
the minimum lot size requirement for a single-family detached
dwelling in the zoning district where the dwelling is located and
shall provide an additional 3,500 square feet per lot for each
additional unit.
(2) Total units. Regardless of the size or number of existing dwelling
units, the total number of dwelling units on any one parcel after
conversion shall not exceed three.
(3) Restriction from development. Within 30 days of having obtained a
use and occupancy permit for any conversion unit(s), the applicant
shall record with the Montgomery County Recorder of Deeds deed
restrictions, easements or private covenants which shall be
acceptable to the Borough Solicitor for the purpose of permanently
restricting from further subdivision or land development the land
area required by this section.
C. General standards.
(1) There shall be no external alteration of the building except as may
be necessary for reasons of safety or improved design for otherwise
permitted units. Any alterations shall reflect the architectural
character of the existing building. Fire escapes and outside
stairways shall, where practicable, be located to the rear of the
building.
(2) Each dwelling unit shall have two direct means of access to the
outdoors or to a hall which directly accesses the outdoors.
(3) All residential conversions shall comply with the off-street parking
requirements of Article XII of this chapter. All dwelling units shall
share the existing driveway entrance(s) to the existing dwelling
unit.
(4) All dwelling units shall be provided with smoke detectors and fire
extinguisher. A dwelling unit located at or above the second story of
a converted structure must have a fire escape.
§ 95-159 WATER § 95-161
94:537
public utility structures or facilities in existence at the time of passage of
this chapter or which may hereafter be located within public easements
or rights-of-way designated for such purposes. The location of any such
construction not within a public easement or right-of-way, however, unless
specifically provided for in this chapter, shall be subject to approval of the
Zoning Hearing Board, which shall give consideration to the effect of such
construction or installation upon the public safety and the character of the
adjacent neighborhood.
§ 95-162. Projections into required yards.
No building and no part of a building shall be erected within or shall project
into any required yard in any district, except that:
§ 95-163. Height limitations of fences and walls.
No fence or wall, except a retaining wall or a wall of a building permitted
under the terms of this chapter, over six feet in height shall be erected
within any of the open spaces required by this chapter unless that portion
of the fence or wall which exceeds six feet in height has a ratio of open area
to solid area of at least 4 to 1. The Zoning Hearing Board may authorize
the erection of walls or fences of greater height in such cases as may be
necessary to provide adequate protection, shielding or screening of open
storage or equipment areas where allowed in LI Limited Industrial and C
Commercial Districts.
§ 95-164. Satellite dishes and antennas.
A. An unenclosed porch not more than 14 feet in height may be erected to
extend into a required front or rear yard a distance of not more than 10
feet, provided that in no case shall it extend into such front or rear yard
more than 1/2 the required depth of the yard.
B. A terrace, platform or landing place not covered by a roof, canopy or
trellis, which does not extend above the level of the first floor of the
building, may be erected to extend into a required yard a distance of
not more than 12 feet, provided that it shall not extend into such yard
more than 40% of the required depth or width of the yard.
C. A porte cochere or carport may be erected over a driveway in a
required side yard, provided that such structure is:
(1) Not more than 14 feet in height and 20 feet in length.
(2) Entirely open on at least three sides, exclusive of the necessary
supporting columns and customary architectural features.
D. A buttress, chimney, cornice, pier or pilaster of a building may project
not more than 18 inches into a required yard.
E. Open, unenclosed fire escapes, steps, bay windows and balconies may
project not more than three feet into a required yard.
§ 95-161 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-164
94:538
A. General standards.
(1) No advertising shall be affixed to any part of an antenna satellite
dish or supporting structure.
(2) Installation shall require a use and occupancy permit.
(3) All applications must include certification by a registered engineer
that the proposed installation complies with all applicable BOCA
Code standards, including load distributions within the building
support structure for roof-mounted installations.
(4) All installations shall be located to prevent obstruction of the
antenna or satellite dish reception window from potential
permitted development on adjoining properties.
(5) No antenna shall be located within the minimum front yard setback
area or minimum setback area of any yard abutting a street.
B. Ground-mounted antennas and satellite dish antennas. The accessory
use of ground-mounted antennas and satellite dish antennas shall meet
the standards and criteria for the following zoning districts.
(1) General standards. In any zoning district, permanent, extendable,
retractable or telescoping ground-mounted tower, mast or support
and accompanying antenna that is accessory to a permitted or
special use may be erected to a maximum height of 65 feet above
mean ground level as measured at the base of the structure,
provided that said antenna(s) may only be located in a side or rear
yard. The antenna tower must be set back from all applicable
minimum side and rear yard setbacks one foot for every one foot of
antenna height. For example, a forty-foot antenna must be set back
40 feet from the setback line. All installations must comply with all
other accessory use yard, height, bulk and setback requirements
specified within the district.
(2) All nonresidential districts. In all nonresidential districts, groundmounted
satellite dish antennas may be erected to maximum height
of 15 feet above mean ground level as measured from the base of
the structure. If the subject parcel abuts a residence district, all
such antennas shall be placed a minimum of 20 feet from any lot
line and effectively screened from any adjoining residential
property.
(3) All residential districts. In a residential district, one accessory
ground-mounted satellite dish antenna may be erected to a
maximum height of 12 feet above mean ground level as measured
at the base of the structure, and provided that the following criteria
are met:
§ 95-164 WATER § 95-164
94:539
(a) The satellite dish antenna shall be neutral in color and, to the
extent possible, be compatible with the character and
appearance or the surrounding neighborhood.
(b) All installations must include screening treatments located
along the antenna's nonreception window axis and low-level
ornamental landscape treatments along the reception window
axis of the antenna's base. Such treatments should completely
enclose the antenna(s).
C. Roof-mounted antennas and satellite dish antennas. The accessory use
of roof-mounted antennas and satellite dish antennas shall meet the
following standards and criteria.
(1) All residential districts: antennas. In any residential district, roofmounted
accessory antennas (except satellite dish antennas, unless
30 inches or less in diameter) may be erected on the roof of the
principal or accessory building to a maximum height of 20 feet
above the maximum height of the building on which it is located.
(2) All residential districts: satellite dish antennas. In any residential
district, roof-mounted satellite dish antennas (greater than 30
inches in diameter) may be erected, when granted by the Zoning
Hearing Board as a special exception, in compliance with the
provisions of Article XVII of this chapter and the following criteria:
(a) Demonstration by the applicant that compliance with the
applicable yard, setback and height restrictions would result in
the obstruction of the antenna's reception window;
furthermore, such obstruction involves factors beyond the
applicant's control.
(b) The height of the proposed installation does not exceed the
maximum height restriction impose upon primary and
accessory uses within the district.
(c) Only one satellite dish antenna (greater than 30 inches in
diameter) shall be permitted per lot.
(d) Satellite dish antennas shall not exceed 12 feet in diameter.
(e) Satellite dish antennas shall be neutral in color and, to the
extent possible, be compatible with the appearance and
character of the neighborhood.
(3) All nonresidential districts. In all nonresidential zoning districts,
roof-mounted accessory antennas of any type may be erected on
the roof of the principal or accessory building to a maximum height
of 35 feet above the maximum height of the building on which it is
located, provided that the following criteria are met:
§ 95-164 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-164
94:540
§ 95-165. Private ownership and maintenance of common elements.
Common elements, including but not limited to open space, recreation,
sewer, water and stormwater management facilities which will not be
publicly owned, shall be subject to a form of ownership established in
private agreements acceptable to the Borough Council, upon
recommendation of the Borough Solicitor. Such private ownership may
include, but is not limited to, corporate, individual, condominium, landlord
or fee-simple homeowners' or landowners' associations and shall be
governed by the following:
(a) Satellite dish antennas and microwave relay antennas shall not
be visible between ground level and 10 feet above ground level
from any street adjoining the lot.
(b) Satellite dish antennas shall not exceed 12 feet in diameter.
Microwave relay antennas shall not exceed four feet in
diameter.
(c) Satellite dish antennas, microwave relay antennas and their
accompanying support structures shall be neutral in color and,
to the extent possible, be compatible with the appearance and
character of the neighborhood.
A. Access to and use of these common elements may be restricted to the
following:
(1) Property owners or tenants within the development.
(2) Nearby property owners or tenants who wish to join.
B. Perpetual maintenance shall be guaranteed by trust indenture or
similar instrument, which:
(1) Shall be recorded with the Recorder of Deeds of Montgomery
County simultaneously with the recording of the final plan.
(2) Shall restrict the common elements by deed restrictions granting
the borough the right to enforce the restrictions.
(3) Shall include provisions for:
(a) Bonds posted by the developer to cover expenses incurred
before formation of a homeowners' association.
(b) Adjustment of association fees to account for inflation.
(c) A reserve fund to cover capital improvements and/or
unforeseen major maintenance requirements.
(d) Funds for professional management.
(4) Shall authorize the borough to maintain the common elements and
assess the private ownership accordingly if private ownership fails
§ 95-164 WATER § 95-165
94:541
§ 95-166. Refuse collection facilities.
In all zoning districts except the R-1 Low-Density, R-2 Medium-Density
Residential Districts and the residential development in the Commercial
District, refuse collection facilities must be provided by the applicant, either
inside the building(s) or within an area enclosed by either walls or opaque
fencing, according to the following provisions:
§ 95-167. Parking of commercial vehicles in residential district.
Routine on- or off-street parking of not more than one commercially
registered vehicle with no more than four axles and not more than twentysix-
thousand-pound gross vehicle weight rating, which is used regularly or
frequently for business purposes, shall be permitted. Routine parking of
more than one such vehicle shall constitute a business operation and shall
not be permitted in any residential district.
§ 95-168. Traffic impact study,
to function as required in the private agreements. This shall
include, but need not be limited to:
(a) Failure to clear streets and parking areas of snow.
(b) Failure to maintain stormwater control facilities.
(c) Failure to correct any hazardous conditions.
(d) Failure to perform, abide by and complete any duties,
obligations or requirements as set forth in the private
agreements and/or the final plan approval of the Borough
Council.
A. These facilities shall be architecturally compatible with the building(s).
B. Walls or fencing shall be designed to shield the refuse facilities from
direct view from adjacent properties, to a height of at least six feet.
C. These facilities shall be designed in a manner which can accommodate
large collection trucks.
D. Landscaping is encouraged around these facilities.
E. Refuse facilities attached to or within buildings shall be subject to the
same building setbacks as the buildings.
F. Refuse facilities detached from residential buildings shall be subject to
the setback of 10 feet from all property lines.
A. Intent. A traffic impact study is intended to enable the borough to
assess the traffic impacts of a proposal. Specifically, its purpose is to:
§ 95-165 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-168
94:542
(1) Identify any traffic problems that may be created in the existing
highway network as a result of the proposal.
(2) Delineate solutions to potential problems and to present
improvements to be incorporated into the proposal or into the
highway and/or public transit systems within the study area.
(3) Assist in the protection of air quality and the conservation of
energy and to encourage the use of public transit where available.
B. Preparation of study. The traffic impact study shall be prepared by a
qualified traffic engineer and/or transportation planner in accordance
with accepted traffic engineering standards, with the cost borne by the
applicant. The traffic study shall include sufficient information to assess
the impact of the proposed development on all roads within 1/2 mile
radius of the tract being developed. The study must demonstrate that
the proposed development will not adversely affect traffic circulation in
surrounding areas or else identify any traffic problems that might be
caused or aggravated by the use and delineate solutions to those
problems. Based on the findings of the study, the Borough Council may
require improvements which will alleviate hazardous or congested
situations as a condition for approval.
C. Applicability.
(1) A traffic impact study shall be submitted with all developments
with 50,000 or more square feet of building floor area and all
subdivisions of 30 or more dwelling units.
(a) Proposals which would not be required to produce a traffic
impact study by reason of size, above, must produce a study if
the expected number of trips generated per day exceeds 1,000.
(b) The anticipated number of trips per day shall be determined
through the use of the most recent addition of the Institute of
Transportation Engineers' (ITE) Trip Generation Report. The
proposed use or development shall be identified using the
appropriate ITE land use code. Where doubt exists, the
applicant shall seek guidance from the Borough Engineer.
(2) An application which requires a Traffic Impact Study shall not be
considered complete until the Traffic Impact Study is submitted to
the appropriate review body in accordance with the provisions of
this section.
(3) The appropriate review body, at its discretion, may require any
other subdivision, land development, zoning change, special
exception or conditional use application to be accompanied by a
traffic impact study.
§ 95-168 WATER § 95-168
94:543
§ 95-169. Landscaping and buffering.
All landscaping and buffer requirements shall meet standards set forth in
the East Greenville Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.115
§ 95-170. Procedure for conditional use application.
An application for any conditional use as specified in the various articles of
this chapter shall be considered by the Borough Council according to the
following procedure:
(4) The Borough Council may waive the requirement for a Traffic
Impact Study where, in the opinion of the Borough Council, the
proposal is not expected to create a significant traffic impact.
A. Application.
(1) The application shall be submitted to the Borough Council.
(2) The application shall include the request for approval of a
conditional use and sufficient information to document compliance
with the applicable standards of this chapter; a tentative sketch
plan of the proposed development shall be included.
(3) If necessary, the Borough Council shall submit one copy of the
application to the Montgomery County Planning Commission for its
advisory review and other copies to agencies and/or technical
consultants whose reviews may be relevant.
B. Public hearing.
(1) The Borough Council shall schedule a public hearing within 30 days
of the application date to consider the proposal, render a verbal
decision within 45 days of the application date or 15 days from the
close of the last hearing, whichever is later, and notify the
applicant, in writing, within five days after a verbal decision.
(2) The Borough Council shall consider the comments and
recommendations of the Montgomery Planning Commission, other
advisors and those present at the public hearing prior to deciding
to approve or deny the proposed use and any condition to be
imposed upon approval.
(3) The applicant shall demonstrate at the public hearing that the
proposed use shall not be contrary to the public health, safety and
welfare of the community. In particular, the applicant shall
demonstrate the adequacy of the proposed vehicular circulation
system and other roadway improvements, pedestrian circulation
system, utilities, buffering and screening and the protection of
natural resources.
115. Editor's Note: See Ch. 85, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 95-168 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-170
94:544
§ 95-171. Modification of side and rear yards. [Added 3-2-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-6]
Buildings or structures accessory to dwellings, regardless of the zoning
district in which located, may extend into mandated side and rear yards
so that the side and rear yard setbacks for such accessory buildings and
structures shall measure at least:
§ 95-172. Wireless telecommunications facilities. [Added 3-12-2001
by Ord. No. 01-5]
(4) The time limits in this section may be waived by the applicant as
necessary.
A. For lots less than 10,000 square feet in area: three feet.
B. For lots between 10,000 and 20,000 square feet in area: 10 feet.
C. For lots more than 20,000 square feet in area: 20 feet.
A. Legislative intent. It is the intent of this section to establish general
guidelines for the siting of wireless telecommunication facilities.
Specifically, it is the intent of this section to:
(1) Provide procedures and guidelines for the location, placement and
construction of wireless telecommunication facilities in the
Borough.
(2) Provide clear performance standards and review requirements
addressing the siting of wireless telecommunication facilities.
(3) Encourage the location of wireless telecommunication facilities on
existing structures, including utility poles, signs, water towers,
buildings and other wireless telecommunication facilities where
feasible.
(4) Encourage the use of public property and structures for wireless
telecommunication facilities to the greatest extent possible and
provide for mechanisms to achieve fair and equitable rental for the
use of such property.
(5) Ensure that wireless telecommunication facilities will be safe and
blend into their environment to the greatest extent possible.
(6) Encourage the site sharing of new and existing wireless
telecommunication facilities.
(7) Enhance the ability of wireless telecommunication services to
provide such services to the Borough quickly, effectively and
efficiently.
(8) Preserve the residential character of neighborhoods.
(9) Comply with the Telecommunications Act of 1996.
§ 95-170 WATER § 95-172
94:545
B. Permitted districts. Telecommunications antennas and their support or
attachment structures are permitted in the following districts:
(1) Telecommunications antennas mounted on attachment structures
are permitted by right in or on the following:
(a) BC Borough Commercial District.
(b) BR Borough Residential District.
(c) IN Institutional Districts.
(d) Any municipally owned property.
(2) Telecommunications antennas mounted on support structures are
permitted by conditional use in or on the following:
(a) LI Limited Industrial District.
(b) Any municipally owned property.
C. Regulations for telecommunications antennas.
(1) A telecommunications antenna shall not exceed the height of the
structure or building on which it is mounted, such as existing
telecommunications towers, public utility transmission towers,
smokestacks, water towers, buildings, other existing structures, or
proposed telecommunications towers, by more than 20 feet.
(2) Omnidirectional or whip telecommunications antennas shall not
exceed 20 feet in height or seven inches in diameter.
(3) Building-mounted telecommunications antennas shall not be
located on any single-family dwelling or two-family dwelling.
(4) Directional or panel telecommunications antennas shall not exceed
five feet in height or three feet in width.
(5) Any applicant proposing a telecommunications antenna that will be
mounted on a building or other structure shall submit the
following:
(a) Evidence from a Pennsylvania registered professional engineer
certifying that the proposed installation will not exceed the
structural capacity of the building or other structure,
considering wind and other loads associated with the antenna
location.
(b) Detailed construction and elevation drawings indicating how
the antenna will be mounted on the structure, for review by the
Borough Code Enforcement Officer for compliance with the
Borough Building Code and other applicable regulations.
(c) Evidence of agreements and/or easements necessary to
provide access to the building or structure on which the
§ 95-172 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-172
94:546
antenna is to be mounted so that installation and maintenance
of the antenna and telecommunications equipment can be
accomplished.
(6) The owner or operator of a telecommunications antenna shall be
licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to
operate such an antenna.
(7) One off-street parking space shall be provided for a
telecommunications equipment building and/or
telecommunications tower.
(8) The installation of a telecommunications antenna not involving the
construction of a new building, a new building addition or a
telecommunications tower does not require the submittal of a land
development plan.
D. Regulations for telecommunications equipment buildings.
(1) Telecommunications equipment buildings shall meet the height and
setback requirements for principal buildings in the zoning district
in which the building is located.
(2) Property line buffers and site element screens shall be provided to
screen the building in accordance with the Borough's Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance, but shall not interfere with the
operation of the equipment, tower or antenna.
(3) The construction or installation of a telecommunications equipment
building shall be considered a land development and shall be
accompanied by a site plan as required by the Borough's
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
E. Regulations for telecommunications towers.
(1) Telecommunications towers shall only be permitted by conditional
use when the following conditions have been met:
(a) The applicant demonstrates, using technological evidence, that
the communications tower must be located where proposed in
order to satisfy its function in a company's grid system.
(b) The applicant demonstrates that it contacted the owners of tall
structures, buildings and towers within a one-quarter-mile
radius of the site proposed, asked for permission to install an
antenna on those structures, buildings, and towers, and was
denied for one of the following reasons:
[1] The proposed antenna and related equipment would
exceed the structural capacity of the existing building,
structure, or tower, and its reinforcement cannot be
accomplished at a reasonable cost.
§ 95-172 WATER § 95-172
94:547
[2] The proposed antenna and related equipment would cause
radio frequency interference with other existing
equipment for that existing building, structure, or tower
and the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable
cost.
[3] Such existing buildings, structures, or towers do not have
adequate location, space, access, or height to
accommodate the proposed equipment or to allow it to
perform its intended function.
[4] A commercially reasonable agreement could not be
reached with the owners of such building, structure, or
tower.
(c) The tower shall not exceed 100 feet in height.
(d) The applicant agrees that the telecommunications tower shall
be dismantled and removed if the tower remains unused for a
period of 12 consecutive months. Such dismantling and
removal shall occur within six months of the expiration of the
twelve-month period. If the owner of the telecommunications
tower does not dismantle and remove the telecommunications
tower within the above specified six months, the Borough may
assume responsibility of dismantling and removing the
telecommunications tower and may assess costs to the owner
of the telecommunications tower.
(e) The applicant agrees that, in order to reduce the number of
telecommunications towers needed in East Greenville Borough
in the future, the proposed telecommunications tower shall be
able to support at least three antennas and be able to
reasonably accommodate other users, including other
communication companies, and local police, fire, and
ambulance companies.
(2) Additional regulations.
(a) The foundation and base of any telecommunications tower
shall be set back from property lines (not lease lines) by the
larger of the following:
[1] The minimum setback in the underlying zoning district.
[2] A distance equal to 50% of the height of the
telecommunications tower from all property lines.
(b) All support structures shall be fitted with anti-climbing
devices, as approved by the manufacturers.
(c) A security fence shall be required around the
telecommunications tower and other equipment. The fence
shall be a minimum of six feet in height and shall not exceed
§ 95-172 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-172
94:548
eight feet in height. A nameplate which contains the name,
address and emergency telephone number of the operator of
the support structure shall be placed at eye level on the
security fence.
(d) All guy wires associated with guyed telecommunications
towers shall be clearly marked so as to be visible at all times
and shall be located within a fenced enclosure. Guy wires and
their anchors shall be set back at least 25 feet from property
lines.
(e) Telecommunications towers shall be painted silver or have a
galvanized finish above the tree line in order to reduce the
visual impact. Telecommunications towers shall be painted
appropriately below the tree line so as to blend into the natural
or physical context of its surroundings.
(f) No signs or lights shall be mounted on a telecommunications
tower, except as may be required by the Federal
Communications Commission, Federal Aviation Administration
or other governmental agency which has jurisdiction.
(g) Access shall be provided to the telecommunications tower and
telecommunications equipment building by means of a public
street or easement to a public street. The easement shall be a
minimum of 20 feet in width and shall be improved to a width
of at least 10 feet with a dust-free, all-weather surface for its
entire length.
(h) Property line buffers and site element screens shall be
provided to screen the base of the support structure, in
accordance with the Borough's Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.
(i) A telecommunications tower may be located on a lot occupied
by other principal structures and may occupy a leased parcel
within a lot meeting the minimum lot size requirements for the
zoning district.
(j) The construction or installation of telecommunications towers
and any associated equipment buildings shall be considered a
land development and shall be accompanied by a site plan as
required by the Borough's Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.
(k) The applicant shall demonstrate that the structure has been
designed to blend in with or mimic existing features in the
landscape such as trees or flagpoles.
(l) Landscaping shall be installed to mitigate for the visual impact
of a telecommunications structure. Such landscaping shall
meet the following requirements:
§ 95-172 WATER § 95-172
94:549
[1] Landscaping shall be installed to screen and buffer the
support structure and any ground level features, such as
an equipment building, from adjacent buildings.
[2] The landscape screen shall be a minimum height of six feet
at planting, and reach a minimum of 15 feet at maturity.
[3] Existing vegetation on and around the site shall be
preserved to the greatest extent possible.
[4] The Borough may permit a combination of existing
vegetation, topography, walls, decorative fences or other
features when it achieves the intent of this section.
(m) The applicant shall submit a copy of its current FCC license;
the name, address and emergency telephone number of the
operator of the support structure; and a certificate of
insurance evidencing general liability coverage in the
minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence and property
damage coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per
occurrence covering the telecommunications support
structure and telecommunications antennas.
(n) The applicant shall submit certification from a Pennsylvania
registered professional engineer that a proposed
telecommunications support structure will be designed and
constructed in accordance with the current structural
standards for steel antenna towers and antenna support
structures, published by the Electrical Industrial Association/
Telecommunications Industry Association and applicable
requirements of East Greenville's Building Code.
(o) Inspections. By July 1 of each year, an inspection shall be
performed by an independent registered professional engineer
acceptable to the Borough and paid by the owner or operator.
Verification shall be provided to the Borough Zoning Officer
that there have been no changes in the operating
characteristics of the telecommunications support structure
since the issuance of the zoning permit for the facility,
including at minimum:
[1] Direction of signal;
[2] Frequency, modulation and class of service;
[3] Transmission and maximum effective radiated power;
[4] Manufacturer, type, and model of equipment;
[5] Height of the support structures and antennas;
[6] Name, address, and emergency telephone number of the
operator;
§ 95-172 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-172
94:550
§ 95-173. Renewable energy systems. [Added 8-26-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-04]
[7] Copy of the current FCC license;
[8] Review of all reasonable requests of shared use of the
support structure.
(p) Any wireless telecommunication facility that is no longer a
licensed and active receiving or transmitting facility shall be
removed at the owner's expense within 60 days of the last date
that the facility was licensed by the FCC. If there are two or
more users of a single support structure, this provision shall
not become effective until all the users cease using the support
structure. Prior to construction of any facility, a bond or escrow
account shall be posted with the Borough in an amount
sufficient to ensure such removal. The bond or escrow shall be
used by the Borough in the event that the owner or operator of
the telecommunication support structure fails to remove the
facility within the time period prescribed above. Any portion of
the bond or escrow not used by the Borough shall be returned
to the owner or operator at such time that the facility becomes
inactive or loses its FCC license.
A. Purpose and intent.
(1) The purpose of this section is to provide a regulatory framework for
the construction and operation of solar energy systems, geothermal
energy systems, and small wind energy systems in East Greenville
Borough, subject to reasonable restrictions which will protect the
public health, safety, and welfare, while also maintaining the
character of East Greenville Borough.
(2) This section also seeks to promote the safe, effective, and efficient
use of renewable energy systems which are installed to reduce the
on-site consumption of utility-supplied electricity.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ABANDONED WELL — Any individual well in existence prior to
enactment of these regulations which has not been in service for a
period of three consecutive years.
ANNULAR SPACE — The space between two cylindrical objects, one of
which surrounds the other, such as the space between a drill hole and a
casing pipe.
AQUIFER — A saturated permeable geological formation that stores
and transmits significant quantities of water under ordinary hydraulic
gradients.
§ 95-172 WATER § 95-173
94:551
BLADE CLEARANCE — Required minimum distance between the
lowest point of a rotor blade and the ground surface below it.
BORING/BOREHOLE — A penetration of soil and/or rock that is
augured, drilled, cored, bored, washed, driven, dug, jetted, or
otherwise constructed which is generally cylindrical in shape and
whose diameter is generally smaller than its depth of penetration.
BUILDING-INTEGRATED PHOTOVOLTAIC (BIPV) SYSTEM — A solar
energy system that consists of integrating solar PV modules into the
building envelope, where the solar panels themselves act as a building
material (e.g., roof shingles) or as a structural element (e.g., facade).
CASING — An impervious durable pipe placed in a well to prevent the
walls from caving and to seal off surface drainage or undesirable water,
gas, or other fluids and prevent their entering the well.
CLOSED-LOOP GEOTHERMAL WELL SYSTEM — A heat pump system
using groundwater, surface water, or subsurface as the heating/cooling
source which continuously circulates a heat transferring liquid through
sealed pipe and a heat exchanger. The internal liquid is not consumed
from or discharged into the environment.
GEOTHERMAL ENERGY SYSTEM — A system that uses a heat pump to
extract heat from the earth in heating mode and/or reject heat into the
earth in cooling mode. Also known as: geothermal heat pump system,
ground-coupled heat pump system, earth-source heat pump system, or
GeoExchange system.
GEOTHERMAL WELL — A well installed for the purpose of extracting
water for heating or cooling.
GROUND-MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A solar energy
system which is not mounted on an existing structure.
GROUND-SOURCE HEAT PUMP — A geothermal heat pump that uses
the earth itself as a heat source and heat sink. It is coupled to the
ground by means of a closed-loop heat exchanger installed horizontally
or vertically underground.
GROUT — A high-solids fluid mixture of cement or bentonite and
potable water of a consistency that can be pumped through a tremie
pipe and placed as required. Various additives, such as sand or
bentonite, may be included in the mixture to meet certain
requirements.
HEAT PUMP — A mechanical device used for heating and/or cooling
which operates by pumping heat from a cooler to a warmer location.
HORIZONTAL AXIS WIND TURBINE — A type of wind turbine in which
the axis of rotation is parallel to the ground, and the blades are
perpendicular to the ground.
HORIZONTAL CLOSED-LOOP SYSTEM — A closed-loop geothermal
energy system where the loops of the pipe are laid horizontally, in the
ground, in trenches.
§ 95-173 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-173
94:552
MONITORING WELL — A well used to observe water levels and/or
obtain samples of groundwater.
NACELLE — The structure that houses all of the generating
components, gearbox, drive train, etc., of a wind turbine.
NAMEPLATE CAPACITY — The maximum rated output of a generator,
prime mover, or other electric power production equipment under
specific conditions designated by the manufacturer.
OPEN-LOOP GEOTHERMAL WELL SYSTEM — A heat pump system
using groundwater or surface water as the heat/cooling source,
circulated through the heat exchanger and returned to the environment
via a separate discharge point.
PHOTOVOLTAIC (PV) SYSTEM — A solar energy system that produces
electricity by the use of semiconductor devices, called photovoltaic (PV)
cells, which generate electricity whenever light strikes them.
PLUME — An area of identified, delineated groundwater or soil
contamination associated with any property considered to be a threat
to the environment or human health, such as, but not limited to, a
superfund site.
RETURN WELL — A well designed and constructed for the return of
water to the ground. Also known as reinjection well.
ROOF-MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A solar energy system
which is mounted on an existing structure.
ROTOR — The blades and hub assembly of a wind turbine.
ROTOR DIAMETER — The cross-sectional dimension of the circle swept
by the rotating blades.
SHADOW FLICKER — The on-and-off flickering effect of a shadow
caused when the sun passes behind the rotor of a wind turbine.
SOLAR ACCESS — The ability of one property to continue to receive
sunlight across property lines without obstruction from another's
property (buildings, foliage, or other impediments).
SOLAR COLLECTOR — A solar photovoltaic (PV) cell, panel, or array, or
solar hot air or water collector device, which relies upon solar radiation
as an energy source for the generation of electricity or transfer of
stored heat.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — An energy system which converts solar
energy into usable thermal, mechanical, chemical, or electrical energy
to meet all or a significant part of a structure's energy requirements.
STANDING-COLUMN GEOTHERMAL WELL SYSTEM — A type of openloop
geothermal heating and/or cooling system that circulates
groundwater from a water well through a heat exchanger and returns
the discharge water from the water-source heat pump to the same
water well that it was pumped from. The water withdrawal and return
locations within the water well bore are separate as far as is possible.
§ 95-173 WATER § 95-173
94:553
Some standing-column geothermal systems discharge some of the
circulating groundwater to enhance their heat transfer.
TEST WELL — A well constructed for the purpose of obtaining
information on groundwater or hydrogeologic conditions including
yield and quality.
TOTAL EXTENDED HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the ground
level to the tip of a wind generator blade when the tip is at its highest
point.
TOWER — A guyed or freestanding structure, anchors, and foundation
that is specifically engineered to support a small wind turbine.
TOWER HEIGHT — The height above grade of the fixed portion of the
tower, excluding the wind turbine itself.
TREMIE PIPE — A rigid or flexible pipe or hose that carries the
grouting materials to the bottom of the zone being grouted. The tremie
pipe is withdrawn as the grout material fills the annular space outside
the casing or fills the space between the loop pipes and the borehole
wall. The end of the tremie pipe is kept submerged just below the
surface of the grout material.
VERTICAL CLOSED-LOOP SYSTEM — A closed-loop geothermal
energy system where the loops of the pipe are laid vertically, into the
ground, in well borings.
VERTICAL-AXIS WIND TURBINE — A type of wind turbine in which the
axis of rotation is perpendicular to the wind stream and the ground.
WATER TABLE — That surface in an unconfined groundwater body at
which the pressure is atmospheric. It is defined by the levels at which
water stands in wells that penetrate the water body just far enough to
hold standing water.
WATER-SOURCE HEAT PUMP — A heat pump that uses a water-torefrigerant
heat exchanger to extract heat from the heat source.
WELL — Any excavation that is drilled, cored, bored, washed, driven,
dug, jetted, or otherwise constructed when the intended use of such
excavation is for the location, acquisition, or artificial recharge of
groundwater. This includes but is not limited to test wells, test borings,
geothermal and monitoring wells, in addition to wells to be utilized as
individual water supplies.
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — Equipment that converts, and then stores
or transfers, energy from the wind into usable forms of energy, which
has a nameplate capacity of not more than 20 kW and which is intended
to primarily reduce on-site consumption of utility power. This
equipment includes any base, blade, foundation, generator, nacelle,
rotor, transformer, vane, wire, inverter, batteries, or other component
in the system.
C. General regulations for solar energy systems.
§ 95-173 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-173
94:554
(1) Applicability.
(a) Solar energy systems shall be a permitted accessory use in all
zoning districts by right.
(b) All solar energy systems shall provide on-site power or energy
for the principal use and/or another accessory use on the same
lot, parcel, or unit on which the solar energy system is located
and shall not be primarily used to convert energy for
commercial or other off-site transfer or use. This provision
shall not be interpreted to prohibit the sale of electricity
generated in excess of on-site requirements under an
interconnection agreement, net metering agreement, or power
purchase agreement.
(c) Owners of solar energy systems are encouraged but not
required to obtain solar easements from neighboring
landowners to ensure solar access. The Borough does not
guarantee and will not protect any individual property rights
with respect to solar access.
(2) Height.
(a) A roof-mounted or wall-mounted solar energy system shall
comply with the following:
[1] A solar energy system shall not project vertically above the
peak of the roof to which it is attached.
[2] If the solar energy system is located on a flat roof, it shall
not project vertically greater than 10 feet above the roof
plane.
[3] In no case shall the height of the solar energy system
exceed five feet above the zoning district's maximum
height limit.
(b) Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall not exceed a
height of 15 feet.
(3) Setbacks and lot coverage.
(a) A roof-mounted solar energy system shall comply with the
following:
[1] On residential properties, a three-foot-wide perimeter
around the roof edge must be maintained for fire
department access.
[2] On nonresidential properties, a six-foot-wide perimeter
around the roof edge must be maintained for Fire
Department access.
§ 95-173 WATER § 95-173
94:555
[3] On all properties, a three-foot-wide setback along the roof
ridgelines must be maintained for firefighters to be able to
penetrate the roof to create ventilation.
[4] On all properties, a 1.5-foot-wide setback from all roof hips
and valleys must be maintained to ensure that firefighters
may access the roof in a quick and safe manner if solar
panels are installed on both sides of the roof hip or valley.
(b) A ground-mounted or wall-mounted solar energy system shall
comply with the following:
[1] The location of the ground-mounted solar energy system
shall meet all applicable accessory-structure setback
requirements (§ 95-171).
[2] Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall not be
permitted in a front yard or facing any street frontages
unless the applicant can prove such installation would
make the system financially impractical otherwise and can
be installed meeting all other requirements.
[3] For purposes of determining compliance with building and
impervious coverage standards of the applicable zoning
district, the total horizontal projection area of all groundmounted
and freestanding solar collectors, including solar
photovoltaic cells, panels, arrays, inverters and solar hot
air or water collector devices, shall not be considered
impervious coverage.
(4) Aesthetics and screening.
(a) The design of solar energy systems shall, to the extent
reasonably possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening,
and landscaping that will blend the facility into the natural
setting and existing environment and shall not be used to
display advertising or decoration, including signage,
streamers, pennants, spinners, reflectors, ribbons, tinsels,
balloons, flags, banners, lights, or similar items.
Manufacturers and equipment information, safety warnings,
and ownership information may be displayed on solar energy
system equipment provided such information complies with
applicable sign regulations.
(b) All solar energy system components shall be clearly labeled
with a warning concerning voltage and other important
electrical safety information.
(c) An applicant shall locate a solar energy system so that tree
removal is not required, to the extent reasonably possible.
§ 95-173 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-173
94:556
[1] No street tree shall be removed for the placement of a
solar energy system.
[2] If a tree located in the front yard and visible from the
public right-of-way must be removed, it shall be replaced
with a tree selected from the lists of shade trees in
§ 85-40A and B herein, provided the replacement tree is
located as close to its original position as practical.
(d) All solar panels and solar energy collectors shall be located so
as to not create any additional heat load or direct solar glare
upon neighboring properties.
(5) Decommissioning requirements.
(a) If a solar energy system remains nonfunctional or inoperative
for a continuous period of one year, the system shall be deemed
to be abandoned and shall constitute a public nuisance, with
the exception of BIPV systems. The owner shall remove the
system within six months of abandonment after a demolition
permit has been obtained in accordance with the following:
[1] Any aboveground mechanical equipment, wiring, and
structural components shall be removed.
[2] Underground wiring and structural components shall be
removed and the resulting void space filled.
(b) When a ground-mounted or freestanding solar energy system
is removed, any disturbed earth as a result of the removal of
the system shall be restored, graded and reseeded.
(6) Compliance with other regulations.
(a) To the extent applicable, the solar energy system shall comply
with the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code, Act 45 of
1999,116 as amended, and the regulations adopted by the
Department of Labor and Industry.
(b) All installers must be on the official list of registered installers
through the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection's Solar Sunshine program.
D. General regulations for geothermal energy systems.
(1) Permitting.
(a) It shall be unlawful to install a new geothermal well or modify
an existing geothermal well without a valid permit.
(b) Prior to constructing a new geothermal well or modifying an
existing geothermal well, the property owner shall file all
116. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 95-173 WATER § 95-173
94:557
appropriate applications with the municipality, county, or other
regulating agency and pay all applicable fees.
(c) The application to construct or alter a geothermal well must be
filed on behalf of the current owner or equitable owner.
(d) The Borough shall approve or deny the application within 15
working days of receipt of a complete application and the
appropriate fee. The Borough must field verify the location of
the proposed geothermal well(s) and all applicable isolation
distances. When the Borough has found an application to be
incomplete, or the Borough is unable to verify the information
submitted, the applicant shall be notified in writing that
additional information or clarification is required. The
Borough's time for acting upon a permit shall be extended 15
days beyond the date of receipt of the supplementary or
amendatory information.
(e) Any relocation of the proposed geothermal well site from the
permitted location must be submitted in writing and approved
by the Borough.
(f) If geothermal well construction is not completed in three years
from the permit issuance date, the approval to construct shall
expire.
(g) All geothermal well applications must include the following
information:
[1] Applicant name and signature, address, and telephone
number.
[2] Site address, subdivision name, lot number, and
municipality.
[3] Driller name, PADCNR license number, and telephone
number.
[4] Tax parcel number.
[5] Description of construction.
[6] Plot plan including:
[a] Property lines, lot dimensions, slope direction,
adjacent streets, and reference to north.
[b] Marked distances from the proposed geothermal well
to any existing and proposed water supplies,
buildings, driveways, parking areas, two nonparallel
property lines, retention areas, surface waters,
chemical/fuel storage areas, and any other feature
§ 95-173 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-173
94:558
that requires an isolation distance as defined in this
section.
(2) Geothermal system standards.
(a) Geothermal wells shall be constructed to the standards
outlined in the Montgomery County Public Health Code,
Chapter 17, "Individual Water Supply, Irrigation Well, and
Geothermal Well System Regulations."
(b) All wells shall be constructed by a Pennsylvania Department of
Conservation and Natural Resources (DCNR) licensed water
well driller or an International Ground Source Heat Pump
Association (IGSHPA) accredited geothermal system installer.
(c) Only closed loop geothermal well systems or standing-column
geothermal well systems are allowed.
(d) Open loop geothermal well systems, except for standingcolumn
geothermal well systems, are prohibited. Separate
supply and reinjection wells are prohibited.
(3) Location of geothermal systems.
(a) The applicant and/or well driller/installer is responsible for
ensuring maintenance of all isolation distances set forth in this
section.
(b) Isolation distances. Minimum isolation distances shall be
maintained from the proposed individual geothermal well to
the facilities listed below.
Minimum Setback from Landmark to Borehole or
Geothermal Supply or Return Well
Closed-Loop
Systems
Standing-
Column Well
Systems
Delineated wetlands,
floodplains, lakes,
ponds, streams, or
other surface waters
12.5 feet* 25 feet*
Storm drains, retention
basins, stormwater
stabilization ponds, or
rainwater pits
12.5 feet* 25 feet*
Community spray
irrigation site, sewage
sludge and septage
disposal site
50 feet* 100 feet*
§ 95-173 WATER § 95-173
94:559
Minimum Setback from Landmark to Borehole or
Geothermal Supply or Return Well
Closed-Loop
Systems
Standing-
Column Well
Systems
Farm silos, barnyards,
manure pits or tanks or
other storage areas of
animal manure
100 feet* 200 feet*
Subsurface sewage
absorption areas,
elevated sand mounds,
cesspools, sewage
seepage pits, singlefamily
spray irrigation
system, etc.
50 feet* 100 feet*
Septic tanks, aerobic
tanks, sewage pump
tanks, holding tanks
25 feet* 50 feet*
Gravity sewer lines and
drains carrying
domestic sewage or
industrial waste (unless
item below applies)
25 feet* 50 feet*
A. Gravity sewer
lines and drains
using cast iron
pipe with
watertight leadcaulked
or
neoprenegasketed
joints,
or Schedule 40
PVC pipe with
solvent-welded
joints
5 feet* 10 feet*
B. Sewer lines and
drains carrying
domestic sewage
or industrial
waste under
pressure (except
welded steel pipe
or concrete
encased pipe)
25 feet* 50 feet*
§ 95-173 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-173
94:560
Minimum Setback from Landmark to Borehole or
Geothermal Supply or Return Well
Closed-Loop
Systems
Standing-
Column Well
Systems
Commercial
preparation area or
storage area of
hazardous spray
materials, fertilizers or
chemicals, salt piles
150 feet* 300 feet*
Existing water and
forced sewer buried
utilities and/or utility
trenches
15 feet or outside easement
Dedicated public rightof-
way and property
lines
10 feet
Building foundations
(except buildings
enclosing water wells
and/or water well
pumps)
10 feet
Identified NPL
(Superfund) site plume
area
300 feet
Any other source or
potential source of
pollution
As approved
* These amounts are the minimum isolation distances
required by Montgomery County Health Department
(MCHD) Code § 17-7. Any deviation or modification from
these isolation distances must be reviewed and approved
by the MCHD.
(c) Any proposed deviation or modification from the above listed
isolation distances must be submitted in writing to the
Borough, and the Montgomery County Health Department
(MCHD), if applicable, stating reasons for such deviation or
modification. Upon review of the material, a waiver may be
granted. Additional conditions may be required prior to permit
issuance. These conditions may also be applied to isolation
distances unable to be determined by the applicant.
(4) Installation and maintenance.
§ 95-173 WATER § 95-173
94:561
(a) The geothermal system must be designed and installed in
conformance with IGSHPA Heat Pump Systems Design and
Installation Standards, as same may be amended and updated
from time to time.
(b) All geothermal systems shall be properly maintained in
accordance with manufacturer's specifications, the installer's
specifications, and any applicable federal, state, and local laws.
(5) Decommissioning requirements.
(a) All abandoned wells must be filled and sealed according to the
PADEP/DCNR Water Well Abandonment Guidelines. A copy of
the PADEP/DCNR Water Well Abandonment form shall be
submitted to MCHD within 30 days of abandonment.
(b) Any and all heat transfer fluid must be removed by
displacement with grout. The top of the borehole must be
uncovered and capped with grout in a manner acceptable to
the Borough and MCHD.
(c) If applicant/homeowner chooses not to abandon the well, a
nonabandonment declaration must be signed and submitted to
MCHD within 30 days.
(d) Abandonment procedures may be subject to MCHD inspection.
(6) Compliance with other regulations. If any provision of this section
conflicts with any applicable county, state, or federal law, rule, or
regulation which is more strict or which is determined to preempt a
provision of this section, the applicable county, state, or federal
requirement shall control.
E. General regulations small wind energy systems.
(1) Applicability.
(a) Wind energy systems shall be a permitted accessory use in all
zoning districts by right.
(b) All wind energy systems shall provide on-site power or energy
for the principal use and/or another accessory use on the same
lot, parcel, or unit on which the wind energy system is located
and shall not be primarily used to convert energy for
commercial or other off-site transfer or use. This provision
shall not be interpreted to prohibit the sale of electricity
generated in excess of on-site requirements under an
interconnection agreement, net metering agreement, or power
purchase agreement.
(2) Permitting.
§ 95-173 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-173
94:562
(a) It shall be unlawful to install a new wind energy system or
modify an existing wind energy system without a valid permit.
(b) Any relocation of the proposed wind energy system from the
permitted location must be submitted in writing and approved
by the Borough.
(c) If the wind energy system is not installed and functioning
within three years from the permit issuance date, the approval
to construct shall expire.
(d) The zoning permit application shall be accompanied by a plot
plan which includes the following information:
[1] Property lines and physical dimensions of the property;
[2] Location, dimensions, and types of existing major
structures on the property;
[3] Location of the proposed wind energy system tower;
[4] The right-of-way of any public road that is contiguous with
the property;
[5] Any public overhead utility lines or easements;
[6] Wind energy system specifications, including
manufacturer and model, rotor diameter, tower height,
tower type (freestanding or guyed), and any manufacturerrecommended
installation and maintenance standards.
(e) Foundation plans and analysis shall be submitted by a certified
engineer for the installation of any tower taller than 35 feet.
(f) Applications for roof-mounted (or other nontraditionally
mounted) wind energy systems must include a wet stamped/
sealed/certified structural engineering analysis for the turbine
mounting system and for the suitability of the building to which
the turbine is to be mounted.
(3) Height and setbacks.
(a) The base of the tower shall be set back from all property lines,
public rights-of-way, designated important bird areas, and
overhead public utility lines a distance equal to 1.1 times the
total extended height.
(b) Ground-mounted wind energy systems shall not be permitted
in a front yard or facing any street frontages unless the
applicant can prove such installation would make the system
financially impractical otherwise and can be installed meeting
all other requirements.
§ 95-173 WATER § 95-173
94:563
(c) Ground-mounted wind energy systems shall not be permitted
in easement areas, unless specifically allowed.
(d) The total extended height of the wind energy system shall be a
maximum of 35 feet in the R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 Residential,
BR-Borough Residential, and BC-Borough Commercial
Districts.
(e) The total extended height of the wind energy system shall be a
maximum of 60 feet in the LI-Limited Industrial and INSTInstitutional
Districts.
(4) Aesthetics.
(a) The wind energy system components shall be of a neutral
color; such as white, off-white, or gray.
(b) The wind energy system shall not be artificially lighted, unless
required by Federal Aviation Administration regulations.
(c) The wind energy system shall not display advertising, except
for reasonable identification of the turbine manufacturer and
any required safety warnings.
(d) All wiring between the wind turbine and any structure shall be
buried below the surface of the ground.
(5) Sound.
(a) The audible sound from a wind energy system shall not exceed
60dBA, measured at the property line.
(b) Sound levels, however, may be exceeded during short-term
events not within the operator's control, such as utility outages
and/or severe storms.
(6) Safety.
(a) All wind energy systems shall be equipped with manual —
electronic or mechanical — and automatic over-speed controls
to limit the blade rotation speed to within the design limits of
the wind energy system.
(b) Horizontal-axis wind turbines shall not be climbable up to a
minimum of 15 feet above grade level and shall have a
minimum blade clearance of 25 feet.
(c) For lattice or guyed towers, sheets of metal or wood shall be
fastened to the lower part of the tower to cover all hand- and
foot-holds up to a height of 15 feet above grade level.
(d) All ground-mounted electrical and control equipment shall be
labeled and secured to prevent unauthorized access.
§ 95-173 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-173
94:564
§ 95-174. Medical marijuana. [Added 7-16-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-03]
(e) Display "Danger - High Voltage" or "Caution - Electrical Shock
Hazard" signs to the sides of the tower.
(7) Shadow flicker. All wind energy systems shall, to the extent
feasible, be sited to prevent shadow flicker on any adjacent
properties as well as any adjacent street rights-of-way.
(8) Decommissioning requirements.
(a) If a wind energy system remains nonfunctional or inoperative
for a continuous period of one year, the system shall be deemed
to be abandoned and shall constitute a public nuisance. The
owner shall remove the system within six months of
abandonment after a demolition permit has been obtained in
accordance with the following:
[1] Any aboveground mechanical equipment, wiring, and
structural components shall be removed.
[2] Underground wiring and structural components shall be
removed and the resulting void space filled.
(b) When a ground-mounted wind energy system is removed, any
disturbed earth as a result of the removal of the system shall be
restored, graded, and reseeded.
(9) Compliance with other regulations. All wind energy systems,
including towers, shall comply with all applicable local, state, and
federal construction and electrical codes.
F. Severability. Invalidity of provisions. If any term, provision, covenant or
restriction of this section is held by a court of competent jurisdiction to
be invalid, illegal, void or unenforceable, the remainder of the terms,
provisions, covenants and restrictions set forth herein shall remain in
full force and effect and shall in no way be affected, impaired or
invalidated.
A. General provisions.
(1) All medical marijuana dispensaries and grower/processors shall
comply with all applicable standards, rules, regulations, and
requirements of the Medical Marijuana Act, the regulations of the
Department of Health, and all other regulations from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the County of Montgomery.
(2) Proof of permit. A medical marijuana dispensary or grower/
processor shall provide proof of a current valid permit from the
Department of Health.
§ 95-173 WATER § 95-174
94:565
§ 95-175. Alley and landlocked lots. [Added 6-4-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-01]
(3) A medical marijuana dispensary or grower/processor shall not be
located in a trailer, cargo container, mobile or modular unit, mobile
home, recreational vehicle, or other motor vehicle.
A. Legislative intent. In expansion of the declaration of legislative intent
and the statement of community development objectives contained in
Article I, §§ 95-2 and 95-3, the specific intent of this section is to
promote the maintenance and appropriate use of properties which do
not have street access.
B. Permitted uses. On an alley lot or landlocked lot, a building may be
erected or used or occupied for any of the following uses and no other:
(1) Open space or park for public or private use.
(2) Private garage or carport, private parking space, private barn.
(3) Noncommercial swimming pool, either above or below ground,
with required swimming pool equipment, or other recreational
facilities.
(4) Private greenhouse or garden shed.
C. Conditional use. On an alley lot or landlocked lot, a single-family
detached dwelling may be constructed by conditional use subject to the
standards below. A single-family detached dwelling shall meet the
following requirements as well as the requirements of the zoning
district in which it is located, except as the requirements pertain to
street access and street width.
(1) Access strip. The alley lot or landlocked lot shall have at least a
twenty-five-foot-wide access strip onto a paved street or alley that
is at least 20 feet wide for the length of the block.
(2) United States Postal Service. The applicant must present
certification from the United States Postal Service of the ability to
be issued a postal address and receive postal mail.
(3) Water. The proposed single-family detached dwelling must be
served by the public water system of East Greenville Borough.
(4) Sewer. The proposed single-family detached dwelling must be
served by the public sewer system of East Greenville Borough.
(5) Emergency services. Certification from the Fire Marshal must be
provided stating that there is adequate access to the alley lot for
emergency vehicles.
(6) Construction. The proposed single-family detached dwelling shall
be constructed with the front facade facing in the direction deemed
§ 95-174 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-175
94:566
§ 95-176. through § 95-179. (Reserved)
most logical and reasonable by Borough Council. In determining
whether the direction of the facade is logical and reasonable,
Borough Council shall consider, but not be limited to, such factors
as:
(a) The potential of paper streets or alleys to be built in the future.
(b) The orientation of nearby homes.
(c) The surrounding topography and other natural and man-made
features.
D. Area and height regulations.
(1) Lot area. Minimum lot area shall be 2,500 square feet.
(2) Lot width. Each lot shall have a width at the alley lot line of not less
than 25 feet.
(3) Building area. A maximum of 35% of the lot may be occupied by
buildings.
(4) Maximum impervious surface coverage. No more than 45% of the
lot area shall be covered by impervious surfaces.
(5) Building setback. Buildings must be set back at least five feet from
the alley and at least 30 feet from any paper street. Buildings must
be set back at least five feet from any property line.
(6) Height. No building or structure shall exceed 15 feet in height,
provided that such height limited may be exceeded by one foot for
each one foot by which the width of each setback is increased
beyond the minimum setback requirements, up to a maximum
height of 20 feet.
§ 95-175 WATER § 95-176
94:567

ARTICLE XVA
Floodplain Conservation District
[Added 3-7-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01]
§ 95-179.1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978,117 delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Borough Council of the Borough of East Greenville
does hereby order as follows.
§ 95-179.2. General provisions.
A. The intent of this article is to:
(1) Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community
by preventing development in areas prone to flooding.
(2) Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in
order to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
(3) Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
(4) Permit only those uses in the floodplain that are compatible with
preserving natural conditions and stream flow.
(5) Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its
governmental units, and its residents by preventing excessive
development in areas subject to flooding.
(6) Comply with federal and state floodplain management
requirements.
B. Applicability.
(1) The Floodplain Conservation District is defined and established to
include that area of the Borough of East Greenville, which is
identified as being a Special Flood Hazard Area on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Montgomery County, Pennsylvania,
as prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA), dated March 2, 2016, or the most recent revision thereof.
(2) The Floodplain Conservation District shall be deemed an overlay on
any zoning district now or hereafter applicable to any lot.
(3) In addition to Subsection B(1), the Borough of East Greenville may
require the applicant to determine the elevation with hydrologic
and hydraulic engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic
117. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 95-179.1 WATER § 95-179.2
94:569
§ 95-179.3. Definitions.
analyses shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or
others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the
technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted
technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc. shall be
submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review
by the Borough of East Greenville.
(4) The Floodplain Conservation District shall be delineated according
to FEMA's FIRM for the Borough of East Greenville, which is
hereby made a part of this article. The FIRM is available for
inspection at the Borough Office.
(5) It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business, or
corporation to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any
construction or development anywhere within the Borough of East
Greenville unless a permit has been obtained from the Floodplain
Administrator.
(6) A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing
buildings or structures.
C. Abrogation and greater restrictions. This article supersedes any other
conflicting provisions, which may be in effect in the Floodplain
Conservation District. However, any other ordinance provisions shall
remain in full force and effect to the extent that those provisions are
more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the provisions of
this article, the more restrictive shall apply.
D. Severability. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or
phrase of this article shall be declared invalid for any reason
whatsoever, such a decision shall not affect the remaining portions of
this article, which shall remain in full force and effect, and for this
purpose the provisions of this article are hereby declared to be
severable.
E. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
(1) The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this
article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is
based on acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods
may occur or flood heights may be increased by man-made or
natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by
debris. This article does not imply that areas outside the Floodplain
Conservation District, or that land uses permitted within such
areas, will be free from flooding or flood damages.
(2) This article shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of
East Greenville or any officer or employee thereof for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this article or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 95-179.2 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-179.3
94:570
A. Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this article
shall be interpreted so as to give this article its most reasonable
application.
B. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
100-YEAR FLOOD — The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled
or exceed in any given year. Also referred to as the "1% annual-chance
flood," or the "base flood," as defined by FEMA in the FIS for the
Borough of East Greenville.
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a 1% chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year (also called the "100-year flood").
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the FIRM
for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the water surface elevation
resulting from a flood that has 1% or greater chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year. The BFE is also shown on the Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) profile, and can be determined for Zone A
floodplains.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground
level on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof; included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to subdivision of land;
construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair, expansion, or
alteration of buildings or other structures; the placement of
manufactured homes; streets and other paving; utilities; filling; grading
and excavation; dredging, drilling, or drilling operations; or storage of
equipment or materials.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXISTING STRUCTURE/EXISTING CONSTRUCTION — A structure for
which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of
the FIRM.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction
§ 95-179.3 WATER § 95-179.3
94:571
of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads).
FLOOD — A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas by water.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which
FEMA or the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Flood Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood
Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area that is subject
to partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream,
river, or watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid
accumulation of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural or nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures that reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than one foot.
FLOODWAY FRINGE — The part of the floodplain adjacent to and
extending from the floodway and subject to inundation by the 100-year
flood.
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a
flood level for purposes of floodplain management.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Pennsylvania Historical and
Museum Commission (PHMC) as meeting the criteria for individual
listing on the National Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the PHMC as contributing
to the historical significance of a National Register, historic district,
or a district preliminarily determined by the PHMC to be eligible to
qualify for listing in the National Register; or
(2)
§ 95-179.3 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-179.3
94:572
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including the basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant, partially
enclosed area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access,
and incidental storage, in an area other than a basement area is not
considered the lowest floor of a building, provided that such space
is not designed and built so that the structure is in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of this article.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed for
use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers,
recreation, and other similar vehicles, which are placed on a site for
more than 180 consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured
home lots for rent or sale.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but
not including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof;
the removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support; or the
removal or change of any required means of egress; or rearrangement
of parts of a structure affecting the exit way requirements; nor shall
minor repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or
relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader,
gas, oil, waste, vent, or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or
other work affecting public health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective start date of this floodplain
management ordinance including any subsequent improvements to
such structures. Any constructed started November 6, 1978 and before
the effective start date of this floodplain management ordinance is
subject to the ordinance in effect at the time the permit was issued,
provided the start of construction was within 180 days of permit
issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
Designated as historic by a municipal ordinance:
Identified individually or as part of a local historic district by
a zoning ordinance under the authority of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code118; or
(a)
Located in a local historic district that has been certified by
the PHMC as meeting the requirements of the Pennsylvania
Historic District Act.
(b)
(3)
118. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 95-179.3 WATER § 95-179.3
94:573
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed on or after November 6, 1978.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever that is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974, or on or
after the community's initial FIRM, dated April 4, 2014, whichever
is later, and as such would be required to be compliant with the
regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974, or
before the community's initial FIRM, dated April 4, 2014, and as such
would not be required to be compliant with the regulation of the NFIP.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle that is:
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The regulatory flood elevation
is the elevation to which development is regulated for purposes of
elevation and/or dry floodproofing. It is equal to the BFE plus a
freeboard of 1 1/2 feet.
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood related damages sustained by a structure
on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost
of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or
exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before the damages
occurred.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is
shown on the FIRM as Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-A30, A99.
SPECIAL PERMIT — A special approval which is required for hospitals,
nursing homes, jails, and new manufactured home parks and
subdivisions or substantial improvements to such existing parks or
subdivisions, when such development is located in all, or a designated
portion, of a floodplain.
(1) Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
(2)
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a lightduty
truck; and
(3)
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
(4)
§ 95-179.3 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-179.3
94:574
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date the permit was issued for
construction, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other
improvement was within 180 days from the date of the permit and
shall be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of the
permit, unless a time extension is granted in writing by the Floodplain
Administrator. The actual start of construction means either the first
placement or permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as
the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/
or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it
include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such
as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of
the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of
construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — Any form or arrangement of building materials
involving the necessity of providing proper support, bracing, tying, and
anchoring, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally
above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels, or other
divisions of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs or devisers, transfer of ownership or building or
lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by lease of
land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres,
not involving any new street or easement of access or any residential
dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of
the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures that
have incurred substantial damage (or repetitive loss when a repetitive
loss provision is used) regardless of the actual repair work performed.
The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a
structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary,
or safety code specifications that have been identified by the local
code enforcement official and are the minimum necessary to assure
§ 95-179.3 WATER § 95-179.3
94:575
§ 95-179.4. Identification of floodplain areas.
safe living conditions. For alteration of historic structures, see
§ 95-179.5D(3).
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building
code adopted by The Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable
to new construction in all municipalities whether administered by the
municipality, a third part, or the Department of Labor and Industry.
Applicable to residential and commercial buildings, The Code adopted
The International Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building
Code (IBC), by reference, as the construction standard applicable with
the State floodplain construction. For coordination purposes,
references to the above are made specifically to various sections of the
IRC and the IBC.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the community's floodplain management
regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation
certificate, other certification, or other evidence of compliance required
in 44 CFR § 60.3(b)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as
that documentation is provided.
A. Identification. The Floodplain Conservation District shall be any areas
of the Borough of East Greenville classified as SFHAs in the FIS and the
accompanying FIRMs dated March 2, 2016, and issued by the FEMA, or
the most recent revision thereof, including all digital data developed as
part of the FIS.
B. Description and special requirements of the Floodplain Conservation
District.
(1) The Floodplain Conservation District shall consist of the following
specific areas/districts:
(a) Those areas identified as an A Zone on the FIRM included in
the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no 1% annual chance
flood elevations have been provided. For these areas, elevation
and floodway information from other federal, state, or other
acceptable source shall be used when available. Where other
acceptable information is not available, the elevation shall be
determined by using the elevation of a point on the boundary of
the Floodplain Conservation District that is nearest the
construction site.
[1] In addition to the above, the Borough of East Greenville
may require the applicant to determine the elevation with
hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques.
Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken
only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated
qualifications, who shall certify that the technical
methods, used correctly, reflect currently accepted
§ 95-179.3 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-179.4
94:576
§ 95-179.5. Use regulations in the Floodplain District.
technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computation, etc.
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough
technical review by the Borough of East Greenville.
(b) Within the Floodplain Conservation District, no new
construction or development shall be located within the area
measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any
watercourse, unless a variance has first been obtained from
the Borough of East Greenville, and a permit has been obtained
from DEP.
C. Changes in identification of area. The Floodplain Conservation District
may be revised or modified by the Borough Council where studies or
information provided by a qualified agency or person documents the
need for such revision. However, prior to any such change, approval
must be obtained from FEMA. Additionally, as soon as practicable, but
not later than six months after the date such information becomes
available, a community shall notify FEMA of the changes by submitting
technical or scientific data.
D. Boundary disputes. Should a dispute concerning any identified
floodplain boundary arise, an initial determination shall be made by the
Borough Planning Commission and any party aggrieved by this decision
or determination may appeal to the Borough Council. The burden of
proof shall be on the appellant.
E. Corporate boundary changes. Prior to development occurring in areas
where annexation or other corporate boundary changes are proposed
or have occurred, the community shall review flood hazard data
affecting the lands subject to boundary changes. The community shall
adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in areas subject to annexation
or corporate boundary changes, which meet or exceed those in 44 CFR
§ 60.3.
A. Uses and activities permitted by right in the Floodplain Conservation
District. The following uses are permitted by right in the Floodplain
Conservation District in compliance with the requirements of this
section.
(1) Up to half of any required yard setback area on an individual
residential lot may extend into the Floodplain Conservation
District.
(2) Open space uses that are primarily passive in nature shall be
permitted to extend into the floodplain including:
(a) Wildlife sanctuaries, nature preserves, forest preserves,
fishing areas, passive areas of public and private parklands,
and reforestation.
§ 95-179.4 WATER § 95-179.5
94:577
(b) Stream bank stabilization.
(3) Forestry operations reviewed by the Montgomery County
Conservation District.
(4) The following floodplain crossings are permitted, provided
disturbance to any existing woodlands and degradation of water
quality are minimized to the greatest extent practicable:
(a) Agricultural crossings by farm vehicles and livestock.
(b) Driveways serving single-family detached dwelling units,
roadways, recreational trails, railroads, and utilities.
(5) Agricultural uses conducted in compliance with methods
prescribed in the latest version of DEP's Erosion and Sediment
Pollution Control Manual. In the event that the Borough has a
Riparian Corridor Conservation District, or similar regulation, the
more restrictive regulation shall apply.
(6) Public sewer and/or water lines and public utility transmission lines
running along the corridor.
B. Uses and activities prohibited in the Floodplain Conservation District.
Any use or activity not authorized within § 95-179.5A shall be
prohibited within the Floodplain Conservation District and the
following activities and facilities are specifically prohibited:
(1) Construction, alteration, or improvement of buildings and any
other type of permanent structure, including fences.
(2) Placement of fill.
(3) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse.
(4) Clearing of all existing vegetation, except where such clearing is
necessary to prepare land for a use permitted under § 95-179.5A
and where the effects of these actions are mitigated by
reestablishment of vegetation.
(5) Use of fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, and/or other chemicals in
excess of prescribed industry standards.
(6) Roads or driveways, except where permitted as corridor crossings
in compliance with § 95-179.5A.
(7) Motor or wheeled vehicle traffic in any area not designed to
accommodate adequately the vehicle's type and volume.
(8) Parking lots.
(9) Subsurface sewage disposal areas.
(10) Sod farming.
§ 95-179.5 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-179.5
94:578
(11) Stormwater basins, including necessary berm and outfall facilities.
(12) The commencement of any of the following activities or the
construction, enlargement or expansion of any structure used or
intended to be used for any of the following activities:
(a) Hospitals.
(b) Nursing homes.
(c) Jails or prisons.
(13) The commencement of or any construction of a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or
manufactured home subdivision.
(14) Any new or substantially improved structure that:
(a) Will be used for the production or storage of any of the
following dangerous materials or substances;
(b) Will be used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a
supply of more than 500 gallons, or other comparable volume,
of any of the following dangerous materials or substances on
the premises; or
(c) Will involve the production, storage, or use of any amount of
radioactive substances.
(d) For the purposes of this article, the following list of materials
and substances are considered dangerous to human life:
[1] Acetone.
[2] Ammonia.
[3] Benzene.
[4] Calcium carbide.
[5] Carbon disulfide.
[6] Celluloid.
[7] Chlorine.
[8] Hydrochloric acid.
[9] Hydrocyanic acid.
[10] Magnesium.
[11] Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
[12] Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
§ 95-179.5 WATER § 95-179.5
94:579
[13] Phosphorous.
[14] Potassium.
[15] Sodium.
[16] Sulfur and sulfur products.
[17] Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and
rodenticides).
[18]Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are
not otherwise regulated.
C. Nonconforming structures and uses in the Floodplain Conservation
District. The provisions of this article do not require any changes or
improvements to be made to lawfully existing structures. However,
when an improvement is made to any existing structure, the provisions
of § 95-179.5D, herein, and Article XIVA of the Code of the Borough of
East Greenville shall apply.
D. Improvements to existing structures in the Floodplain Conservation
District. The following provisions shall apply whenever any
improvement is made to an existing structure located within the
Floodplain Conservation District:
(1) No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be
undertaken in the direction of the stream bank.
(2) Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement
to an existing structure that constitutes a substantial improvement
as defined in § 95-179.3B shall be undertaken only in full
compliance with the provisions of this article. Any reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement to an existing
structure that does not constitute a substantial improvement as
defined in § 95-179.3B shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the
greatest extent possible.
(3) Historic structures undergoing repair or rehabilitation that would
constitute a substantial improvement as defined in this article must
comply with all ordinance requirements that do not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure.
Documentation that a specific ordinance requirement will cause
removal of the structure from the National Register of Historic
Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places must be obtained
from the Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation
Officer. Any exemption from the ordinance requirements will be the
minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design
of the structure.
(4) Any of the above activities shall also address the requirements of
34 Pa. Code, as amended, and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC, or
the most recent revisions thereof.
§ 95-179.5 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-179.5
94:580
§ 95-179.6. Variances.
(5) Any modification, alteration reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind that meets the definition of repetitive loss shall be undertaken
only in full compliance with the provision of this article.
A. General. If compliance with any of the requirements of this article
would result in an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder,
developer, or landowner, the Borough of East Greenville may, upon
request, grant relief from the strict application of the requirements.
B. Variance procedures and conditions.
(1) For a use other than those permitted in § 95-179.5, an application
seeking approval by variance shall be forwarded to the Zoning
Hearing Board along with required studies or information and the
findings of the Zoning Officer.
(2) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any floodway area that would cause any
increase in the BFE.
(3) No variance shall be granted for any of the other requirements
pertaining specifically to development regulated by §§ 95-179.7C
and 95-179.8D.
(4) Notwithstanding any of the provisions relative to variances in this
article, all structures shall be designed and constructed to have the
capability of resisting the base flood.
(5) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
(6) In granting any variance, the Zoning Hearing Board may attach
whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers
necessary in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare,
and to achieve the objectives of this article.
(7) Whenever a variance is granted, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
notify the applicant in writing that:
(a) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(b) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
(8) In reviewing any request for a variance, the Zoning Hearing Board
shall consider, at a minimum, the following:
(a) That there is good and sufficient cause, including:
[1] That there are unique physical circumstances or
conditions, including irregularity, narrowness, or
shallowness of lot size or shape, or exceptional
§ 95-179.5 WATER § 95-179.6
94:581
topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the
particular property and that the unnecessary hardship is
due to such conditions and not the circumstances or
conditions generally created by the provisions of the
Zoning Ordinance in the neighborhood or district in which
the property is located;
[2] That because of such physical circumstances or
conditions, there is no possibility that the property can be
developed in strict conformity with the provisions of the
Zoning Ordinance and that the authorization of a variance
is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the
property;
[3] That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by
the appellant; and
[4] That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the
property is located, nor substantially or permanently
impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent
property, nor be detrimental to the public welfare.
(b) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(c) That the granting of the variance will:
[1] Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense;
[2] Nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the
public, or conflict with any other applicable state or local
ordinances and regulations.
(9) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall
be maintained by the Borough of East Greenville. In addition, a
report of all variances granted during the year shall be included in
the biennial report to FEMA.
C. Special requirements for subdivisions. All subdivision proposals and
development proposals containing at least 50 lots, or at least five acres,
whichever is the lesser, in special flood hazard areas where base flood
elevation data are not available, shall be supported by hydrologic and
hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood elevations
and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by a licensed
professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a Conditional
Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) or Letter of Map Revision (LOMR).
D. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
§ 95-179.6 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-179.6
94:582
§ 95-179.7. Technical provisions in the event of a variance being
granted.
(1) Within the Floodplain Conservation District, manufactured homes
and all additions thereto shall be prohibited within the area
measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any
watercourse.
(2) Where permitted by variance within the Floodplain Conservation
District, all manufactured homes, and any additions thereto, shall
be:
(a) Placed on a permanent foundation;
(b) Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is
at least 1 1/2 feet above the BFE;
(c) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement; and
(d) Have all ductwork and utilities, including HVAC/heat pump,
elevated to the regulatory flood elevation.
(3) Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance
with the manufacturers' installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer. Where the manufacturers' installation instructions
are not available, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009 IRC
or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development's
Permanent Foundations for Manufactured Housing, 1984 edition,
draft or latest revision thereto, and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401
through 405), as amended, shall apply.
(4) Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2009 IBC, and the 2009 IRC, or the most recent revisions thereto,
and 34 Pa. Code, as amended, where appropriate and/or applicable
to units where the manufacturers' standards for anchoring cannot
be provided or were not established for the proposed installation.
E. Special requirements for recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles in
the Floodplain Conservation District must:
(1) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(2) Be licensed and ready for highway use; or
(3) Be elevated and anchored as required in § 95-179.6D(2).
A. General. In granting any variance, the Borough of East Greenville shall
attach the following technical provisions to the proposal for which the
variance has been granted. These conditions and safeguards are
necessary in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of
the residents of the Borough of East Greenville.
(1) Pertaining to the alteration or relocation of watercourse.
§ 95-179.6 WATER § 95-179.7
94:583
(a) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall
be made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities,
which may be affected by such action, have been notified by
the Borough of East Greenville, and until all required permits
or approval have been first obtained from the DEP Regional
Office.
(b) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall
be made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the
activity will not reduce or impede the flood carrying capacity of
the watercourse in any way.
(c) In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of
Community and Economic Development (DCED), shall be
notified prior to any alteration or relocation of any
watercourse.
(2) The municipality shall require technical or scientific data to be
submitted to FEMA for an LOMR within six months of the
completion of any new construction, development, or other activity
resulting in changes in the BFE. A LOMR or CLOMR is required
for:
(a) Any development that causes a rise in the BFE within the
floodway;
(b) Any development occurring in Zones A1 through 30 and Zone
AE without a designated floodway, which will cause a rise of
more than one foot in the BFE; or
(c) Alteration or relocation of a stream (including but not limited
to installing culverts and bridges).
(3) Any new construction, development, uses, or activities allowed by
variance within the Floodplain Conservation District shall be
undertaken in strict compliance with the provisions contained in
this article and any other applicable codes, ordinances, and
regulations. In addition, when such development is proposed within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top of bank of any
watercourse, a permit shall be obtained from the DEP Regional
Office.
B. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
(1) Residential structures.
(a) In A Zones, where there are no BFEs specified on the FIRM,
any new construction or substantial improvement shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above,
the regulatory flood elevation.
(b) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 IBC and 2009 IRC, or the most recent
§ 95-179.7 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-179.7
94:584
revisions thereof, and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401
through 405), as amended, shall be utilized.
(2) Nonresidential structures.
(a) In A Zones, where there are no BFEs specified on the FIRM,
any new construction or substantial improvement shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or completely
flood proofed up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation.
(b) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood Proofing
Regulations" published by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
(June 1972, as amended March 1992) or with some other
equivalent standard. All plans and specifications for such
floodproofing shall be accompanied by a statement certified by
a registered professional engineer or architect, which states
that the proposed design and methods of construction are in
conformance with the above referenced standards.
(c) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 IBC and 2009 IRC, or the most recent
revisions thereof, and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401
through 405), as amended, shall be utilized.
(3) Space below the lowest floor.
(a) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding
basements) which will be used solely for the parking of a
vehicle, building access, or incidental storage in an area other
than a basement, shall be designed and constructed to allow
for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters for the purpose
of equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior walls. The term
"fully enclosed space" also includes crawl spaces.
(b) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or
exceed the following minimum criteria.
[1] Minimum of two openings having a net total area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
space.
[2] The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
[3] Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc. or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
§ 95-179.7 WATER § 95-179.7
94:585
(4) Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building
need not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry, but shall
comply at a minimum, with the following requirements:
(a) The structure shall not be designed or used for human
habitation, but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles, or to
the storage of tools, material, and equipment related to the
principal use or activity on the same lot.
(b) Floor area shall not exceed 100 square feet.
(c) The structure shall be designed and constructed to have the
capability of resisting the base flood.
(d) The structure shall be located on the site so as to cause the
least obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(e) Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the
regulatory flood elevation.
(f) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances, such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc. are prohibited.
(g) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(h) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation
or movement and shall be designed to automatically provide
for the entry and exit of floodwater for the purpose of
equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for meeting
this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
[1] A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not
less than one square inch for every one square foot of
enclosed space.
[2] The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
[3] Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc. or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
C. Special technical requirements.
(1) Development which may endanger human life. In accordance with
the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,119 and the
regulations adopted by DCED as required by the Act, any new or
substantially improved structure of the kind described in
119. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 95-179.7 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-179.7
94:586
§ 95-179.5B(14) shall be subject to the provision of this section, in
addition to all other applicable provisions.
(2) Any structure of the kind described in § 95-179.5B(14) shall be
prohibited within any floodway area. Within any identified
floodplain area, any new or substantially improved structure of the
kind described in § 95-179.5B(14) shall be prohibited within the
area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any
watercourse.
(3) Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any new or
substantially improved residential structure of the kind described
in § 95-179.5B(14) shall be elevated to remain completely dry up to
at least 1 1/2 feet above BFE and built in accordance with
§ 95-179.7B.
(4) Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any new or
substantially improved nonresidential structure of the kind
described in § 95-179.5B(14) shall be built in accordance with
§ 95-179.7B(2) including:
(a) Elevated, or designed and constructed to remain completely
dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above BFE;
(b) Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity
during the course of a base flood; and
(c) Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards for completely dry flood
proofing contained in the publication "Flood Proofing
Regulations" (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972, as
amended March 1992), or with some other equivalent
watertight standard.
D. Design and construction standards. The following minimum standards
shall apply for all construction and development proposed within the
Floodplain Conservation District.
(1) Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
(a) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from
all points.
(b) Consist of soil or small rock materials only. Sanitary landfills
shall not be permitted.
(c) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and
resistance to erosion, scouring, or settling.
(d) Be no steeper than one vertical foot to two horizontal feet
unless substantiated data, justifying steeper slopes are
submitted to, and approved by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 95-179.7 WATER § 95-179.7
94:587
(e) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect
adjacent properties.
(2) Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of surface waters without damage to persons or
property. The system shall ensure proper drainage at all points
along streets, and provide positive drainage away from buildings.
The system shall also be designed to prevent the discharge of
excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
(3) Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(a) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer
facilities and systems, including all pumping stations and
collector systems, shall be located, designed, and constructed
to minimize or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of
floodwaters.
(b) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to
prevent the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(c) No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within
the Floodplain Conservation District.
(d) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA
#348, Protecting Building Utilities from Flood Damages, and
The International Private Sewage Disposal Code, shall be
utilized.
(4) Other utilities. All other utilities, such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems, shall be located, elevated (where possible), and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
(5) Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more
than one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
(6) Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or
that, in times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal, or
plant life, and not listed in § 95-179.7C(1) shall be stored at or
above the regulatory flood elevation and/or floodproofed to the
maximum extent possible.
(7) Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the
minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to
have a minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwaters.
(8) Anchoring.
(a) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in
accordance with accepted engineering practices to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
§ 95-179.7 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-179.7
94:588
(b) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar
objects or components located below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be firmly anchored or affixed to prevent
flotation.
(9) Floors, walls, and ceilings.
(a) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation
shall be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the
flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain without incurring
structural damage to the building.
(b) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(c) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation
shall be designed and constructed of materials that are waterresistant
and will withstand inundation.
(d) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be made of metal or other
water-resistant material.
(10) Paints and adhesives.
(a) Paints, adhesives, other finishes used at or below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant
quality.
(b) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) shall be
finished with a marine or water-resistant paint or other
finishing material.
(11) Electrical components.
(a) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above
the BFE.
(b) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
(12) Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning, and
ventilating units, and other electrical, mechanical, or utility
equipment or apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory
flood elevation.
(13) Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be
designed to prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system
and discharges from the system into floodwaters. Additional
provisions shall be made for the drainage of these systems in the
event that floodwater infiltration occurs.
(14) UCC coordination.
§ 95-179.7 WATER § 95-179.7
94:589
§ 95-179.8. Activities requiring special permits.
(a) The Standards and Specifications contained in 34 Pa. Code
(Chapters 401 through 405), as amended, and not limited to
the following provisions, shall apply to the above and other
sections and subsections of this article, to the extent that they
are more restrictive and/or supplement the requirements of
this article.
[1] IBC 2009, or the latest edition thereof, Sections 801, 1202,
1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and Appendix G.
[2] IRC 2009, or the latest edition thereof, Section R104,
R105, R109, R323, Appendix AE101, Appendix E, and
Appendix J.
A. General. In accordance with the administration regulations
promulgated by DCED to implement the Pennsylvania Flood Plain
Management Act,120 the activities indicated in § 95-179.5B(12) and (13)
shall be prohibited within the Floodplain Conservation District unless a
special permit has been issued by the Borough of East Greenville. In
order to apply for a special permit, variance must first be obtained, as
outlined in § 95-179.6.
B. Application requirements for special permits. Applicants for special
permits shall provide five copies of the following items:
(1) A written request including a completed special permit application
form.
(2) A small scale map showing the vicinity in which the proposed site is
located.
(3) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet, or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale, and date;
(b) Topography based upon the North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) of 1988, showing existing and proposed contours at
intervals of two feet;
(c) All property and lot lines including dimensions, and the size of
the site expressed in acres, or square feet;
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives, other access ways,
and parking areas, with information concerning widths,
pavement types and construction, and elevations;
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
buildings, structures, and other public or private facilities,
120. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 95-179.7 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-179.8
94:590
including railroad tracks and facilities, and any other natural
and man-made features affecting, or affected by, the proposed
activity or development;
(f) The location of the floodplain boundary line, information and
spot elevations concerning the BFE, and information
concerning the flow of water, including direction and
velocities;
(g) The location of all proposed buildings, structures, utilities, and
any other improvements; and
(h) Any other information that the Borough of East Greenville
considers necessary for adequate review of the application.
(4) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures, and other
improvements, clearly and legibly drawn at suitable scale, showing
the following:
(a) Sufficiently detailed architectural or engineering drawings,
including floor plans, sections, and exterior building
elevations, as appropriate;
(b) For any proposed building, the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) and, as required, the elevation of any
other floor;
(c) Complete information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces, and other factors
associated with the BFE;
(d) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures;
(e) Cross-section drawings for all proposed streets, drives, other
access ways, and parking areas showing all rights-of-way and
pavement widths;
(f) Profile drawings for all proposed streets, drives, and vehicular
access ways including existing and proposed grades; and
(g) Plans and profiles of all proposed sanitary and storm sewer
systems, water supply systems, and any other utilities and
facilities.
(5) The following data and documentation:
(a) Certification from the applicant that the site upon which the
activity or development is proposed is an existing separate and
single parcel, owned by the applicant or the client he/she
represents;
(b) Certification from a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscaped architect that the proposed
§ 95-179.8 WATER § 95-179.8
94:591
construction has been adequately designed to protect against
damage from the BFE;
(c) A statement certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, landscape architect, or other qualified person that
contains a complete and accurate description of the nature and
extent of pollution that might possibly occur from the
development during the course of a BFE, including a statement
concerning the effects such pollution may have on human life;
(d) A statement certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect that contains a complete and
accurate description of the effects the proposed development
will have on BFEs and flows;
(e) A statement certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect that contains a complete and
accurate description of the kinds and amounts of any loose
buoyant materials or debris that may possibly exist or be
located on the site below the base flood elevation and the
effects such materials and debris may have on BFEs and flows;
(f) The appropriate component of DEP's "Planning Module for
Land Development";
(g) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
DEP's requirements to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control;
(h) Any other applicable permits such as, but not limited to, a
permit for any activity regulated by DEP under § 302 of Act
1978-166; and
(i) An evacuation plan, which fully explains the manner in which
the site will be safely evacuated before or during the course of
a base flood.
C. Application review procedures. Upon receipt of an application for a
special permit by the Borough of East Greenville the following
procedures shall apply in addition to those in § 95-179.9.
(1) Within three working days following receipt of the application, a
complete copy of the application and all accompanying
documentation shall be forwarded to the Montgomery County
Planning Commission for its review and recommendations. Copies
of the application shall also be forwarded to the Borough Planning
Commission and Borough Engineer for review and comment.
(2) If an application is received that is incomplete, the Borough of East
Greenville shall notify the applicant in writing, stating in what
respect the application is deficient.
§ 95-179.8 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-179.8
94:592
(3) If the Borough of East Greenville decides to disapprove an
application, it shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the reasons
for the disapproval.
(4) If the Borough of East Greenville approves an application, it shall
file written notification, together with the application and all
pertinent information, with DCED, by registered or certified mail,
within five working days after the date of approval.
(5) Before issuing the special permit, the Borough of East Greenville
shall allow DCED 30 days, after the receipt of the notification by
the Department, to review the application and the decision made by
the Borough of East Greenville.
(6) If the Borough of East Greenville does not receive any
communication from DCED during the thirty-day review period, it
may issue a special permit to the applicant.
(7) If DCED should decide to disapprove an application, it shall notify
the Borough of East Greenville and the applicant, in writing, of the
reasons for the disapproval, and the Borough of East Greenville
shall not issue the special permit.
D. Special technical requirements. In addition to the requirements of
§ 95-179.7 of this article, the following minimum requirements shall
also apply to any proposed development requiring a special permit. If
there is any conflict between any of the following requirements and
those in § 95-179.7 of this article or in any other code, ordinance, or
regulation, the more restrictive provision shall apply.
(1) No application for a special permit shall be approved unless it can
be determined that the structure or activity will be located,
constructed, and maintained in a manner which will:
(a) Fully protect the health and safety of the general public and
any occupants of the structure. At a minimum, all new
structures shall be designed, located, and constructed so that:
[1] The structure will survive inundation by waters of the base
flood elevation without any lateral movement or damage to
either the structure itself, or to any of its equipment or
contents below the BFE.
[2] The lowest floor (including basement) will be elevated to at
least 1 1/2 feet above the BFE.
[3] The occupants of the structure can remain inside for an
indefinite period of time and be safely evacuated at any
time during the BFE.
(b) Prevent any significant possibility of pollution, increased flood
levels or flows, or debris endangering life and property.
§ 95-179.8 WATER § 95-179.8
94:593
§ 95-179.9. Administration.
(2) All hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualification,
who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect
currently accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses,
computation, etc. shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a
thorough technical review by the Borough of East Greenville and
DCED.
A. Designation of the Floodplain Administrator. The Code Enforcement
Officer within the Borough of East Greenville is hereby appointed to
administer and enforce this article and is referred to herein as the
Floodplain Administrator.
B. Permits required. A permit shall be required before any proposed
construction or development is undertaken within the Floodplain
Conservation District. In the case of a proposed hospital, nursing home,
jail, prison, or manufactured home park or subdivision, the permit
referred to here would be the special permit of § 95-179.8.
C. Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator. The
Floodplain Administrator may: (A) Fulfill the duties and responsibilities
set forth in these regulations; (B) Delegate duties and responsibilities
set forth in these regulations to qualified technical personnel, plan
examiners, inspectors, and other employees; or (C) Enter into a written
agreement or written contract with another agency or private sector
entity to administer specific provisions of these regulations.
Administration of any part of these regulations by another entity shall
not relieve the community of its responsibilities pursuant to the
participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program as
set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations at 44 C.F.R. § 59.22.
(1) The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has
been determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be
in conformance with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances.
(2) Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator
shall review the application for the permit to determine if all other
necessary government permits required by state and federal laws
have been obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania
Sewage Facilities Act121 (Act 1966-537, as amended); the
Pennsylvania Dam Safety and Encroachments Act122 (Act 1978-325,
as amended); the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act123 (Act
1937-394, as amended); and the U.S. Clean Water Act, Section 404,
121. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
122. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
123. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 95-179.8 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-179.9
94:594
33 U.S.C. 1344. No permit shall be issued until this determination
has been made.
(3) In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
development/permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the
history of repairs to the subject building, so that any repetitive loss
issues can be addressed before the permit is issued.
(4) During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator, or
other authorized official, may inspect the premises to determine
that the work is progressing in compliance with the information
provided on the permit application and with all applicable Borough
of East Greenville laws and ordinances. The Floodplain
Administrator shall make as many inspections, during and upon
completion of the work, as are necessary.
(5) In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator
shall have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises
or development in the Floodplain Conservation District, upon
presentation of proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to
enforce the provisions of this article.
(6) In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work
does not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws
and ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by an applicant, the Floodplain Administrator
shall revoke the permit and report such fact to the Borough Council
for whatever action it considers necessary.
(7) The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain in perpetuity all
records associated with the requirements of this article including,
but not limited to, permitting, inspection, and enforcement.
(8) The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of 34
Pa. Code, and the 2009 IBC and 2009 IRC, or latest revisions
thereof.
(9) The Floodplain Administrator is the official responsible for
submitting a biennial report to FEMA concerning community
participation in the National Flood Insurance Program.
(10) In the absence of a designated Floodplain Administrator, the
Floodplain Administrator duties are to be fulfilled by the Borough
Engineer.
(11) The responsibility, authority, and means to implement the
commitments of the Floodplain Administrator can be delegated
from the person identified. However, the ultimate responsibility lies
with the person identified in the floodplain ordinance as the
Floodplain Administrator/Manager.
D. Application procedures and requirements.
§ 95-179.9 WATER § 95-179.9
94:595
(1) Application for a permit shall be made in writing to the Floodplain
Administrator on forms provided by the Borough of East Greenville.
Such application shall contain, or be accompanied by, the following
specific information:
(a) Name and address of applicant.
(b) Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
(c) Name and address of contractor.
(d) Site location including addresses.
(e) Listing of other permits or variances required.
(f) Brief description of work and estimated cost, including a
breakout of flood-related cost and the market value of the
building before the flood damage occurred, where applicable.
(2) If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within the Floodplain Conservation District, applicants for
permits shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient
detail and clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to
determine that:
(a) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage and conform to the requirements of this and all
other applicable codes and ordinances.
(b) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and
water systems are located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage.
(c) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to
flood hazards.
(d) Structures will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement.
(e) Building materials are flood-resistant.
(f) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been
used.
(g) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed
and/or located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
(3) Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any
other pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain
Administrator to make the above determination.
(a) A completed permit application form.
§ 95-179.9 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-179.9
94:596
(b) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of
one inch being equal to 100 feet, or less, showing the
following:
[1] North arrow, scale, and date.
[2] Topographic contour lines, if available.
[3] The location of all existing and proposed buildings,
structures, and other improvements, including the location
of any existing or proposed subdivision and development.
[4] The location of all existing streets, drives, and other access
ways.
[5] The location of any existing bodies of water or
watercourses, the Floodplain Conservation District, and
information pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of
water including direction and velocities, if available.
(c) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures, and other
improvements, drawn at a scale of one inch being equal to 100
feet, or less, showing the following:
[1] The proposed lowest floor elevation (including basement)
of any proposed building based upon NAVD of 1988.
[2] The elevation of the base flood.
[3] Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34
Pa. Code, the 2009 IBC, or the 2009 IRC, or latest revisions
thereof.
(d) The following data and documentation:
[1] Detailed information concerning any proposed flood
proofing measures and corresponding elevations.
[2] A document certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect that states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand
the pressures, velocities, impact, and uplift forces
associated with the BFE. Such statement shall include a
description of the type and extent of floodproofing
measures which have been incorporated into the design of
the structure and/or development.
[3] Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§§ 95-179.5B(14)(d) and 95-179.7D(6), including:
[a] The amount, location, and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in § 95-179.7C and D(6) that
are intended to be used, produced, stored, or
otherwise maintained on the site.
§ 95-179.9 WATER § 95-179.9
94:597
[b] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or
spills of the dangerous materials or substances listed
in § 95-179.7C during a base flood.
[4] The appropriate component of DEP's "Planning Module for
Land Development."
[5] Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan
meeting the requirements of the DEP, to implement and
maintain erosion and sedimentation control.
(e) Applications for a permit within the Floodplain Conservation
District shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the Borough
of East Greenville based upon the estimated cost of the
proposed construction as determined by the Floodplain
Administrator at the following rates:
Estimated Cost Fee
$0 to $200 $0
$201 to $1,000 $5
Each additional $1,000 or
part thereof beyond the first
$1,000
$1
E. Review by Montgomery County Conservation District. A copy of all
applications and plans for any proposed construction or development in
the Floodplain Conservation District to be considered for approval shall
be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to the County
Conservation District for review and comment prior to the issuance of a
permit. The recommendations of the County Conservation District shall
be considered by the Floodplain Administrator for possible
incorporation into the proposed plan.
F. Review of application by others. A copy of all plans and applications for
any proposed construction or development in the Floodplain
Conservation District to be considered for approval may be submitted
by the Floodplain Administrator to any other appropriate agencies and/
or individuals (e.g., Planning Commission, Municipal Engineer) for
review and comment.
G. Changes. After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain
Administrator, no changes of any kind shall be made to the application,
permit, or any of the plans, specifications, or other documents
submitted with the application without the written consent or approval
of the Floodplain Administrator. Requests for any such change shall be
in writing, and shall be submitted by the applicant to the Floodplain
Administrator for consideration.
H. Placards. In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall
issue a placard, which shall be displayed on the premises during the
§ 95-179.9 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-179.9
94:598
time construction is in progress. This placard shall show the permit
number, the date of its issuance, and be signed by the Floodplain
Administrator.
I. Start of construction.
(1) Work on the proposed construction and/or development shall begin
within 180 days after the date of issuance of the permit and shall be
completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of the
permit, or the permit shall expire unless a time extension is
granted, in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator.
(2) Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is
submitted by the applicant, which sets forth sufficient and
reasonable cause for the Floodplain Administrator to approve such
a request and the original permit is compliant with the ordinance
and FIRM/FIS in effect at the time the extension is granted.
J. Enforcement.
(1) Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized municipal representative determines that there are
reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provision of this article, or of any regulations adopted pursuant
thereto, the Floodplain Administrator shall give notice, in writing,
of such alleged violation as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
(a) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance.
(b) Allow a reasonable time, not to exceed a period of 30 days, for
the performance of any act it requires.
(c) Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case
may require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall
be deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or
agent when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by
any other method authorized or required by the laws of this
commonwealth.
(d) Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this article, or any part
thereof, and with the regulation adopted pursuant thereto.
(2) Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this article or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order, or direction of the Floodplain
Administrator, or any other authorized employee of the Borough of
East Greenville shall pay a fine to the Borough of not less than $25
nor more than $300, plus costs of prosecution. In default of such
payment, such person shall be imprisoned in Montgomery County
prison for a period not to exceed 10 days. Each day during which
any violation of the provisions of this article continues shall
§ 95-179.9 WATER § 95-179.9
94:599
constitute a separate offense. In addition to the above penalties,
all other actions are hereby reserved, including an action in equity,
for the proper enforcement of this article. The imposition of a
fine or penalty for any violation of, or noncompliance with, this
article shall not excuse the violation or noncompliance or permit
it to continue and all such persons shall be required to correct
or remedy such violations and noncompliance within a reasonable
time. Any development initiated or any structure or building
constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered, or relocated, in
noncompliance with this article may be declared by the Borough
Council to be a public nuisance and abated as such.
K. Appeals.
(1) Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of
this article, may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal
must be filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision,
determination, or action of the Floodplain Administrator.
(2) Upon receipt of such appeal, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
consider the appeal in accordance with the Municipalities Planning
Code124 and any other local ordinance.
(3) Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board
may seek relief there from by appeal to court, as provided by the
laws of this State, including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain
Management Act.125
124. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
125. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 95-179.9 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-179.9
94:600
ARTICLE XVI
Administration
§ 95-180. Zoning Officer.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Zoning Officer, who
shall be appointed by the Borough Council. The Zoning Officer shall be
appointed at the first meeting of the Borough Council following the adoption
of this chapter to serve until the first day of January next following and shall
thereafter be appointed annually to serve for a term of one year and/or until
his or her successor is appointed. The Zoning Officer may succeed himself
or herself. He or she shall receive such fees or compensation as the Borough
Council, by resolution, may provide.
§ 95-181. Duties and powers.
The Zoning Officer shall have the duty and power to:
A. Keep a report of all plans and applications for permits and all permits
issued with notations as to special conditions attached thereto. All
records shall be open for public inspection.
B. Review applications for permits for erections or alterations of
structures or changes of use; determine whether such construction or
use is in accordance with the general requirements of this chapter, all
other applicable ordinances of the borough and with the laws and
regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The Zoning Officer
shall issue no permit unless it conforms with all applicable ordinances,
statutes and regulations of the Borough of East Greenville.
C. Conduct inspections and surveys to determine compliance or
noncompliance with the terms of this chapter. In carrying out such
surveys, the Zoning Officer or his or her representatives may enter
upon any land or building within the borough within the limits of law
regarding trespass and illegal search.
D. Make written orders requiring compliance with the provisions of this
chapter to be served personally or by registered mail.
E. Institute civil enforcement proceedings for the enforcement of
provisions of this chapter, when acting within the scope of his or her
employment.
F. Maintain a map showing the current zoning classification of all land
within the borough.
G. Maintain a map and register showing the registration, identity, location
and type of all nonconforming uses within the borough.
H. Participate in all proceedings before the Zoning Hearing Board; present
facts and information to assist the Board in reaching decisions which
shall be compatible with this chapter.
§ 95-180 WATER § 95-181
94:601
§ 95-182. Permit required; inspections.
§ 95-183. Application for permit.
All applications for zoning permits shall be made in writing by the owner or
tenants or authorized agent and shall be filed with the Zoning Officer. The
application:
§ 95-184. Expiration of permits.
A permit issued under the authority of this chapter shall expire six months
after date of issuance unless the permittee shall have commenced
substantial construction or utilization of the property which is the subject of
the permit in accordance with the intent thereof within such period.
§ 95-185. Appeals.
An appeal from the determination of the Zoning Officer shall be taken within
the limits and according to the procedures described in the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.126
I. Participate and attend Planning Commission meetings.
A. No building shall be constructed or enlarged in the borough or the use
of any building changed until a zoning permit has been secured from
the Zoning Officer.
B. Upon completion of the work authorized by any permit, the applicant
for the permit shall notify the Zoning Officer of such completion. No
permit shall be considered as complete or as permanently effective until
the Zoning Officer has noted on the permit that the work has been
inspected and approved as being in conformity with the provisions of
this chapter.
A. Shall include a statement as to the proposed use of the buildings or
land.
B. Shall be accompanied by a plan, drawn to scale, showing the location of
the buildings in relation to all abutting property and street lines.
C. Shall include a statement that the side lines of all roads shown on the
plan have been located and staked on the premises by a registered
professional engineer or registered land surveyor competent to give
such location.
D. Shall give the name and address of the person who has so located and
staked the street lines. In the case of signs, the size, height, location
and construction shall be shown on the application.
126. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 95-181 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-186
94:602
§ 95-186. Appeal and application procedure.
An application for special exception or for a variance from the terms of this
chapter or an appeal from a decision of the Zoning Officer may be filed with
the Secretary of the Zoning Hearing Board and shall state:
§ 95-187. Fees.
The applicant for a permit shall, at the time of making the application, pay
to the Zoning Officer a fee in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by the
Borough Council by resolution.
§ 95-188. (Reserved)
§ 95-189. (Reserved)
A. The name and address of the applicant.
B. The name and address of the owner of the real estate to be affected by
the proposed exception or variance.
C. A brief description and location of the real estate to be affected by such
proposed change.
D. A statement of the present zoning classification of the real estate in
question, the improvements thereon and the present use thereof.
E. A statement of the section of this chapter from which the variance is
required or special exception may be allowed and the reasons why it
should be granted.
F. A reasonably accurate description of the present improvements and the
additional improvements intended to be made under the application,
indicating the size of the lot and size of improvements now erected and
those proposed to be erected thereon.
§ 95-186 WATER § 95-189
94:603

ARTICLE XVII
Zoning Hearing Board
§ 95-190. Appointments.
The Borough Council shall appoint a Zoning Hearing Board consisting of
three members. The Borough Council shall designate one such member to
serve until the first day of January following the original effective date of
this chapter, one until the first day of the second January thereafter and
one until the first day of the third January thereafter, shall reappoint or
appoint three successors on the expiration of their respective terms to serve
three years and shall fill any vacancy for the unexpired term of any member
whose term becomes vacant.
§ 95-191. Alternate members.
The Borough Council may appoint by resolution no more than three
residents of the Borough to serve as alternate members of the Board. The
term of office of an alternate shall be three years.
§ 95-192. Organization of the Board.
A. The members of the Zoning Hearing Board shall be removable for cause
by the Borough Council upon written charges and after a public
hearing.
B. Zoning Hearing Board members may hold no other office in the
borough.
C. The word "Board," when used in this article, shall mean the Zoning
Hearing Board.
A. If, by reason of absence or disqualification of a member, a quorum is not
reached, the Chairman of the Board shall designate as many alternate
members of the Board to sit on the Board as may be needed to provide a
quorum. An alternate so designated shall be entitled to participate in all
proceedings and discussions of the Board to the same and full extent as
provided by law for Board members, including specifically the right to
cast a vote as a voting member during the proceedings, and shall have
all the powers and duties set forth in this article and as otherwise
provided by law.
B. Any alternate member of the Board shall continue to serve on the Board
in all proceedings involving the matter or case for which the alternate
was initially appointed until the Board has made a final determination
of the matter or case.
C. Alternate members may hold no other office in the borough.
A. The Board shall annually elect officers from its membership.
§ 95-190 WATER § 95-192
94:605
§ 95-193. Jurisdiction.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and
render final adjudications in accord with the requirements of Article IX of
the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.128
§ 95-194. Appeal or application to Zoning Hearing Board.
Challenges and appeals may be filed with the Board in writing by the
landowner affected, any officer or agency of the municipality or any person
aggrieved. Requests for variance or special exception may be filed by any
landowner or any tenant with permission of the landowner. An appeal or
application regarding a matter within the jurisdiction of the Zoning Hearing
Board may be filed with the Zoning Officer on forms provided by the Zoning
Hearing Board and shall state:
B. For the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum
shall be no fewer than two voting members, but the Board may appoint
from its own membership a hearing officer to conduct any hearing on its
behalf and the parties may waive further action by the Board, as
provided in Section 908 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.127
C. The Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its
procedure, consistent with ordinances of the borough and the laws of
the commonwealth.
D. The Board shall keep public records of its business, which records shall
be the property of the borough, and shall submit reports of its activities
to the borough as requested by the Borough Council.
A. The name and address of the applicant and of the applicant's
representative(s) or agent(s) where applicable.
B. The name and address of the record owner of the property that is the
subject of the application or appeal; where the applicant is not the
record owner of the subject property, a signed and notarized statement
from the record owner, authorizing the applicant to pursue the specific
appeal or application.
C. A copy of the deed to the subject property.
D. A brief description and location of the subject property, along with a
survey and/or sketch of the property boundaries.
E. A statement of the present zoning classification of the subject property
with the improvements thereon and the present use thereof.
127. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
128. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 95-192 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-194
94:606
§ 95-195. Board action on application or appeal.
§ 95-196. Notice of hearing.
The Board shall schedule a public hearing and shall give public notice, as
well as written notice as follows:
F. A statement of the section of this chapter under which consideration by
the Board is requested, along with a summary of reasons or arguments
in support of request.
G. A reasonably accurate description of the improvements or changes
intended to be made under the application. In addition, there shall be
attached a plot plan of the property to be affected, indicating the
location and size of the lot and the size and location of the existing and
proposed improvements or changes.
H. A list of all landowners within 400 feet of the applicant's land, to be
supplied by applicant, who shall obtain the list at his or her own cost
and expense from the available records at the Montgomery County
Board of Assessment Appeals or from the Tax Collector of East
Greenville Borough and other municipalities when the adjacent land is
outside the borough, along with pre-stamped and pre-addressed
envelopes for all landowners shown on the aforesaid list.
I. A payment to the borough in accordance with a fee schedule adopted
and amended from time to time by the Borough Council, in accordance
with the requirements of Article IX of the Municipalities Planning Code,
as amended.129
A. Immediately upon receipt of an application, the Zoning Officer shall
promptly forward the application to the Zoning Hearing Board Solicitor.
B. The Zoning Hearing Board Solicitor, in consultation with the Chairman,
shall fix a reasonable time and place for a public hearing on the
application. Said hearing shall occur no more than 60 days after the
application is made to the borough, unless the applicant has agreed in
writing to an extension of time.
C. A true and correct copy of the application and all related information
shall be forwarded to each member of the Zoning Hearing Board and to
the President of the Borough Council, the Borough Secretary, Mayor
and Borough Solicitor.
A. Written notice shall be given to:
(1) The record owner, applicant and applicant's representative.
(2) Adjacent landowners, utilizing the envelopes provided by the
applicant pursuant to § 95-194H of this chapter.
129. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 95-194 WATER § 95-196
94:607
§ 95-197. Hearing procedures.
(3) The Borough Council President, Borough Solicitor, Mayor and
Zoning Officer.
(4) All parties in interest who have entered their appearance and any
other person registered for that purpose.
B. Written notice shall be conspicuously posted on the affected tract of
land at least one week prior to the hearing.
A. Zoning Hearing Board hearings shall be held at the call of the Chairman
and at such times as the Board may determine.
B. Hearings may be conducted by the Board, which may appoint any
member as a hearing officer. The decision or findings shall be made by
the Board; however, the applicant may, prior to a decision, waive a
decision or findings by the Board and accept the decision or findings of
the hearing officer as final.
C. The parties to the hearing shall be the borough, any person affected by
the application who has made timely appearance of record before the
Board and any other person, including civic or community
organizations, permitted to appear by the Board. The Board shall have
the power to require that all persons who wish to be considered parties
enter appearances in writing on forms provided for that purpose.
D. The Chairman or Acting Chairman or hearing officer may administer
oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and
production of relevant documents and papers, including witnesses and
documents requested by the parties.
E. The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall
be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence and
argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.
F. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial or
unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
G. The Board or the hearing officer shall keep a stenographic record of the
proceedings. The appearance fee for a stenographer shall be shared
equally by the applicant and the Board. The cost of the original
transcript shall be paid by the Board if the transcript is ordered by the
Board or hearing officer or shall be paid by the person appealing from
the decision of the Board if such appeal is made, and in either event, the
cost of additional copies shall be paid by the person requesting such
copy or copies. In other cases, the party requesting the original
transcript shall bear the cost.
H. The Board or hearing officer shall not, except upon notice and
opportunity for all parties to be present, participate and inspect and
contest materials:
§ 95-196 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-197
94:608
§ 95-198. Decision of the Zoning Hearing Board.
(1) Communicate, directly or indirectly, with any party or his
representative in connection with any issue involved;
(2) Take notice of any communication, reports, staff memoranda or
other materials, except advice from their solicitor; or
(3) Inspect the subject site or its surroundings after commencement of
hearings with any party or his or her representative.
A. The Zoning Hearing Board or hearing officer shall render a written
decision or, when no decision is called for, make written findings on the
application within 45 days of the last hearing. When the application is
contested or denied, the decision shall be accompanied by findings of
fact and conclusions based upon findings. Conclusions based on any
provision of a borough ordinance shall contain a reference to the
provision relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed
appropriate in the light of facts found.
B. If the hearing is conducted by a hearing officer and there has been no
stipulation that his or her decision or findings are final, the Board shall
make his or her report and recommendations available to the parties
within 45 days and the parties shall be entitled to make written
representations to the Board prior to final decision or entry of findings.
The Board's decision shall be entered no later than 30 days after the
report of the hearing officer.
C. Where the Board fails to render the decision within the required period
or fails to hold the required hearing within 60 days of application, the
decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the
applicant unless the applicant has agreed in writing or on the record to
an extension of time.
D. When a decision has been deemed to have been rendered in favor of the
applicant because of the failure of the Board to hold a hearing or render
a decision as provided, the Board shall give public notice of said
deemed decision within 10 days from the last day it could have met to
render a decision. If the Board shall fail to provide such notice, the
applicant may do so. Nothing in this subsection shall prejudice the right
of any party opposing the application to appeal the decision to a court of
competent jurisdiction.
E. A copy of the final decision or findings shall be delivered to the
applicant personally or mailed to him or her not later than the day
following its date. A copy of the decisions shall also be mailed to the
Borough Secretary, President of the Borough Council and Chairman of
the Borough Planning Commission. To all other persons who have filed
their name and address with the Board not later than the last day of the
hearing, the Board shall provide, by mail or otherwise, brief notice of
§ 95-197 WATER § 95-198
94:609
§ 95-199. General standards for Board review.
§ 95-200. Specific standards for variances and special exceptions.
the decision or findings and a statement of the place at which the full
decision or findings may be examined.
A. In the consideration of an application, the Board shall:
(1) Consider the suitability of the property for the use desired; assure
itself that the proposed change is consistent with the spirit,
purpose and intent of this chapter and the Comprehensive Plan.
(2) Determine that the proposed change will not substantially injure or
detract from the use of neighboring property or from the character
of the neighborhood and that the use of the adjacent property is
adequately safeguarded.
(3) Determine that the proposed change will serve the best interests of
the borough, the convenience of the community (where applicable)
and the public welfare.
(4) Consider the effect of the proposed change upon the logical,
efficient and economical extension of public services and facilities
such as public water, sewers, police and fire protection and public
schools.
(5) Consider the suitability of the proposed location of use with respect
to probable effects upon highway traffic and assure adequate
access arrangements in order to protect major roads from undue
congestion and hazard.
(6) Be guided in its study, review and recommendation by sound
standards of subdivision and land development practice where
applicable.
(7) Impose such conditions and safeguards in addition to those
required as are necessary to assure that the intent of this chapter
and the Comprehensive Plan are complied with, which conditions
may include (but are not limited to) harmonious design of
buildings, planting and its maintenance as a sight or sound screen,
the minimizing of noxious, offensive or hazardous elements and
adequate standards of parking, loading and sanitation.
B. The Zoning Hearing Board shall be limited to consideration of
applications as they relate to ordinance provisions in effect at the time
of the application. The Borough Council shall retain the exclusive right
to enact and amend ordinances.
A. Variance. The Board shall hear requests for variances where it is
alleged that the provisions of this chapter inflict unnecessary hardship
upon the applicant.
§ 95-198 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-200
94:610
§ 95-201. Review of challenges and appeals.
(1) The Board may grant a variance, provided that all of the following
findings are made where relevant in a given case:
(a) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or
shape or exceptional topographical or other physical
conditions and not the circumstances or conditions generally
created by the provisions of this chapter in the neighborhood
or district in which the property is located.
(b) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions,
there is no possibility that the property can be developed in
strict conformity with the provisions of this chapter and that
the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable
the reasonable use of the property.
(c) That the unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
applicant.
(d) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property
is located, nor substantially or permanently impair the
appropriate use or development of adjacent property, nor be
detrimental to the public welfare.
(e) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue.
(2) In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement
the purposes of this chapter.
B. Special exception. The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear and decide
requests for special exceptions in accordance with the standards and
criteria found in the particular section of this chapter that permits
application for said special exception and with the general standards in
§ 95-199 of this article.
C. Burden of proof. For variances, the burden of proof shall be on the
applicant. For special exceptions, the applicant shall be entitled to the
special exception unless others can prove that it would adversely affect
the public health, safety, morals or welfare.
A. Time limitations on appeals:
(1) All appeals from determinations adverse to the landowners shall be
filed by the landowner within 30 days after notice of the
determination is issued.
§ 95-200 WATER § 95-201
94:611
(2) Appeals designed to secure reversal or limit the approval of any
application for development, preliminary or final, shall be filed with
the Board no later than 30 days after the application is approved by
an appropriate municipal officer or agency, unless the person filing
alleges and proves that he or she had not notice, knowledge or
reason to believe that such approval had been given. If such person
succeeded to his or her interest after such approval, he or she shall
be bound by the knowledge of his or her predecessor in interest.
B. Effect of filing. When an appeal is filed, further development or official
action pursuant to the appealed determination or approval shall be
stayed until issuance of a final decision or findings by the Board. If the
Zoning Officer or other municipal agency presents facts to the Board
indicating that such a stay would cause imminent peril to life or
property, development or official action can only be stayed by
restraining order granted by the Board or by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
C. Substantive validity challenge. A landowner who desires to challenge,
on substantive grounds, the validity of a map or ordinance provision
which prohibits or restricts the use or development of land in which he
or she has an interest may submit the challenge either to the Zoning
Hearing Board or, with a request for curative amendment, to the
Borough Council.
(1) The written application to the Zoning Hearing Board shall contain
the reasons for the challenge.
(2) Public notice of the hearing shall include notice that the validity of
the ordinance or map is in question and shall specify the place and
time where a copy of the request and its accompanying materials
may be examined by the public.
(3) Based upon the testimony at the hearing(s), the Board shall
determine whether the challenged ordinance or map is defective,
as alleged. If the challenge is found to have merit, the decision of
the Board shall include recommended amendments to the
challenged ordinance which will cure the defects found.
(4) In reaching its decision, the Board shall consider the plans and
explanatory material submitted by the landowner and shall also
consider:
(a) The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water
supplies, schools and other public service facilities;
(b) If the proposal is for residential use, the impact of the proposal
upon regional housing needs and the effectiveness of the
proposal in providing housing units of a type actually available
to and affordable by classes of persons otherwise unlawfully
excluded by the challenged provisions of the ordinance or map;
§ 95-201 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-201
94:612
§ 95-202. Expiration.
Unless otherwise specified by the Board, a special exception or variance
shall expire if the applicant fails to obtain any and all permits within six
months of the date of authorization thereof.
§ 95-203. Appeal to Court.
Any persons aggrieved by the decision of the Board may within 30 days
thereafter appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Montgomery County in
accordance with the provisions of Article X-A of the Municipalities Planning
Code, as amended.130
§ 95-204. (Reserved)
§ 95-205. (Reserved)
§ 95-206. (Reserved)
§ 95-207. (Reserved)
§ 95-208. (Reserved)
§ 95-209. (Reserved)
(c) The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by
the site's soils, slopes, woodland, wetlands, floodplains,
aquifers, natural resources and other natural features;
(d) The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes,
woodland, wetlands, floodplains, aquifers, natural resources
and other natural features, the degree to which these are
protected or destroyed, the tolerance of the resources to
development and any adverse environmental impacts; and
(e) The impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture
and other land uses which are essential to public health and
welfare.
(5) If the Board fails to act on the request within 45 days of the last
hearing, a denial of the request is deemed to have occurred.
130. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 95-201 WATER § 95-209
94:613

ARTICLE XVIII
Violations, Enforcement Remedies, Fines and Charges
§ 95-210. Violations; causes of action.
In case any building, structure, landscaping or land is or is proposed to be
erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained or used
in violation of this chapter, the Borough Council or, with the approval of
the Borough Council, an officer of the borough or any aggrieved owner or
tenant of real property who shows that his or her property or person will be
substantially affected by the alleged violation, in addition to other remedies,
may institute any appropriate legal action or proceeding to prevent,
restrain, correct or abate such building, structure, landscaping or land or
to prevent, in or about such premises, any act, conduct, business or use
constituting a violation. When any such action is instituted by a landowner
or tenant, notice of that action shall be served upon the borough at least 30
days prior to the time the action is begun by serving a copy of the complaint
on the Borough Council. No such action may be maintained until such notice
has been given.
§ 95-211. Enforcement notice.
A. If it appears to the borough that a violation of this chapter has
occurred, the borough shall initiate enforcement proceedings by
sending an enforcement notice as provided in this section.
B. The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the
parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has filed
a written request to receive enforcement notices regarding that parcel
and to any other person requested in writing by the owner of record.
C. The enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
(1) The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the borough intends to take action.
(2) The location of the property in violation.
(3) The specific violation with a description of the requirements which
have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions
of this chapter and the steps which must be taken to correct the
violation.
(4) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
(5) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board within a prescribed period of time in
accordance with procedures set forth in this chapter.
§ 95-210 WATER § 95-211
94:615
§ 95-212. Violations and penalties; enforcement remedies and fines.
§ 95-213. Charges.
Charges for applications, permits, certificates, etc., shall be as stated in
resolutions adopted by the Borough Council, in accordance with applicable
laws.
§ 95-214. (Reserved)
§ 95-215. (Reserved)
§ 95-216. (Reserved)
(6) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board,
constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions as described herein.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefore in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the borough, pay a judgment of not more than $500,
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the
borough as a result thereof.
B. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the
date of the determination of a violation by the District Justice.
C. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of
civil procedure.
D. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation,
unless the District Justice determining that there has been a violation
further determines that there was a good faith basis for the person,
partnership or corporation violating this chapter to have believed that
there was no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to
have been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date
of the determination of a violation by the District Justice, and thereafter,
each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
E. All judgments, costs and reasonable attorney fees collected for the
violation of this chapter shall be paid over to the borough.
F. The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending a final adjudication
of the violation and judgment.
G. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the borough the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
§ 95-211 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-217
94:616
§ 95-217. (Reserved)
§ 95-218. (Reserved)
§ 95-219. (Reserved)
§ 95-217 WATER § 95-219
94:617

ARTICLE XIX
Amendments
§ 95-220. Power of amendment.
The Borough Council of the Borough of East Greenville from time to time
may amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal this chapter, in whole
or in part, including the Zoning Map, by the procedures noted herein or as
otherwise required by law.
§ 95-221. Public notice.
For any amendment proposed to this chapter, the Borough Council shall
conduct a public hearing pursuant to public notice, as follows:
A. At a regular or special meeting, the Borough Council shall fix the time
and place for the public hearing.
B. Notice of hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be published once a week
for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the
borough. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and
particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first
publication shall not be more than 30 days and the second publication
shall not be less than seven days from the date of the hearing. The
notice shall include reference to the time and place of the hearing as
well as the place in the borough where copies of the amendment may be
examined without charge or obtained for the cost of reproduction.
C. Publication of text. The full text of the proposed amendment, or a
reasonably detailed summary prepared by the Borough Solicitor, shall
be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the borough
no less than seven days and no more than 60 days before a vote of
enactment. If the full text is not published:
(1) A copy of the full text shall be supplied to the publishing newspaper
at the time of publication.
(2) An attested copy of the full text shall be filed in the Montgomery
County Law Library.
D. Mailed notice. Notice shall be mailed to every person or group who
shall have registered with the borough their names and addresses for
this purpose.
E. Perimeter posting. If the proposed amendment involves a Zoning Map
change, notice of said public hearing shall be conspicuously posted
along the perimeter of the affected tract by the borough at least one
week prior to the public hearing, at points deemed by the borough to be
sufficient to notify potentially interested citizens.
F. Change to amendment. If, after any public hearing, the proposed
amendment is changed substantially or is revised to include land not
§ 95-220 WATER § 95-221
94:619
§ 95-222. Application for amendment by citizens.
Every application for amendment of this chapter shall first be presented to
the Zoning Officer and shall contain the following:
§ 95-223. Petitions for amendment.
Whenever the owners of 50% or more of the frontage in any district shall
present to the Borough Council a petition, duly signed and acknowledged,
requesting an amendment, supplement, change, modification or repeal of
the regulations prescribed for or of the Zoning Map including such district,
it shall be the duty of the Borough Council to hold a public hearing thereon
previously affected, the Council shall hold another public hearing,
pursuant to public notice, before proceeding to a vote on the
amendment.
G. Notice of change to amendment. Where a public hearing is required in
accordance with § 95-221F above, at least 10 days before voting to
enact, the Council shall publish in a newspaper of general circulation in
the borough a brief summary setting forth in reasonable detail the
provision of the amendment along with a summary of the changed
portions of the amendment.
H. Thirty days prior to the hearing on the proposed amendment, the
Borough Council shall submit the proposed ordinance to the
Montgomery County Planning Commission for review and
recommendation.
A. The applicant's name and address and his or her representative and the
interest of every person represented in the application.
B. A plan showing the extent of the area to be rezoned, streets bounding
and intersecting the area, the land use and zoning classification of
abutting districts and photographs of the area to be rezoned and
abutting area.
C. A statement of the circumstances in the proposed district and the
abutting districts and any other factors on which the applicant relies as
reasons for supporting the proposed rezoning.
D. The approximate time schedule for the beginning and completion of
development in the area.
E. A site plan to scale, indicating the locations of structures, uses, areas
for off-street parking and loading.
F. Information about the market area to be served by the proposed
development, if a commercial use, including population to be served,
effective demand for proposed business facilities and any other
information necessary for the Borough Council to evaluate the
proposal.
§ 95-221 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § 95-223
94:620
and cause notice thereof to be given in the manner prescribed in § 95-196
herein; provided, however, that the Borough Council shall not be required
to consider a petition requesting an amendment, supplement, change,
modification or repeal of any provision of this chapter or the Zoning Map
or to hold a public hearing thereon when the requested change is the same
or substantially the same as requested and upon which a public hearing
has been held within the previous year. Such petition shall set forth the
following facts:
§ 95-224. Opportunity to be heard.
At the public hearing, full opportunity to be heard shall be given to any
citizen and all parties in interest.
§ 95-225. County copy.
Within 30 days after enactment, a copy of the amendment shall be
forwarded to the Montgomery County Planning Commission.
§ 95-226. Fees.
For the purpose of defraying expenses of advertising, etc., applications
for amendments shall be accompanied by payment to the borough in
accordance with its adopted fee schedule.
A. Signature and address of each petitioner, together with the amount of
front footage in any district or part thereof.
B. The petition, if pertaining to the Zoning Map, shall have attached
thereto a plot plan of the tract to be affected.
§ 95-223 WATER § 95-226
94:621
Appendix
Chapter A098
(RESERVED)
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
98-1 1-5-1998 Tax rate for 1998 NCM
98-2 1-5-1998 Property maintenance
amendment
Repealed by Ord. No.
2007-03
98-3 2-2-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 91
98-4 2-2-1998 Numbering of buildings
amendment
Ch. 37
98-5 3-2-1998 Zoning Map amendment NCM
98-6 3-2-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 95
98-7 3-2-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 91
98-8 9-8-1998 Unified Police Department Repealed by Ord. No.
2017-02
98-9 12-22-1998 Unified Police Department
amendment
Repealed by Ord. No.
2017-02
99-1 1-4-1999 Tax rate for 1999 NCM
99-2 3-1-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 91
99-3 6-7-1999 Garbage and refuse
disposal amendment
Ch. 47
99-4 7-6-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 91
99-5 9-7-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 91
00-1 1-3-2000 Tax rate for 2000 NCM
§ 95-226 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § DL-1
A098:622
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
00-2 3-6-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 91
00-3 7-3-2000 Water amendment Ch. 94
00-4 7-3-2000 Animal control amendment Ch. 32
00-5 7-3-2000 Playground rules Ch. 62, Art. I
00-6 11-6-2000 Parks and Recreation
Board
Ch. 13
00-7 12-4-2000 Zoning renumbering Ch. 95
01-1 1-2-2001 Tax rate for 2001 NCM
01-2 1-2-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 91
01-3 2-12-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 91
01-4 3-12-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 95
01-5 3-12-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 95
01-6 5-7-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 95
2001-7 3-12-2001 Curfew Ch. 41
2002-1 1-7-2002 Tax rate for 2002 NCM
2002-2 1-7-2002 Authority over parks and
recreation areas
Ch. 13
2002-3 3-4-2002 Water cross-connections Ch. 94, Art. II
2003-1 1-6-2003 Tax rate for 2003 NCM
2003-2 1-6-2003 Water amendment Ch. 94, Art. I
2003-3 4-8-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 95
2003-4 5-5-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 91
2003-5 5-27-2003 Police cooperative
arrangement
Repealed by Ord. No.
2017-02
2003-6 7-7-2003 Dumpsters amendment Ch. 47
2004-1 1-5-2004 Tax rate for 2004 NCM
2004-2 1-5-2004 Water amendment Ch. 94, Art. I
2004-3 1-5-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 91
2004-4 3-1-2004 Stormwater management Superseded by Ord.
No. 2014-02
2004-5 3-15-2004 Waterline easements NCM
2004-6 3-25-2004 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 (RESERVED) § DL-1
A098:623
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2004-7 3-25-2004 Bond NCM
2004-8 4-5-2004 Uniform Construction
Code enforcement
Ch. 35, Art. I
2004-9 6-7-2004 Property maintenance
amendment
Repealed by Ord. No.
2007-03
2005-1 1-3-2005 Tax rate for 2005 NCM
2005-2 8-1-2005 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 35, Arts. I and III
2005-3 9-6-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 91
2006-1 1-3-2006 Tax rate for 2006 NCM
2006-2 6-5-2006 Unified Police Department
amendment
Repealed by Ord. No.
2017-02
2007-1 1-8-2007 Tax rate for 2007 NCM
2007-2 3-5-2007 Realty transfer tax Ch. 88, Art. I
2007-3 3-5-2007 Property maintenance Repealed by Ord. No.
2010-06
2007-4 6-4-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 91
2007-5 12-3-2007 Pensions: municipal
employees retirement
system
Repealed by Ord. No.
2013-02
2008-01 1-7-2008 Tax rate for 2008 NCM
2008-02 3-3-2008 Salaries and compensation
amendment
Ch. 18
2008-03 3-3-2008 Street acceptance NCM
2008-04 8-4-2008 Building construction:
adoption of Uniform
Construction Code
amendment
Ch. 35, Art. I
2009-01 1-5-2009 Tax rate for 2009 NCM
2009-02 3-11-2009 Fraud investigation and
reporting policy
Ch. 7
2009-03 4-6-2009 Unified Police Department
amendment
Repealed by Ord. No.
2017-02
2009-04 7-6-2009 Local Government
Investment Trust
Ch. 8
2009-05 8-3-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 95
§ DL-1 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § DL-1
A098:624
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2009-06 9-8-2009 Garbage and refuse
disposal amendment;
outdoor burning:
contained open burning
Chs. 47; 58, Art. I
2009-07 12-7-2009 Outdoor burning: outdoor
wood-fired burners/
furnaces
Ch. 58, Art. II
2010-01 1-4-2010 Tax rate for 2010 NCM
2010-02 2-1-2010 Garbage and refuse
disposal amendment
Ch. 47
2010-03 3-1-2010 Disorderly conduct: noise Ch. 42, Art. I
2010-04 6-7-2010 Local services tax Ch. 88, Art. V
2010-05 6-7-2010 Officers and employees:
Borough Manager
Ch. 10, Art. II
2010-06 10-4-2010 Property maintenance Ch. 73
2011-01 7-5-2011 Building construction:
adoption of Uniform
Construction Code
amendment
Ch. 35, Art. I
2012-01 2-28-2012 Real estate tax
certifications amendment
Ch. 88, Art. IV
2012-02 4-24-2012 Municipal parking lots:
parking regulations
Ch. 53, Art. I
2012-03 9-4-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 95
2012-04 12-17-2012 Collection of delinquent
real estate taxes
Ch. 88, Art. VI
2013-01 1-22-2013 Tax rate for 2013 NCM
2013-02 6-25-2013 Municipal employees
retirement system
Ch. 13A, Art. I
2013-03 9-24-2013 Animal control amendment Ch. 32
2013-04 10-22-2013 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 73
Res. No.
2013-10
9-24-2013 Municipal parking lots:
parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 53, Art. I
2014-01 1-28-2014 Tax rate for 2014 NCM
2014-02 1-28-2014 Stormwater management Ch. 81
2014-03 4-22-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 91
§ DL-1 (RESERVED) § DL-1
A098:625
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2014-04 8-26-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 95
2015-01 1-5-2015 Tax rate for 2015 NCM
2015-02 11-24-2015 Capital projects NCM
2015-03 12-7-2015 Municipal parking lots:
parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 53, Art. I
2015-04 12-22-2015 Tax rate for 2016 NCM
2016-01 3-7-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 95
2016-02 4-4-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 91
2016-03 7-26-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 91
2016-04 12-21-2016 Tax rate for 2017 NCM
2016-05 3-7-2016 Emergency Operations
Plan
NCM
2017-01 4-25-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 95
Res. No.
2017-07
4-25-2017 Records: Open Records
Policy
Ch. 17, Art. I
2017-02 5-8-2017 Police Services: Police
Department, Unified
Amendment
Ch. 14, Art. I
2017-03 7-25-2017 Garbage and Refuse
Disposal: Recycling
Ch. 47, Art. II
2017-04 10-24-2017 Peddling and Soliciting:
House-to-House
Solicitation Amendment;
Posters and Handbills
Amendment
Ch. 64, Art. I; Ch. 71
2017-05 10-24-2017 Civil Service Commission Ch. 9
2017-06 11-28-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 91
2017-07 12-28-2017 Tax Rate NCM
2017-08 12-28-2017 Police Pension Fund
Amendment
Ch. 15
2017-08 4-25-2017 Support of Changes to
House Bill No. 290
NCM
2017-09 4-25-2017 Petition of Representatives
and Senators
NCM
2017-10 4-25-2017 Grant Application NCM
§ DL-1 EAST GREENVILLE CODE § DL-1
A098:626
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2017-18 10-2-2017 Fees NCM
2017-19 10-24-2017 Appointment NCM
2017-20 11-28-2017 Water Rent Collection
Procedure
NCM
2017-21 11-28-2017 Purchase; Lease-Purchase
Agreement
NCM
2017-22 11-28-2017 Purchase; Lease-Purchase
Agreement
NCM
2017-23 12-28-2017 Prohibiting NCM
2018-01 6-4-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 95
2018-02 6-18-2018 Cable Franchise NCM
2018-03 7-16-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 95
2018-04 10-15-2018 Property Maintenance
Amendment
Ch. 73
2018-11 6-4-2018 Budget NCM
2018-13 7-16-2018 Facility Plan Amendment NCM
2018-14 8-20-2018 Procedure for Collection of
Real Estate Taxes
NCM
2018-15 8-20-2018 Hazard Mitigation Plan
Update
NCM
2018-16 10-15-2018 Appointment NCM
§ DL-1 (RESERVED) § DL-1
A098:627