Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code by Board of Supervisors
[Adopted 12-19-1988 by Ord. No. 274]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 702, Clause XLI.1 (53 P.S. § 65741.1) of the Second
Class Township Code, the codification of a complete body of ordinances
for the Township of East Norriton, County of Montgomery, Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, as revised, codified and consolidated into titles, chapters
and sections by General Code Publishers Corp. and consisting of Chapters
1 through 206, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted,
ordained and enacted as a single ordinance of the Township of East
Norriton, which shall be known and is hereby designated as the "Code of
the Township of East Norriton," hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of this
ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and not as
new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from
the date of adoption of the prior ordinance. All such provisions are hereby
continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their
adoption by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of East Norriton, and
it is the intention of said Board of Supervisors that each such provision
contained within the Code is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears
in said Code. Only such provisions of former ordinances as are omitted
from this Code shall be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions
of § 1-3 below, and only new or changed provisions, as described in § 1-6
below, shall be deemed to be enacted from the effective date of this Code,
as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of ordinances not contained in Code.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted by the Township of East Norriton and in force on the date of the
adoption of this Code and not contained in the Code are hereby repealed as
of the effective date given in § 1-15 below, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-4. Ordinances saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to July 1, 1988.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Township prior to the effective date of this
ordinance, or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Township or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending,
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Township.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Township or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond of the Township, or other instruments
or evidence of the Township's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Township.
K. Any ordinance providing for requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance, or part of an ordinance, providing for laying out,
opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing
grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any
right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other
public place or property or designating various streets as public
highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; or providing for a
system of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the
construction, extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any
part of a system of sewers or water supply lines.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
§ 1-4 EAST NORRITON CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such legislation shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted ordinances; new
provisions.
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held
to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of
the Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any
statute, other ordinance or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance or regulation
impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of such statute,
other ordinance or regulation shall control.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Township or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
A. Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances of the Township for adoption and revision as part of the
Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes were
made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the Board
of Supervisors that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if
the ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended to
read as such.
B. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, the following changes and revisions of a
substantive nature are hereby made to various ordinances included in
the Code. These changes are made to bring provisions into conformity
with the desired policies of the Board of Supervisors, and it is the intent
of the Board of Supervisors that all such changes be adopted as part of
the Code as if the ordinances so changed have been previously formally
amended to read as such. All such changes and revisions shall be
deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of the Code specified in
§ 1-15.1
1. Editor's Note: Pursuant to § 1-6B, the following sections, articles and chapters were added
or amended; § 9-7B, Ch. 59, §§ 63-8A, 72-2A(13) and (14), 72-4A(4), 72-6A(2), 72-6C(3),
77-3, 82-1, 82-2A, 82-3A, 82-4A, 82-5B and C, 87-3, 87-5, 87-8A, 92-2, 97-4, 110-7, 114-6,
118-5, 118-11, 122-6, 129-5, 135-3, 139-2, 144-3, 144-6, 144-9, 148-3, 152-6, 156-5, 159-2,
162-18, 162-32, 162-43, 162-79, 168-5B, 168-14A, 178-9, 182-17, 182-22I, 182-25A,
182-39, 182-51, 190-3 and 205-146.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-8
1:5
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-9. Filing of copies of Code.
Three copies of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
Ordinance Book in the office of the Township Manager and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copies
shall be certified to by the Township Manager, as provided by law, and such
certified copies shall remain on file in the office of the Township Manager,
available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while
said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of
the Board of Supervisors to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be
incorporated into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be
understood and intended to include such changes. Whenever such
additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be
adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the post-bound book containing said Code, as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Township Manager, or someone authorized
and directed by him or her, to keep up-to-date the certified copies of
the book containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the
Township Manager for the use of the public. All changes in said Code
and all ordinances adopted by the Board of Supervisors subsequent to the
effective date of this codification which the Board of Supervisors shall adopt
specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included
therein by reference until such changes or new ordinances are printed as
supplements to said Code books, at which time such supplements shall be
inserted therein.
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code, or in supplements made to the Code, are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
ordinances.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
ordinances.
§ 1-8 EAST NORRITON CODE § 1-12
1:6
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Township Manager, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction and of the adoption of the
Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. The enactment
and application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the
notices of introduction and adoption, as required by law, and the availability
of copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and
considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for
all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code, or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the Township
to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not
exceeding $300 plus costs of prosecution, and in default of payment thereof
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article or part
thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be
illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article or part thereof rendered. It is hereby declared to be the intent of
the Board of Supervisors that this ordinance and the Code would have
been adopted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional clause, sentence,
subsection, section, article or part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after January 1, 1989.
§ 1-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:7

ARTICLE II
Ordinances Adopted During Codification
[During the process of codification, certain complete new
ordinances were approved by the Board of Supervisors for inclusion
in the Code of the Township of East Norriton. Such new ordinances
are noted in the histories of individual chapters as "Adopted . . .
during codification; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II." During
the course of routine supplementation, specific amendment dates
will be inserted where pertinent in the text of the various chapters.
The listing below sets forth each chapter and, where applicable,
each section affected by any such legislation adopted during
codification. The complete text of such amendments is on file in the
office of the Township Manager, where it may be inspected during
regular office hours.]
Chapter/Section Adoption Date Legislation
196 12-19-1988 Ord. No. 275
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:9
Chapter 4
ADULT AGE, ESTABLISHMENT OF
§ 4-1. Definition amended.
Any ordinance granting any privilege or right or imposing any duty upon
any adult is hereby amended to define adult as any person 18 years of age
or older.
§ 4-2. Age of adult amended.
Any ordinance granting any privilege or right or imposing any duty upon
any person 21 years of age or over is hereby amended to read any person
18 years of age or older.
§ 4-3. Construal.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as changing the definition of
adult or lowering any age from 21 years of age to 18 years of age, except
insofar as the various ordinances presently adopted by the Township of East
Norriton are concerned.
Chapter 6
CONSORTIUM OF COMMUNITIES
§ 6-1. Articles of Agreement.
East Norriton Township shall endorse the Articles of Agreement as drafted
by a committee of the Consortium communities.2
§ 6-2. Authorization.
The President of the Board of Supervisors and the Township Secretary
shall be authorized to execute said Articles of Agreement on behalf of the
Township of East Norriton.
2. Editor's Note: The preamble to this chapter reads as follows: "WHEREAS, the Townships of
Abington, Cheltenham, Lower Gwynedd, Lower Moreland, Plymouth, Upper Dublin, Upper
Merion, Upper Moreland, Whitpain, Whitemarsh and Springfield have joined as a
voluntary organization to be known as the 'Montgomery County Consortium of
Communities,' and "WHEREAS, the Montgomery County Consortium of Communities,
hereinafter referred to as the 'Consortium,' has undertaken several cooperative projects
which have been economically advantageous to the Townships, and "WHEREAS, the
Consortium seeks to utilize the total resources of all member communities to meet the
challenges of the region, seek solutions to mutual problems and to develop
recommendations for ratification and implementation by member local governments, and
"WHEREAS, the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act of 1973 (Act No. 180) provides that
two or more municipalities in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania may jointly cooperate
and exercise the respective governmental functions, powers or responsibilities or delegate
or transfer any function, power or responsibility to one or more other governmental units
upon passage of an ordinance of its governing body."
§ 1-15 EAST NORRITON CODE § 6-3
4:10
§ 6-3. Representation.
East Norriton Township shall be an active participant in the Consortium,
shall pay annual dues and shall be otherwise represented by its Township
Manager or his designated representative at all meetings of the
Consortium.
Chapter 9
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY
§ 9-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ATTACK — A direct or indirect assault against the Township of East
Norriton, its government, its environs or the nation by the forces of a
hostile nation or the agents thereof, including but not limited to assault by
bombings; radiological, chemical or biological means; or sabotage.
COORDINATOR — The Emergency Management Coordinator of the
Emergency Management Agency of the Township of East Norriton.
DISASTER — An actual or threatened attack, natural disaster, extraordinary
fire, epidemic, evacuation or any other pending or actual emergency or
calamity which endangers or threatens to endanger the health, safety, life
or property of the residents of the Township or endangers or threatens to
endanger the constituted government of the nation or state.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT — To carry out the basic government
functions of maintaining the public peace, health and safety, including plans
and preparations for protection from and relief, recovery and rehabilitation
from the effects of an attack on the Township and such activity in connection
with a disaster as defined herein.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT FORCES — The employees, equipment and
facilities of all Township departments, boards, institutions and commissions
and all volunteer personnel, equipment and facilities contributed by or
obtained from volunteer persons or agencies.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT VOLUNTEER — Any person duly enrolled,
identified and appointed by the Coordinator and assigned to participate in
Emergency Management Agency activity.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, corporation, association or partnership,
including the plural as well as the singular and both genders.
REGULATION — The plans, programs and emergency procedures
established by the Emergency Management Agency which are deemed
essential to an adequate program.
VOLUNTEER — A person contributing a service, equipment or facilities to
the Emergency Management Agency without remuneration.
§ 6-3 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY § 9-2
9:11
§ 9-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to:
§ 9-3. Creation of Agency; Coordinator.
A. Establish an Emergency Management Agency that will be responsible
for the complete and efficient utilization of all Township facilities to
safeguard and protect life and property within the Township of East
Norriton during a state of war, a local emergency or disaster and during
normal day-to-day operations.
B. Establish the Emergency Management Agency and its attendant
responsibilities, duties and powers, including but not limited to
provisions for the promulgation of a basic emergency management plan
with necessary lines of succession.
C. Establish the Emergency Management Coordinator and his attendant
responsibilities, duties and powers and Coordinator of the Emergency
Management Agency.
D. Provide for the promulgation of emergency management regulations,
enforcement and penalties.
A. There is hereby created an Emergency Management Agency for the
Township of East Norriton. The Emergency Management Agency shall
consist of a Coordinator, to be known as the "Emergency Management
Coordinator," who shall be selected by the Township Board of
Supervisors and appointed by the Governor of Pennsylvania. Said
Coordinator shall serve at the pleasure of the Township Board of
Supervisors or its designated alternate. The Coordinator may appoint a
staff as is necessary, but in all circumstances said appointments, if any,
shall be with the express approval of the Township Board of Supervisors
or its designated alternate. The members of the Emergency
Management Agency shall serve without compensation.
B. The Emergency Management Coordinator shall be professionally
competent and capable of planning, effecting coordination among
various departments and generally controlling coordinated operations
by emergency preparedness forces.
C. The employees, equipment and facilities of all Township departments,
boards, institutions and commissions will be at the disposal of the
Emergency Management Agency and will participate as directed by the
Coordinator with the approval of the Township Board of Supervisors;
provided, however, that duties assigned to the various departments
shall be the same or similar to the normal activities of said department.
D. During normal day-to-day activities each department head shall be
responsible for practicing emergency management within the
department, and final Emergency Management Agency authority will
rest with the Township Board of Supervisors; provided, however, that
§ 9-2 EAST NORRITON CODE § 9-3
9:12
§ 9-4. Powers and duties of Agency.
Subject to the direction and control of the Township Board of Supervisors,
the Emergency Management Agency shall have the following powers and
duties:
§ 9-5. Powers and duties of Coordinator.
Subject to the direction and control of the Township Board of Supervisors,
the Emergency Management Coordinator shall have the following powers
and duties:
the Board of Supervisors may delegate such final authority to the
Township Fire Marshal regarding the Fire Department and the Chief of
Police with regard to the Police Department.
A. To prepare a comprehensive basic plan for emergency management and
keep the basic plan current to provide for the fullest protection of the
Township and its inhabitants in case of disaster or declared emergency.
B. To recommend to the Township Board of Supervisors or its designated
alternate all necessary rules and regulations for the implementation of
the basic plan and all other rules and regulations necessary for the
protection of the Township and its inhabitants in case of disaster or
declared emergency.
C. To provide individual and organizational training programs to ensure
prompt, efficient and effective disaster emergency services.
D. To organize, prepare and coordinate all locally available manpower,
materials, supplies, equipment, facilities and services necessary for
disaster emergency readiness, response and recovery.
E. To adopt and implement precautionary measures to mitigate the
anticipated effects of disaster.
F. To have available for inspection at its emergency operations center all
emergency management plans, rules and orders, if any, of the agency.
G. To provide prompt and accurate information regarding local disaster
emergencies to appropriate commonwealth and local officials and
agencies and the general public.
A. To oversee the formulation of the basic plan of emergency management
and to direct its implementation in time of disaster or declared
emergency.
B. To designate the lines of succession within the Emergency Management
Agency and be responsible for the proper performance of all necessary
duties and functions assigned to the various departments under the
basic plan.
§ 9-3 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY § 9-5
9:13
§ 9-5.1. Mutual aid agreement for emergency services. [Added
5-26-1992 by Ord. No. 316]
C. To seek assistance from outside the Township when a required
competency or skill for a disaster function is not available within the
Township departments.
D. To make recommendations for rulings, orders or ordinances on behalf
of the Emergency Management Agency to the Township Board of
Supervisors or its designated alternate whenever requested to do so
and whenever it is deemed necessary or advisable.
E. To make reports to the Township Board of Supervisors as required.
A. The Board of Supervisors of East Norriton Township is hereby
authorized to enter into an agreement with the contiguous surrounding
municipalities of East Norriton Township or to appoint an authorized
and appropriate officer or employee of the Township to enter into such
agreement for the mutual aid in the provision of emergency
management services to East Norriton Township and its surrounding
municipalities. Such agreement is entered into in accordance with the
Emergency Management Services Code, 35 Pa.C.S.A. § 7101 et seq.
B. This agreement shall have a perpetual term unless the Township
chooses to withdraw from the agreement by notice given in accordance
with the agreement.
C. The purpose and the objectives of the agreement shall be for the
dispatch of emergency services equipment and/or personnel by East
Norriton Township or its surrounding municipalities in response to the
occurrence of a threat of man-made, natural or war-caused disaster; the
distribution of materials, supplies, equipment and other forms of aid by
and between East Norriton Township and the surrounding
municipalities; the staffing and equipping of an emergency operation
center responsible for coordinating the emergency response activities
of either East Norriton Township or the surrounding municipalities
affected by an actual or imminent disaster emergency; the dispatch of
emergency service equipment, material and/or personnel by either East
Norriton Township or the surrounding municipalities in response to a
declaration of local disaster emergency declared by East Norriton
Township or any of the surrounding municipalities; response to
incidents, actual or imminent, which endanger the health, safety or
welfare of the public and which require the use of special equipment,
trained personnel or personnel in larger numbers than are locally
available in order to reduce, counteract or remove the danger caused
by the incident; and participation in exercises, drills or other training
activities designed to train personnel to prepare for, cope with or
prevent the occurrence of any disaster emergency. The powers and
scope of authority delegated in the agreement shall be coincidental
with and shall not exceed the powers and scope of authority delegated
in this chapter to the Emergency Management Agency and Coordinator.
§ 9-5 EAST NORRITON CODE § 9-5.1
9:14
§ 9-6. Approval of expenditures.
No purchase or purchases shall be made, no contract entered into and no
expenses incurred by the Emergency Management Agency, which involve
the payment of more than $25 out of the treasury of East Norriton
Township, unless the proposed expenditure has been approved in writing
by the Township Board of Supervisors. If any purchase or contract is made
or other expenses incurred contrary to the provisions of this section, East
Norriton Township shall not be responsible for the payment thereof, but the
person acting for the Agency in the transaction shall be personally liable for
the payment.
§ 9-7. Violations and penalties.
D. The performance of the agreement shall be financed from the treasury
of the Township and to the extent possible through outside grants.
E. The agreement shall be implemented by persons designated by the
Board of Supervisors of East Norriton Township, from time to time,
which may include the Emergency Management Coordinator.
F. All property, real or personal, to be acquired, managed, licensed or
disposed of pursuant to the agreement shall be done only with the
appropriate authorization of the Board of Supervisors and any and all
contracts or policies of insurance, employee benefits, including social
security, for employees carrying out the agreement shall be done with
the approval of the Board of Supervisors.
G. The Board of Supervisors authorizes the Chairman of the Board of
Supervisors and the Secretary of the Board of Supervisors to enter into
a mutual aid agreement for emergency services to carry out the
purposes and intent stated herein with the municipalities contiguous to
and surrounding East Norriton Township, in form acceptable to the
Township Solicitor.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this
chapter or of the regulations or plans issued pursuant to the authority
contained herein or to willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of
the Emergency Management Agency as herein defined in the
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter or any regulation, plan or
order issued hereunder.
B. Any person violating any provision of this chapter or any rule,
regulation or order promulgated hereunder, upon conviction before a
District Justice within the district of which the Township of East
Norriton is a part, shall be fined not less than $300, plus costs of
prosecution. In default of the payment of any fine, such persons shall be
liable for imprisonment of not more than 30 days in the Montgomery
County Prison. Whenever any violators shall be notified by a
representative of the Township or by service of summons or prosecution
or in any other way that such violation has been committed, each day
§ 9-5.1 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY § 9-7
9:15
Chapter 10
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency Management Agency — See Ch. 9.
Police Department — See Ch. 33.
Alarm devices — See Ch. 54.
Uniform Construction Code — See Ch. 74.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 95.
Hazardous wastes — See Ch. 118.
Fire insurance — See Ch. 120, Art. I.
Kerosene heating and storage — See Ch. 122.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 152.
that the violator shall continue in such violation shall constitute a
separate offense punishable by fine or penalty. [Amended 12-19-1988
by Ord. No. 274]
§ 9-7 EAST NORRITON CODE § 9-7
9:16
ARTICLE I
Fire Department of East Norriton Township
§ 10-1. Creation and composition.
The Fire Department of East Norriton Township shall consist of the Norriton
Fire Engine Company and any companies as the Board of Supervisors of
East Norriton Township may from time to time receive into the Department
by ordinance or resolution.
§ 10-2. Officers.
§ 10-3. Control by Board of Supervisors.
The Fire Department and all personnel comprising the Fire Department
shall at all times conform to any and all rules and regulations as adopted
by the East Norriton Township Board of Supervisors as well as the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania's Second Class Township Code,
notwithstanding anything in the Constitution and bylaws of the Fire
Department. The ultimate responsibility of the Fire Department lies with the
East Norriton Township Board of Supervisors.
§ 10-4. Appropriations.
The Township Board of Supervisors may appropriate annually to the
Norriton Fire Engine Company such sum or sums as may be in the
judgement of the Board of Supervisors considered proper. Any such
appropriations may be made upon and subject to such conditions as the
Board of Supervisors may deem proper to impose. Appropriations shall be
itemized in detail.
§ 10-5. Submission of Constitution and bylaws changes.
The Norriton Fire Engine Company shall submit, after the first reading and
prior to the second reading, any proposed constitution and bylaws changes
for review by the Township Board of Supervisors.
§ 10-6. Rules and regulations.
The Norriton Fire Engine Company may recommend rules and regulations
covering the following matters, but such rules and regulations shall not be
effective until submitted to and approved by the Board of Supervisors:
A. Officers shall be as stated in Article II of the Company's bylaws
Preamble.
B. The officers of the Norriton Fire Engine Company shall consist of a
President, First Vice President, Second Vice President, nine Trustees,
Financial Secretary-Treasurer, Membership Secretary, Recording
Secretary, Fire Chief, Chief Engineer, and Fire Police Captain elected by
the Company members as set forth in the bylaws of the fire company.
§ 10-1 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY § 10-6
9:17
§ 10-7. Duties of fire fighters.
The Board of Supervisors of East Norriton Township does hereby authorize
the Norriton Fire Company and all its members to perform the following
duties:
A. Prevention of fires.
B. Storage and use of explosives and flammables.
C. Installation and maintenance for fire alarm systems.
D. Inspection and regulation of fire escapes and exits from all buildings
where a number of persons work or congregate.
E. The investigation of the cause, origin or circumstance of fires.
F. The establishment of fire drills in educational or other establishments.
G. Determining the number and location of fire hydrants.
H. The inspection of all fire-fighting equipment.
I. The institution of classes in fire fighting.
J. Elimination of fire hazards.
K. Procedure for dispatching fire companies.
A. To fight fires.
B. To identify and remove fire hazards.
C. To inspect buildings to determine whether fire hazards exist.
D. To assist in the removal or salvage of all property of any type which has
been subject to windstorms, floods, wrecks, fires, or other catastrophes.
E. To assist in the maintenance and repair of any buildings or real estate
or other property owned by said volunteer Fire Department or property
owned by East Norriton Township which is being utilized or operated by
said Fire Department.
F. To assist with emergency management services (civil defense)
programs.
G. To attend and participate in fire/training schools, exhibitions or
programs, whether held in the Township or elsewhere.
H. To assist in the maintenance of fire alarm systems or fire hydrants by
reporting malfunctions of such systems to the proper authorities.
I. To assist in the rescue of persons or animals.
J. To participate in fund-raising activities.
§ 10-6 EAST NORRITON CODE § 10-7
9:18
§ 10-8. Violations of rules, policies and duties.
As stated in Article XVII of the Company's bylaws:
K. To participate in parades, either in the Township or in a community
within a twenty-mile radius of the Township building or at such other
locations as may be approved by the Board of Supervisors.
L. To participate in water rescues.
M. To assist in fire prevention.
N. To respond to out-of-the-jurisdiction calls pursuant to mutual aid
agreements.
O. To travel to and from any of the above activities, either on foot or in any
type of vehicle.
P. To review proposed subdivision/land development plans and to
recommend in an advisory capacity to the Board of Supervisors,
changes or modifications to the plans that will facilitate access for fire
equipment.
Q. To recommend to the Board of Supervisors amendments that will
improve and strengthen Building Code/Fire Code3 provisions in the
interest of fire prevention and public safety.
A. Charges may be preferred against any officer or member of the
Company for conduct not becoming such officer or member, provided
all charges preferred shall be submitted in writing at a stated meeting
of the Company with 30 days after the commission of the alleged act or
acts.
B. Upon receipt of such complaint, the President shall appoint a
committee of five active members of the Company: one each from the
appointees of the Fire Chief, Chief Engineer, and the Fire Police
Captain; one from the Trustees who is not a member of the Board by
virtue of his or her office; and one from the group of members who are
not appointed or elected to any office.
C. The duty of such committee shall be to make a full investigation of the
alleged act or acts, giving the complainant and the person complained
of full opportunity of presenting their respective sides of this issue.
D. Upon receiving all the evidence of both sides, said committee shall
retire and thoroughly consider the facts of the case to the best of their
ability and reduce the decision of the majority of the committee to
writing and submit same to the Company at its next regular meeting for
such action to be taken by the Company, as it sees fit.
3. Editor's Note: See Ch. 72, Art. I, Building Code, and Ch. 95, Fire Prevention, respectively.
§ 10-7 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY § 10-8
9:19
§ 10-9. Training and certification.
The Norriton Fire Company will provide for adequate training for all fire
fighters and shall certify to the Township (through the Public Safety
Director) annually that all fire fighters responding to an incident will have
received the appropriate training for duties undertaken by the fire fighters.
§ 10-10. Establishment of areas for Fire Company solicitation.
The Board of Supervisors hereby establishes the entire boundaries of East
Norriton Township for solicitation of the public for financial support on the
part of the Norriton Fire Engine Company.
§ 10-11. Hazardous material incidents.
All personnel who may respond to a potential hazardous materials incident
shall be certified at a minimum fire responder awareness level of training or
as required by the Norriton Fire Engine Company. The cost of abatement of
any hazardous materials incident which poses an immediate threat to public
health, safety and welfare shall be paid by the person who negligently or
intentionally deposited the hazardous substance (Authorized by Ordinance
No. 234, § 118-4, Abatement, of the East Norriton Township Code Book).
§ 10-12. Annual report.
The Fire Company shall submit annually to the Board of Supervisors an
annual report of activities, operations and financial condition for the
calendar year preceding.
§ 10-12.1. Workers' compensation coverage. [Added 11-16-2010 by
Ord. No. 531]
E. If, in the opinion of the committee, the member is found guilty, the
committee shall make a recommendation of a penalty.
Recommendations not accepted by the Company may be revised by the
Company floor.
F. Appointed officers, performing acts not in accord with orders of the Fire
Chief, Chief Engineer or Fire Police Captain, shall be removed from
such office by the officer in charge of the group in which the offense
was committed. The individual officer so removed from the office shall
have no status until the specified case is considered as outlined above.
A. All volunteer members of the Norriton Fire Engine Company (hereafter
the "Fire Company"), which serves the inhabitants of the Township of
East Norriton, shall be considered employees of the Township, for
purposes of receiving compensation pursuant to the Pennsylvania
Workers' Compensation Act (Act of June 2, 1915, P.L. 736, as amended),
77 P.S. § 601 (a)(1), for injuries sustained while actively engaged in
performing the following duties:
§ 10-8 EAST NORRITON CODE § 10-12.1
9:20
(1) Responding to alarms, including all emergency and fire-fighting
activities related thereto; auto rescue; water rescue; hazardous
materials alarms; and assistance to other municipalities (whether
on an emergency scene in another municipality or on standby at the
Fire Company when requested by another municipality); assistance
to the fire police; and all special alarms as authorized by the Fire
Chief or the Officer in Charge. For purposes of this Subsection A(1),
"responding to alarms" shall include the volunteer firefighter's
travel from and the direct return to a firefighter's home, place of
business or other place where he or she shall have been when he or
she received the call or alarm.
(2) Answering any emergency calls for any purpose or while riding
upon the fire apparatus which is owned or used by the Fire
Companies.
(3) Performing repair, maintenance of or other work on Fire Company
equipment, buildings and property at the direction of the Fire Chief
or Officer in Charge.
(4) Participating in instructional fire drills and other training exercises
pertaining to the operation and certification of the Fire Company,
including training exercises in conjunction with fire companies in
other municipalities, as authorized by the Fire Chief or Officer in
Charge.
(5) Participating in Fire Prevention Week activities in the Township
and with fire companies in other municipalities, when authorized
by the Fire Chief or the Officer in Charge.
(6) Participating in fund-raising events sponsored by the Fire Company
at their Fire houses or on Township property. Participation in fundraising
activities of any kind at all other locations shall not be
allowed without the prior written authorization of the Township
Board of Supervisors or Manager acting on behalf of the Board.
(7) Participating in parades, equipment housings and funerals for fire
personnel within the Township of East Norriton, and in other
municipalities only with the prior written authorization by the
Township Board of Supervisors or the Manager acting for the
Board.
(8) Participating in any and all additional events or activities for which
such participation is expressly preauthorized in writing by the
Township Board of Supervisors or the Manager acting for the
Board.
B. Except where otherwise stated herein, nothing contained in this section
shall be considered to limit in any way the activities for which
compensation is available to volunteer fire personnel pursuant to the
Pennsylvania Workers' Compensation Act (Act of June 2, 1915, P.L. 736,
as amended), as set forth in 77 P.S. § 601 (a)(1) and/or (a)(2).
§ 10-12.1 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY § 10-12.1
9:21

ARTICLE II
Fire Chief, Public Safety Director and Emergency Management
Coordinator
§ 10-13. Appointment.
The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the Fire Department based on the Fire
Department's bylaws.
§ 10-14. Duties.
§ 10-15. Emergency Management Coordinator.
The Township's Emergency Management Coordinator will perform the
following duties:
A. The Fire Chief shall be the chief fire officer of the Township and shall
have the power and responsibility of carrying out the provisions of this
chapter.
B. The Fire Chief shall report to the Public Safety Director who will report
to the Board of Supervisors and the Township Manager the efficient and
effective operation of the Fire Department. The Fire Chief will develop
and enforce standard operating guidelines based on recognized
practices and procedures.
C. The Public Safety Director will coordinate with the Fire Chief command
of large scale or complex emergencies when such action is necessary to
protect life and property. The Fire Chief or other officer in charge of the
scene shall have authority to close streets, initiate evacuations and
exclude the public from the immediate vicinity of the emergency or
place of danger.
A. Assist in the development of an emergency management staff using
existing governmental services, public agencies and volunteers.
B. Review and assist the development of the Township's emergency
management plan, standard operating procedures and a resource list to
address potential major emergencies.
C. Provide direction and coordination for the planning, organization and
operation of the emergency management program.
D. The Township's Emergency Management Coordinator will provide for
the unmet needs of the Township's departments and service units and
coordinate the activities of all on-scene agencies.
§ 10-13 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY § 10-15
9:23

ARTICLE III
Fire Marshal
§ 10-16. Appointment.
The Board of Supervisors shall appoint an officer to be known as the Fire
Marshal of East Norriton Township as recommended by the Public Safety
Director, whose duties shall be as hereinafter described.
§ 10-17. Duties.
§ 10-18. Deputy Fire Marshal.
Where the words "Fire Marshal" are used in this chapter, that shall be taken
to mean as well "Deputy Fire Marshal" where one has been appointed by
the Board of Supervisors.
§ 10-19. Inspections.
The Fire Marshal may, at all reasonable hours, enter any building or
premises within his jurisdiction for the purpose of making any inspection or
investigation which he/she may deem necessary in the performance of his/
her duties.
§ 10-20. Inspection of hazardous processes and installations.
The Fire Marshal shall inspect, as often as necessary, all especially
hazardous manufacturing processes, storage or installation of gases,
chemicals, oils, explosive and flammable materials, all interior fire alarms
and automatic suppression systems and other similar appliances and shall
issue such orders as may be necessary for the enforcement of the laws and
ordinances governing the same and for the safeguarding of life and property
from fire.
A. The Fire Marshal shall have the power and responsibility of enforcing
all laws, ordinances and regulations with respect to: (See Township's
job description for this position).
B. The investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fires and
explosions shall be in the following order: Fire Marshal, Deputy Fire
Marshal, Fire Chief and the chain of command within the Fire
Department.
A. The current National Fire Protection Association codes and standards
shall be considered the standard for the installation, use, storage and
transportation of liquefied gases, fuel oils and gas appliances.
B. The Pennsylvania state laws governing flammable liquids and the
current edition of the National Fire Protection Association standard 30
are to be considered part of the chapter.
§ 10-16 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY § 10-20
9:25
C. All buildings shall be subject to regulations for protection from fire and
panic and for public safety, as provided for by the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the ordinances of East Norriton
Township, which shall have the same effect as is stated in this chapter.
§ 10-20 EAST NORRITON CODE § 10-20
9:26
ARTICLE IV
Recovery of Costs
[Added 7-28-2015 by Ord. No. 564]
§ 10-21. Authorization to collect; procedures.
A. The Norriton Fire Engine Company, after responding to a fire service
event, is hereby authorized to charge, collect, and recover the fair and
reasonable costs and expenses from an insurance carrier or agent of
any party involved in or causing said fire service event which required
the services, materials, and supplies of the Norriton Fire Engine
Company, including amounts recoverable under the Hazardous
Material Emergency Planning and Response Act.4
B. The Norriton Fire Engine Company, or its appointed designee, is
authorized to directly charge, collect, or recover any costs or expenses
incurred during the provision of emergency services during a fire
service event. Payment of such costs and expenses shall be made
directly to the Norriton Fire Engine Company, or its appointed
designee.
C. In the event that any costs or expenses charged to an insurance carrier
are denied by the receiving party, the Fire Chief of the Norriton Fire
Engine Company is authorized to make a final determination as to
whether or not he or she desires to pursue further action to collect such
amounts.
D. The Norriton Fire Engine Company is authorized to impose interest on
any invoices that are not paid within 30 days of the date of mailing of
said invoice by its recipient at a rate of 1 1/2% per month.
E. In the event the Fire Chief decides to pursue further legal action to
collect an unpaid invoice, the recipient of said invoice shall be
responsible for all additional costs, expenses, reasonable attorneys'
fees, collection agency fees, filing fees, and litigation expenses incurred
by the Norriton Fire Engine Company in recovering such amounts.
F. The Norriton Fire Engine Company or its authorized designee shall only
have the authority to seek reimbursement from the applicable
insurance company/carrier.
G. The reimbursement rates for the aforementioned services, materials,
and supplies shall be set by the Norriton Fire Engine Company from
time to time and shall be only applied to the recovery of costs arising
out of incidents that occurred subsequent to the setting of the rates.
These rates shall be approved by the Township and be kept on file in the
Township Building. The reimbursement costs for the aforementioned
services, materials, and supplies shall be set by the Township from time
to time by resolution adopted by the Board of Supervisors.
4. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6022.101 et seq.
§ 10-21 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY § 10-21
9:27
H. Any intentional attempt by the Norriton Fire Engine Company or any
authorized designee to recover such costs from any insurance carrier
other than the appropriate insurance company shall result in the
immediate revocation of the authority to recover such costs granted
under this article.
I. Except for recovery of costs incurred by the Township, the Township
shall not be responsible for any aspect of the recovery of costs under
this article. The Township shall not take any steps to assist the Norriton
Fire Engine Company or any third-party billing service in recovery of
costs under this article.
§ 10-21 EAST NORRITON CODE § 10-21
9:28
Chapter 11
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 30.
Building construction — See Ch. 72.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 152.
Zoning — See Ch. 205.
§ 10-21 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY § 10-21
9:29

ARTICLE I
Historical Advisory Commission
§ 11-1. Creation of Board; membership. [Amended 1-6-2003 by Ord.
No. 446; 4-17-2007 by Ord. No. 496]
There is hereby created an Historical Advisory Commission in and for East
Norriton Township. The Commission shall consist of up to nine persons to
be appointed by the East Norriton Township Supervisors for such terms as
they shall permit. No more than two terms shall expire in any one year.
§ 11-2. Appointments; terms of office.
The members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Supervisors of
East Norriton Township for terms of five years, in such order that at least
one member's term shall expire annually; the aforesaid appointments for a
specified term notwithstanding, a Commission member may stay in office
until a successor qualifies or is appointed, or the East Norriton Township
Supervisors may remove any member of the Commission, at the pleasure of
the Supervisors.
§ 11-3. Compensation.
All members of the Historical Advisory Commission shall be residents of
East Norriton Township and shall serve without compensation other than
for such expenses in connection with their duties on said Commission as the
Supervisors may approve in advance.
§ 11-4. Officers; meetings.
The Historical Advisory Commission shall elect from among its members,
at the first meeting thereof, and at the annual meeting in January of each
and every year thereafter, a Chairman, Secretary and such other officers as
said Commission may deem necessary, by a majority vote of the members
present at such meeting. Written notice of the annual meeting shall be
mailed to each member by the Secretary at least 10 days prior to said
meeting; regular or special meetings shall be convened at the call of the
Chairman, or in such other manner as the members may, by a majority vote,
designate.
§ 11-5. Annual budget.
The Historical Advisory Commission, at such times as directed by the
Supervisors, shall annually submit for approval to the Supervisors a
proposed budget for the ensuing year, setting forth all proposed
expenditures and programs. The Historical Advisory Commission shall not
in any manner obligate the Township for the payment of any municipal
funds until the same is appropriated by the Township Supervisors.
§ 11-6. Duties.
§ 11-1 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY § 11-6
9:31
A. The Historical Advisory Commission shall undertake the following
functions and responsibilities in connection with advising the
Supervisors in identifying and preserving historical sites, buildings,
papers, documents and relics of historical significance to East Norriton
Township:
(1) Conduct investigations on historical matters relating to East
Norriton Township and report the same for public information.
(2) Collect and disseminate data and information on matters of
historical significance to East Norriton Township.
(3) Publish a pamphlet or report designating the historical sites or
buildings of significant value to the history of East Norriton
Township.
(4) Make recommendations for suitable plaques or markers to
distinguish historic sites and buildings of East Norriton Township.
(5) Cooperate with any qualified historical society in investigations of
historical matters relating to East Norriton Township.
(6) Recommend to the Supervisors a suitable depository and display of
historical papers, documents and relics.
(7) Cooperate with and encourage the activities of interested citizens
to the end that such activities will serve the historical interests of
East Norriton Township.
B. The Historical Advisory Commission, by its Chairman or by other
members appointed for such purpose by the Chairman, shall make such
reports from time to time to the Supervisors as the Chairman shall
deem advisable.
§ 11-6 EAST NORRITON CODE § 11-6
9:32
ARTICLE II
Historic Resources
[Added 10-23-2007 by Ord. No. 501]
§ 11-7. Demolition.
A. Demolition of historic structures. No structure listed as a historic
resource in accordance with this article shall be demolished except
upon grant of special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board. The
Zoning Hearing Board shall consider, in making its decision, the
recommendation of the East Norriton Township Historical Advisory
Commission. The applicant shall demonstrate that there is no
reasonable possibility of saving the structure. The Zoning Hearing
Board may impose reasonable conditions upon the grant of the special
exception.
B. Purposes. It is hereby declared as a matter of public policy that the
preservation and protection of buildings, structures, and sites of
historic, architectural, cultural, archeological, educational, and
aesthetic merit are public necessities and are in the interest of the
health, prosperity and welfare of the people of East Norriton Township.
It is therefore the intent of this article to provide a comprehensive
framework for the preservation of historic sites, objects, buildings,
structures and districts within the Township, in order to promote the
following public purposes:
(1) To promote the general welfare by facilitating protection of the
historical integrity of the historic resources of East Norriton
Township.
(2) To establish a clear process by which proposed land use changes
affecting historic resources can be reviewed.
(3) To discourage the unnecessary demolition of historic resources.
(4) To provide incentives for the continued use of historic resources
and to facilitate their appropriate reuse.
(5) To encourage the conservation of historic settings and landscapes.
C. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
DEMOLITION OR DEMOLISH — The razing or destruction, whether
entirely or in significant part, of the exterior of a building, structure, or
site. Demolition includes the removal of a building or structure from its
site or the removal, stripping, concealing or destruction of the facade
or any significant exterior architectural features which are integral to
the historic character of the resource, for whatever purpose, including
new construction or reconstruction.
HISTORIC RESOURCE — Any property which meets one or more of the
following categories of criteria:
§ 11-7 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY § 11-7
9:33
HISTORIC RESOURCE IMPACT STUDY — A study of the potential
impacts of proposed land development and/or land disturbance on
nearby historic resources, including study of potential means to
mitigate negative impacts, required to be submitted to the Township in
certain land development scenarios, in accordance with this article.
HISTORIC RESOURCE INVENTORY — The East Norriton Township
Board of Supervisors shall, by resolution, establish a list of historic
resources. Said resolution shall be available for inspection at the
Township offices. The East Norriton Township historic resource
inventory may include a list and corresponding map indicating the
locations of all historic resources, including both principal and
contributing resources, to which the provisions of this article apply.
All sites designated by the Secretary of the Interior as National
Historic Landmarks;
(1)
All buildings, sites, structures, and objects listed individually in the
National Register of Historic Places;
(2)
All buildings and structures classified as certified historic
structures by the Secretary of the Interior;
(3)
All buildings, sites, structures, and objects documented as
contributing resources in a National Register Historic District;
(4)
Any resources, which have received a determination of eligibility
(DOE) by the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission
(PHMC);
(5)
All historic resources identified by the East Norriton Township
Board of Supervisors as historic resources.
(6)
D. Procedure for addition or removal of historic resources from East
Norriton Township historic resources inventory.
(1) Any property may be proposed for addition to the East Norriton
Township historic resource inventory as a historic resource by the
owner of such property or by the Historical Advisory Commission.
(2) The Historical Advisory Commission shall periodically, but no less
frequently than once in every seven years, review the inventory of
historic resources and make recommendations to the Board of
Supervisors for the addition or removal of resources from the
inventory.
(3) Any proposal for addition to the East Norriton Township historic
resources inventory shall be considered by the Township Board of
Supervisors in accordance with the following:
(a) Upon receipt, any proposal regarding resource classification
shall be referred to the Historical Advisory Commission which
shall hold a public meeting thereon.
§ 11-7 EAST NORRITON CODE § 11-7
9:34
(b) Unless a property is proposed by the owner(s), such owner(s)
shall be notified upon receipt of a proposal affecting their
property and shall be invited to respond to such proposal at or
prior to the public meeting.
(c) The Historical Advisory Commission shall give 14 days' public
notice of the public meeting to consider the proposal and shall
send written notice to the owner(s) of the affected property.
Such notice shall be published once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Township and shall indicate the date, time
and place of the public meeting at which the Historical
Advisory Commission will consider the proposal. Notice shall
be sent to the registered owner's last known address as the
same appears in the real estate tax records of the Township
Manager and sent to the owner at the street address of the
property in question.
(d) Any interested party may present testimony or documentary
evidence regarding the proposal at the public meeting,
describing how or why the subject property meets the criteria
for designation as a historic resource, or does not. Such
evidence may be presented at the public meeting held to
consider the proposal or may be submitted in writing to the
Township prior to said meeting.
(e) The Historical Advisory Commission shall present a written
report to the Township Board of Supervisors, within 30 days
following the public meeting, stating its recommendation
regarding the subject proposal, based upon the criteria
established herein.
(f) Based upon the criteria set forth herein and after receiving the
recommendations of the Historical Advisory Commission, the
Township shall, within 30 days of receipt of the report of the
Historical Advisory Commission, render a decision on whether
the subject property shall be classified or reclassified as a
historical resource. Written notice of the action of the
Township Board of Supervisors shall be given to the property
owner within 14 days of the Board of Supervisors' decision.
The written notice to the owner of a property designated as a
historic resource shall advise the property owner of the rights
and benefits of the status and shall also advise the owner of his
or her right to decline the status.
(4) Any proposal by the property owner, the Township Board of
Supervisors or the Historic Advisory Commission for removal of a
property from the inventory shall be considered in accordance with
the following:
(a) If the proposal to remove the resource does not initiate from
the Historic Advisory Commission, the Township staff shall
§ 11-7 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY § 11-7
9:35
forward the proposal to the Historic Advisory Commission
which shall hold a public meeting thereon within 30 days of
receipt of the proposal.
(b) The Historical Advisory Commission shall give 14 days' public
notice of the public meeting to consider the proposal and shall
send written notice to the owner(s) of the affected property.
Such notice shall be published once and shall indicate the date,
time and place of the public meeting at which the Historical
Advisory Commission will consider the proposal. Notice shall
be sent to the registered owner's last known address as the
same appears in the real estate tax records of the Township
Manager and sent to the owner at the street address of the
property in question.
(c) Any interested party may present testimony or documentary
evidence regarding the proposal at the public meeting,
describing why the subject property should be removed from
the inventory of historic resources, or why the property should
remain on the inventory. Such evidence may be presented at
the public meeting held to consider the proposal or may be
submitted in writing prior to said meeting.
(d) In accordance with the procedure set forth herein and after
receiving the recommendations of the Historical Advisory
Commission, the Township Board of Supervisors shall from
time to time review structures, sites and objects for removal
from the historic resources inventory, or to change
classification. Written notice of the action of the Township
Board of Supervisors shall be given to the property owner
within 14 days of the Board of Supervisors' decision.
E. Demolition of historic structures.
(1) Applicability of demolition permit requirement.
(a) Demolition of a historic structure is subject to the provisions of
this article.
(b) Within five days of receipt by the Township, the complete
application for demolition of any historical structure shall be
forwarded to the Historical Advisory Commission, for review
and comment. No demolition permit for a historic resource
shall issue for at least 90 days following receipt of the
application.
F. Historic resource impact study.
(1) Applicability. In the following situations, the Board of Supervisors
may, after receipt of recommendations by the Township Engineer
and the Historical Advisory Commission, require the submission of
a historic resource impact study which shall be submitted to the
§ 11-7 EAST NORRITON CODE § 11-7
9:36
Township, the Planning Commission, and the Historical Advisory
Commission:
(a) As part of preliminary plan submission for any subdivision or
land development application which proposed new
construction of buildings, structures, roads, driveways,
parking areas, or other land disturbance on the same lot as a
historic resource, or on a neighboring property within 300 feet
of the exterior walls of any historic resource.
(b) Where general bridge or road construction or substantial
repair is proposed within 250 feet of the exterior walls of any
historic resource.
(c) In the event of an application for a special exception or
variance to the Zoning Hearing Board by the property owner.
(2) Contents. The historic resource impact study shall contain the
following information:
(a) Background information.
[1] If not otherwise provided by the applicant, a general site
description of the site subject to application, including
topography, watercourses, vegetation, landscaping,
existing drives, etc.
[2] General description and classification of all historic
resources located within 300 feet of any proposed land
development or land disturbance.
[3] Physical description of all such historic resources.
[4] Narrative description of the historical significance of each
historic resource, relative to both the Township and to the
region in general.
[5] Sufficient number of black and white eight-inch-by-teninch
photographs to show each historic resource in its
setting.
(3) Assessment of potential impacts to historic resources.
(a) General description of the proposed activity subject to
application, including timetable or phases.
(b) Description of potential impact(s) to each historic resource
identified in Subsection F(2)(a) above, with regard to
architectural integrity, historic setting, and future use.
(4) Mitigation measures. Suggested approaches to mitigate potentially
negative impacts to historic resources, including design
alternatives, buffering, landscaping, conservation of existing
§ 11-7 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY § 11-7
9:37
vegetation, and any other appropriate measures permitted under
the terms of this and other Township ordinances.
G. Violations, penalties and enforcement. Any person who violates the
terms of this article shall be subject to the enforcement procedures,
fines and penalties provided for in the East Norriton Township Zoning
Ordinance.5 In addition:
(1) In the event any person demolishes or threatens to demolish a
historic resource in violation of the provisions of this article, or
violates any conditions or requirements specified in a special
exception or permit issued under the terms of this article, the
Township Board of Supervisors may institute any proceeding, at
law or in equity, necessary to enforce the provisions of this article.
Such proceeding may include, but is not limited to, an action to
compel the reconstruction and/or restoration of the historic
resource to its condition and appearance as existed immediately
prior to the violation. Such restoration shall be in addition to, and
not in lieu of, any penalty or remedy available under this article or
any other applicable law.
(2) In the event the Township Board of Supervisors authorizes the
commencement of an action pursuant to Subsection G(1) of this
section, the Zoning Officer shall withhold issuing any building
permit for the construction of any building or structure proposed to
be located in any location on the site of the subdivision or land
development on which the historical resource is located, which
action would preclude reconstruction or restoration of the historic
resource subject to a violation of this article, or any building or
structure intended to replace such, unless for the purpose of
restoring the historic resource to its condition as existed
immediately prior to the violation.
(3) The Zoning Hearing Board may, as a condition of any special
exception granted hereunder, and the Township Board of
Supervisors may, as a condition of approval of any subdivision or
land development application involving any property which, at the
date of enactment of this article, was occupied by an historic
resource(s) that subsequently was demolished or otherwise altered
in violation of this article, impose a condition requiring the
satisfactory reconstruction or restoration of any such historic
resource(s).
(4) The Township, through such person or agency charged by the
Township Board of Supervisors with enforcement of the provisions
of this article, shall monitor the progress and status of any change
being made to an historic resource subject to the provisions of this
article, and shall render such reports thereon to the Board of
Supervisors and to the Historical Advisory Commission as may be
5. Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Zoning.
§ 11-7 EAST NORRITON CODE § 11-7
9:38
necessary to assure compliance with the provisions of this article
and/or any compliance with any conditions which may have been
attached to any building permit, demolition permit, subdivision/
land development approval, special exception or conditional use
approval.
(5) In addition to the above remedies, the Board of Supervisors may
take other appropriate legal action, which may include equitable
and injunctive relief, to enforce the provisions of this article.
§ 11-7 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY § 11-7
9:39
Chapter 11A
HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION
§ 11A-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "East Norriton Township Human
Relations Ordinance."
§ 11A-2. Purpose and declaration of policy.
§ 11A-3. Definitions.
A. East Norriton Township finds that it is of high public importance to
adopt appropriate legislation to insure that all persons, regardless of
actual or perceived race, color, religious creed, ancestry, sex, age,
national origin, handicap, use of guide or support animals because of
blindness, deafness or physical handicap of the user or the user is a
handler or trainer of support or guide animals, or sexual orientation,
gender identity or gender expression enjoy the full benefits of
citizenship and are afforded equal opportunities for employment,
housing and public accommodation.
B. The Board of Supervisors of East Norriton Township hereby declares it
to be the public policy of the Township to foster equality and equal
opportunity for all citizens, regardless of actual or perceived race,
color, religious creed, ancestry, sex, age, national origin, handicap or
use of guide or support animals because of blindness, deafness or
physical handicap of the user or because the user is a handler or trainer
of support or guide animals, or because of an individual's sexual
orientation, gender identity or gender expression in all matters
affecting employment, housing and commercial property and public
accommodation, and to safeguard the right of all persons to remain free
of discrimination or discriminatory practices in any of the foregoing
aspects of their lives.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as supporting, endorsing or
advocating any particular doctrine, point of view, or religious belief. On
the contrary, it is the express purpose and intent of this chapter that all
persons be treated fairly and equally, and that all persons in the
Township of East Norriton shall be guaranteed fair and equal treatment
under law.
D. This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of East
Norriton Township, as provided under the Pennsylvania Second Class
Township Code,6 for the protection of the public welfare, prosperity,
health and peace of the community of East Norriton Township.
6. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 11-7 EAST NORRITON CODE § 11A-3
9:40
A. The following words and phrases, when appearing in this chapter, shall
have the meanings given to them under this section:
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS — The Board of Supervisors of the Township
of East Norriton, Montgomery County.
CHAPTER — This chapter, which shall be referred to as the "East
Norriton Human Relations Ordinance."
DISCRIMINATION — Any discriminatory act(s) taken by any person,
employer, entity, employment agency, or labor organization, with
respect to or involving a transaction related to employment, public
accommodations, on the basis of a person's actual or perceived race,
color, religious creed, ancestry, sex, age, national origin, handicap or
use of guide or support animals because of blindness, deafness or
physical handicap of the user or because the user is a handler or
trainer of support or guide animals, or because of an individual's sexual
orientation, gender identity or gender expression.
DISCRIMINATORY ACTS —
EMPLOYEE — Does not include any individuals who, as a part of their
employment, reside in the personal residence of the employer.
All acts or actions defined in the Pennsylvania Human Relations
Act7 as unlawful discriminatory practices as related to employment,
public accommodations, publicly offered commercial property or
housing accommodations, actual or perceived race, color, religious
creed, ancestry, sex, age, national origin, handicap or use of guide
or support animals because of blindness, deafness or physical
handicap of the user or because the user is a handler or trainer
of support or guide animals, or because of an individual's sexual
orientation, gender identity or gender expression.
EMPLOYMENT — The opportunity for an individual to obtain
employment for which he is qualified.
(a)
PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION — The opportunity for an
individual to access food, beverages or lodging, resort or
amusement which is open to, accepts or solicits the patronage
of the general public, but shall not include any
accommodations which are in their nature distinctly private.
(b)
COMMERCIAL PROPERTY OR HOUSING — The opportunity
for an individual to obtain any commercial property or housing
accommodation for which he is qualified.
(c)
(1)
The above rights are hereby recognized as and declared to be a
civil right which shall be enforceable as set forth in Section 4 of the
Pennsylvania Human Relations Act.8
(2)
7. Editor's Note: See 43 P.S. § 951 et seq.
8. Editor's Note: See 43 P.S. § 954.
§ 11A-3 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY § 11A-3
9:41
§ 11A-4. Unlawful practices.
§ 11A-5. Exceptions.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, it shall not be an
unlawful practice for a religious corporation or association to commit any of
the acts as defined in § 11A-4 of this chapter.
EMPLOYER — Any person who employs four or more employees,
including the Township, its departments, boards and commissions, and
any other government agency within the jurisdiction of the Township,
save those of any government agency whose laws may be deemed
preemptive of this chapter.
GENDER IDENTITY OR EXPRESSION — Self-perception, or perception
by others, as male or female, including an individual's appearance,
behavior, or physical characteristics, that may be in accord with, or
opposed to, one's physical anatomy, chromosomal sex, or assigned sex
at birth, and shall include, but is not limited to, persons who are
undergoing or who have completed sex reassignment, are transgender
or gender variant.
PERSON — Any natural person, fraternal, civic or other membership
organization, corporation, general or limited partnership,
proprietorship, limited liability company, or similar business
organization, including the Township, its departments, boards and
commissions, and any other for-profit and nonprofit organization.
SEXUAL ORIENTATION — Actual or perceived homosexuality,
heterosexuality and/or bisexuality.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of East Norriton, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania.
B. Any terms of this chapter not expressly defined herein shall be
construed in a manner consistent with the Pennsylvania Human
Relations Act.9
A. Discrimination in employment, housing and commercial property or any
public accommodation is prohibited under this chapter.
B. Retaliation against any individual because such person has opposed any
practice forbidden by this chapter, or because such person has made a
charge, testified, or assisted in any manner in any investigation or
proceeding under this chapter is prohibited under this chapter.
C. Aiding, abetting, inciting, compelling or coercing the doing of any act
declared by this chapter to be an unlawful practice, or obstructing or
preventing any person from complying with the provisions of this
chapter is prohibited under this chapter.
9. Editor's Note: See 43 P.S. § 954.
§ 11A-3 EAST NORRITON CODE § 11A-6
9:42
§ 11A-6. Establishment of Human Relations Commission.
A. Pursuant to the authority set forth under § 962.1 of the Pennsylvania
Human Relations Act, 43 P.S. § 962.1, there is hereby established a
Human Relations Commission for the Township of East Norriton, which
shall be known as the "East Norriton Human Relations Commission."
B. The East Norriton Township Human Relations Commission shall consist
of four members, who shall be appointed to terms of three years by the
Board of Supervisors. The terms of the members of the Commission
shall be staggered, such that the terms of 1/3 of the members of the
Commission shall expire each year. All members of the Commission
shall be residents or business owners of the Township of East Norriton
and shall serve without compensation.
C. The Chairperson of the Commission will designate one member as
needed to receive the complaint and conduct an intake meeting with
the complainants. The member charged with this duty shall not
participate in any mediations involving parties to the complaint for
which they handled the intake nor shall this member vote on complaints
brought in front of the Commission.
D. The Human Relations Commission shall, annually, designate one
member to serve as Chairperson of the Commission. The Chairperson
shall be responsible for coordinating the activities, meetings, and
operations of the Commission, as set forth under this chapter. The
Chairperson shall also report, from time to time, to the Chairman of the
Board of Supervisors regarding the activities of the Commission.
E. Members of the Commission shall, as soon after their appointment as
practical, attend such training and education seminars or sessions as
deemed necessary to acquaint themselves with the functioning of the
East Norriton Township Human Relations Commission under this
chapter, as well as the terms, conditions and provisions of the
Pennsylvania Human Relations Act,10 and the operation of the
Pennsylvania Human Relations Commission. Such training and
education shall be as directed by the Chairperson, and shall be
performed in conjunction with the state Human Relations Commission.
F. The East Norriton Township Human Relations Commission shall have
all of those powers necessary to execute the duties set forth under this
chapter, provided that such powers shall not exceed those exercised by
the Pennsylvania Human Relations Commission under the Pennsylvania
Human Relations Act.11
G. The East Norriton Township Human Relations Commission shall
operate within the scope of funds which may be allocated, on an annual
basis, by the Board of Supervisors and shall not exceed the annual
allocation in any year, except upon prior approval by the Board of
10.Editor's Note: See 43 P.S. § 951 et seq.
11.Editor's Note: See 43 P.S. § 951 et seq.
§ 11A-6 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY § 11A-6
9:43
§ 11A-7. Complaint; procedures for filing complaints.
Supervisors. In adopting this chapter, the Board hereby expresses its
intention that the operation of the East Norriton Township Human
Relations Commission under this chapter shall be supported by
volunteers, unpaid staff, and volunteer efforts and shall be as close to
zero-cost to the Township as reasonably feasible.
A. Complaints.
(1) Any person claiming to be aggrieved by a practice which is made
unlawful under this chapter may make, sign and file a verified
complaint, as provided under Subsection A(2) of this chapter,
alleging violations of this chapter. Such complaint shall, at a
minimum, contain the following information:
(a) The name, telephone number, mailing address and e-mail (if
applicable) of the aggrieved person(s);
(b) The name, telephone number, mailing address and e-mail (if
applicable) of the person(s) alleged to have committed the
prohibited practice;
(c) A concise statement of the facts, including pertinent dates,
times, locations, people, and acts involved constituting the
alleged discriminatory practice;
(d) Such other information as may be required by the Commission.
(2) Complaints may be filed in person at the office of the Township
Manager, or by mailing such complaints to the Township offices, to
the attention of the Township Manager or the member of the
Commission designated to handle intake. All such complaints must
be received by the Township within 180 days of the occurrence of
the last act giving rise to the complaint or such complaint shall be
dismissed as untimely.
(3) The Township Manager shall transmit all complaints received to
the Chairperson of the Commission not later than 10 days of receipt
of the complaint. The Township Manager shall conspicuously mark
the face of the complaint with the date the document was first
received in the Township offices.
(4) The Commission may promulgate forms for use by persons wishing
to file a complaint; however, complaints which are prepared
without the use of an approved form shall be deemed acceptable
under this chapter so long as the facts set forth under Subsection
A(1) of this section can be clearly determined from the document
submitted as a complaint.
(5) The Commission may provide for a process by which persons
seeking to file a complaint may consult with a volunteer or other
§ 11A-6 EAST NORRITON CODE § 11A-7
9:44
staff person affiliated with the Commission who is trained to assist
the prospective complainant in discerning the facts relevant to the
prospective complaint. Such process shall also include referral of
additional information to the prospective complainant concerning
the content of this chapter, the content of the Pennsylvania Human
Relations Act,12 and the availability of the Pennsylvania Human
Relations Commission as an additional venue within which the
prospective complainant may seek redress when possible.
B. Notifications and answer.
(1) Within 30 days of receipt of a complaint, the Commission shall:
(a) Send a copy of the complaint to the person(s) charged with a
discriminatory act or practice under this chapter (the
"respondent"), together with a copy of this chapter.
(b) Send a notice to the complainant, informing him that the
complaint has been accepted and processed by the
Commission. If the complaint alleges discrimination on a basis
proscribed under federal or state law, the notice shall also
inform the complainant of his right to file a complaint with the
Pennsylvania Human Relations Commission or the federal
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission as well as the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development,
where applicable.
(c) The Commission shall notify the Pennsylvania Human
Relations Commission of the filing of any complaint that may
be deemed to be within the jurisdiction of that commission, as
required under the Human Relations Act.13
(d) The Commission shall also include a notice to both the
complainant and the respondent(s) of their option to elect to
proceed to voluntary mediation in order to resolve the matters
giving rise to the complaint.
(2) The respondent(s) shall file a written verified answer to the
complaint within 30 days of service of the complaint. An answer
shall be filed in the same manner as a complaint.
C. Mediation.
(1) Within 30 days of receipt of an answer to a complaint or, where no
answer is filed, within 60 days of service of the complaint upon the
respondent(s), the Commission shall proceed in accordance with
the following options:
12.Editor's Note: See 43 P.S. § 951 et seq.
13.Editor's Note: See 43 P.S. § 951 et seq.
§ 11A-7 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY § 11A-7
9:45
§ 11A-8. Nonlimitation of remedies.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to limit the right of an
aggrieved person to recover under any other applicable law or legal theory.
§ 11A-9. Multiple filings.
This chapter shall have no jurisdiction over matters which are the subject
of pending or prior filings made by an aggrieved person before any state or
federal court or agency of competent jurisdiction.
§ 11A-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of § 11A-4 of this chapter may
be subject by the Montgomery County Court of Common Pleas or any court
of competent jurisdiction to the penalties enumerated in Section 9(f)(1) and
(2), Sections 9.2, 9.3, and Sections 10 and 11 of the Pennsylvania Human
Relations Act.14 The penalties contained in this chapter shall mirror any
future changes to the Pennsylvania Human Relations Act as adopted by the
General Assembly and approved by the Governor.
(a) In the event that both parties have consented to mediation,
under Subsection B(1)(d) of this section, then the Commission
shall refer the matter to a recognized alternative dispute
resolution service, which same service may be provided
through Montgomery County, the Montgomery County Bar
Association, or any other professional mediation service
provider, or may refer the matter to a licensed member of the
Pennsylvania bar, who may be willing to perform service to the
Commission as a volunteer mediator. Any costs or expenses
which may be associated with the mediation shall be the
responsibility of the parties. The parties shall jointly select the
mediator; however, the Commission shall retain the authority
to act as the mediator in the event the parties have agreed to
mediation but cannot jointly agree on a mediator. Mediation
sessions conducted by the Commission may proceed with a
minimum of two eligible Commission members. Mediation
sessions shall remain private and not otherwise subject to
public attendance.
(2) When mediation has resulted in an amicable resolution of the
complaint and the complaint is resolved, the Commission shall
notify the parties that the complaint has been dismissed and shall
record the result of the mediation in the notice of dismissal.
(3) In the event the complaint has not been resolved through
mediation, the parties are entitled to proceed to the Court of
Common Pleas in Montgomery County.
14.Editor's Note: See 43 P.S. § 951 et seq.
§ 11A-7 EAST NORRITON CODE § 11A-10
9:46
Chapter 12
LOCAL GOVERNMENT INVESTMENT TRUST
§ 12-1. Adoption of declaration of trust.
This municipality shall join with other municipalities in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act15 by becoming a settlor
of the Pennsylvania Local Government Investment Trust (the "Trust") and
entering into the Declaration of Trust, which is adopted by reference with
the same effect as if it had been set out verbatim in this section and a copy
of which shall be filed with the minutes of the meeting at which this chapter
was adopted.
§ 12-2. Authorization to purchase and redeem shares.
This municipality is authorized to purchase shares in the Trust from time
to time with available municipal funds and to redeem some or all of those
shares from time to time as funds are needed for municipal purposes. These
actions are to be taken by the officers designated for this purpose, pursuant
to general or specific instructions by the governing body adopting this
chapter.
§ 12-3. Official custody of funds.
The Trustees of the Trust are designated as having official custody in this
municipality's funds which are invested by the purchase of shares in the
Trust.
§ 12-4. Findings.
As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, the following
matters are specifically found and determined:
A. This chapter extends the protections of the Pennsylvania Human
Relations Act to include actual or perceived sexual orientation, gender
identity or gender expression.
B. All penalties included in the Pennsylvania Human Relations Act shall be
extended to include all protected classes enumerated in the East
Norriton Township Human Relations Ordinance.
A. The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the Declaration of
Trust referred to in § 12-1.
B. This municipality's participation in the Trust shall be terminable at any
time by ordinance.
15.Editor's Note: 53 P.S. § 481 et seq. was repealed 12-19-1996 by P.L. 1158, No. 177. See now
53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 11A-10 LOCAL GOVERNMENT INVESTMENT TRUST § 12-4
12:47
Chapter 15
MANAGER, TOWNSHIP
§ 15-1. Creation.
The office of Township Manager is hereby created by the Board of
Supervisors, subject to the right to abolish said office at any time by
ordinance.
§ 15-2. Appointment; removal; vacancy; compensation.
C. The Declaration of Trust and the purchase of its shares are for the
purpose of investing this municipality's funds in obligations which are
otherwise legal investments as part of a pooled arrangement with other
governmental units, thereby achieving economic and other advantages
of pooled investments.
D. It is not necessary to finance the agreement authorized herein from
municipal funds except through the purchase of shares in the Trust.
E. The Trust shall be managed by a Board of Trustees as set forth in the
Declaration of Trust and the bylaws provided for therein.
F. Shares may be purchased and redeemed from time to time as this
municipality may determine to be necessary or appropriate to meet its
cash investment requirements.
A. The Manager shall be appointed by a majority of all members of the
Board of Supervisors to serve until the first Monday of January of the
year following appointment or until a successor is elected and qualified
for office. The office of Manager shall be filled annually thereafter.
B. Subject to all provisions of the Second Class Township Code16 and this
chapter, as from time to time amended, an employment contract may be
executed between the Township and Manager, if requested by either
party.
C. The Manager shall receive not less than 30 days' wages, but removal of
the Manager will be immediate from managerial responsibilities at the
discretion of the Board of Supervisors.
D. In the event of a vacancy in the office of Manager, the Board of
Supervisors shall select a replacement by majority vote of all members
of the Board to complete the present unexpired term.
E. The Manager's compensation shall be set from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors and shall be paid out of the
general fund of the Township.
16.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 12-4 EAST NORRITON CODE § 15-3
15:48
§ 15-3. Qualifications.
The Manager will be chosen on the basis of executive and administrative
abilities, with special reference to training and experience in municipal
management and to the duties of the office as set forth in this chapter.
§ 15-4. Bond required.
Before entering upon the duties of the office, the Manager shall give a bond
to the Township with a bonding company as surety, as set by the elected
Auditors of the Township, and the premium for said bond shall be paid by
the Township.
§ 15-5. Powers and duties.
A. The Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the Township
and shall be responsible to the Board of Supervisors as a whole for the
proper and efficient administration of the affairs of the Township. The
powers and duties of administration of all Township business shall be
vested in the Manager, unless expressly imposed or conferred by
statute upon other Township officers.
B. Subject to recall or revision by ordinance of the Board of Supervisors,
the powers and duties of the Township Manager shall include the
following:
(1) The Manager shall supervise and be responsible for the activities of
all municipal departments and all Township employees.
(2) The Manager shall hire, with the approval of the Board of
Supervisors, and, when necessary for the good of the service, shall
discipline, suspend or discharge any employee based upon the
Township's personnel policies and the recommendations of the
department head; provided, further, that with respect to other
Township employees, the hiring and firing thereof shall be subject
to the terms, if any, set forth in any personnel manual promulgated
by the Board of Supervisors. The Manager shall report at each
meeting of the Board of Supervisors any action taken pursuant to
the authority of this subsection.
(3) The Manager shall participate in all personnel actions affecting
department heads and shall periodically perform employee
evaluations and make recommendations to the Board regarding
salaries of personnel under his supervision.
(4) The Manager shall prepare and submit to the Board before the
close of each fiscal year a detailed, balanced budget for the next
fiscal year, and an explanatory budget message when requested.
Such budget shall be submitted in sufficient time to allow for its
study and adoption within the time limitations of the Second Class
Township Code.17 In preparing the recommended budget, the
Township Manager shall obtain from the head of each department,
§ 15-3 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 15-5
15:49
agency, board or office estimates or revenues and expenditures
and such other supporting data deemed necessary. The Township
Manager shall review such estimates and may revise the same
prior to submission of the recommended budget to the Board.
(5) The Manager shall be responsible for the administration of the
budget after its adoption by the Board of Supervisors and shall
prepare monthly financial statements of all revenues and
expenditures with appropriate recommendations to the Board.
(6) The Manager shall, in conjunction with the preparation of the
yearly budget, develop long-range fiscal plans for the municipality,
such plans to be presented annually to the Board of Supervisors for
its review and adoption.
(7) The Manager shall submit to the Board, as soon as possible after
the close of the fiscal year, a complete report on the financial and
administrative activities of the Township for the preceding year.
(8) The Manager shall periodically prepare and submit to the Board of
Supervisors reports as to the conduct of Township affairs and such
other reports as requested by the Board.
(9) The Manager and the Board of Supervisors shall prepare the
agenda for each meeting of the Board of Supervisors, containing
items requested by individual members of the Board in addition to
items suggested by the Township Manager. The Township Manager
will supply pertinent facts thereto.
(10) The Manager shall attend all regular and special meetings of the
Board of Supervisors. The Manager may participate in the general
discussions of the Board but shall not have the right to vote.
(11) The Manager may hold such other municipal offices or head one or
more of the municipal departments as the Board may from time to
time direct.
(12) The Manager shall conduct the general affairs of the Township,
including but not limited to purchasing, collections, administration
and enforcement of contracts, leases and franchises in accordance
with applicable laws and ordinances and the directives and policies
of the Board of Supervisors.
(13) The Manager may employ, with the approval of the Board of
Supervisors, experts or consultants to perform work and to provide
advice to the Township in connection with any of the functions of
the Township.
(14) The Manager shall attend to the letting of contracts in due form of
law and shall supervise the performance and faithful execution of
17.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 15-5 EAST NORRITON CODE § 15-5
15:50
§ 15-6. Absence of Manager.
Should the Manager become ill or disabled or otherwise need to be absent
from the Township, the Assistant Manager, or other person designated by
the Board of Supervisors, shall perform the duties of the Manager.
§ 15-7. Limitations of Board and Manager.
the same except insofar as such duties are expressly imposed upon
other Township officers by law.
(15) The Manager shall see that all money owed to the Township is
promptly paid and that proper proceedings are taken for the
security and collection of all Township claims.
(16) All questions and complaints regarding Township services, actions
and personnel shall be referred to the Township Manager. The
Manager shall investigate, evaluate, respond to and dispose of such
questions and complaints in accordance with Township policies and
regulations and shall report thereon to the Board of Supervisors.
(17) The Manager shall research and investigate the administration and
governmental functions or other municipalities in order to make
recommendations to the Board of Supervisors regarding
appropriate ordinances affecting the health, safety, welfare and
administration of the Township.
(18) The Manager shall perform all lawful duties designated by the
Board of Supervisors.
A. It is the express intention of this chapter that individual members of the
Board of Supervisors shall not interfere with, dictate, influence or
attempt to interfere with, dictate or influence the day-to-day
administrative operations of the Township.
B. Limitations of Manager.
(1) The Manager shall have no authority to fill any position or take any
action reserved to the Board of Supervisors by the Second Class
Township Code.18
(2) The Manager shall not hire or fire any department head without
approval of the Board of Supervisors.
(3) The Manager shall refrain from any attempt to influence decisions
of a legislative or quasi-judicial nature, including but not limited to
zoning changes, consideration of subdivision or development plans
and purchase of open space or parklands.
(4) The Manager shall refrain from actively engaging in federal, state,
county or municipal politics.
18.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 15-5 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 15-7
15:51
Chapter 18
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITIES
§ 15-7 EAST NORRITON CODE § 15-7
15:52
ARTICLE I
East Norriton Township Municipal Authority
[Adopted 5-3-1948 by Ord. No. 2]
§ 18-1. Creation.
An Authority to be known as the "East Norriton Township Municipal
Authority" is hereby created under and by virtue of the Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945, approved the second day of May, A.D. 1945, P.L.
382, as amended.19
§ 18-2. Articles enumerated. [Added 6-7-1948]
In compliance with the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended,20 East
Norriton Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, pursuant to a duly
adopted resolution or ordinance authorizing the formation of a Municipal
Authority, hereby certifies that:
A. The name of the Authority shall be "East Norriton Township Municipal
Authority."
B. This Authority is formed under the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as
amended.
C. No other authority has been organized or is in existence in or for this
municipality under the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended, or
under the Act of June 28, 1935, P.L. 463.
D. The name of the incorporating municipality is "East Norriton Township
of Montgomery County, Pennsylvania."
E. The names and addresses of the Supervisors of said incorporating
municipality are as follows.21
F. The names and addresses and terms of office of the first members of the
Board of the Municipal Authority to be formed hereby are as follows.22
G. The ordinance or resolution authorizing the creation of said Authority,
certified from the records of the incorporating municipality, together
with advertisement of notice of filing these Articles of Incorporation, is
submitted herewith.
19.Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
20.Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
21.Editor's Note: The names and addresses of the Supervisors of said incorporating
municipality are on file in the Township offices and may be examined there during regular
business hours.
22.Editor's Note: The names, addresses and terms of office of the members of the first Board
of the Municipal Authority are on file in the Township offices and may be examined there
during regular business hours.
§ 18-1 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 18-2
15:53
H. The term of existence of said Authority shall be 50 years from the date
of approval of these Articles of Amendment to the Articles of
Incorporation. [Added 3-26-1959 by Ord. No. 24]
§ 18-2 EAST NORRITON CODE § 18-2
15:54
ARTICLE II
East Norriton - Plymouth Joint Sewer Authority
[Adopted 3-26-1959 by Ord. No. 25]
§ 18-3. Organization.
The Board of Township Supervisors hereby signifies its intention and desire
to organize an Authority jointly with Plymouth Township, Montgomery
County, Pennsylvania, under the provisions of the Municipality Authorities
Act of 1945, as amended.
§ 18-4. Authority.
The Chairman and Secretary of the Board of Township Supervisors are
hereby authorized and directed to execute on behalf of East Norriton
Township Articles of Incorporation for said Authority in substantially the
following form.
§ 18-5. Articles enumerated.
In compliance with the requirements of the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382,
known as the "Municipality Authorities Act of 1945," as amended,23
Plymouth and East Norriton Townships, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania,
desiring to incorporate an Authority thereunder, do hereby certify that:
A. The name of the Authority is "East Norriton - Plymouth Joint Sewer
Authority."
B. Said Authority is formed under the provisions of the Act of May 2, 1945,
P.L. 382, as amended.
C. No other authority organized under the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as
amended, nor under the Act of June 28, 1935, P.L. 463, as amended, is
in existence in or for the incorporating municipalities or any of them,
except Plymouth Township Municipal Authority organized by Plymouth
Township (certificate of incorporation dated March 8, 1948) and East
Norriton Township Municipal Authority (certificate of incorporation
dated June 30, 1948), neither of which has undertaken any project or
has any outstanding indebtedness.
D. The names of the incorporating municipalities and the names and
addresses of their municipal authorities are as follows.24
E. Proofs of publication of the advertisements of notice of filing these
Articles of Incorporation are submitted herewith.
23.Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
24.Editor's Note: The names of the incorporating municipalities and the names and
addresses of their municipal authorities are on file in the Township offices and may be
examined there during regular business hours.
§ 18-3 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 18-6
15:55
§ 18-6. Notice of substance and filing to be published.
The Secretary of the Board of Township Supervisors, acting with the
appropriate officers of Plymouth Township, is further directed to cause
a notice of the substance of this article, including the substance of the
above Articles of Incorporation and of the proposed filing of the above
Articles, to be published once in a newspaper published and of general
circulation in the County of Montgomery and once in the Montgomery
County Law Reporter, as required by the Municipality Authorities Act of
1945, as amended.25
§ 18-7. Procedures for incorporation to be followed.
The Secretary of the Board of Township Supervisors, acting with the
appropriate officers of Plymouth Township, is directed to file said Articles
of Incorporation, together with necessary proofs of publication, with the
Secretary of the commonwealth and to do all other acts and things
necessary or appropriate to effect the incorporation of the East
Norriton - Plymouth Joint Sewer Authority, including the payment of any
filing fees in connection therewith.
§ 18-8. Initial project of Authority.
The initial project to be undertaken by said Authority is to acquire, hold,
construct, improve, maintain, operate, own or lease, either in the capacity
of lessor or lessee, sewers, a sewer system or parts thereof and sewage
treatment works, including works for treating and disposing of industrial
waste, for East Norriton Township, Plymouth Township and for such other
territory as it may be authorized to serve.
§ 18-9. Members of first Board.
The following named persons be and they hereby are appointed as members
of the first Board of the Authority, whose term of office shall commence
on the date of appointment and shall be computed from January 1 next
succeeding the date of incorporation.26
§ 18-10. Submission of capital improvement fee. [Added 6-27-1988
by Ord. No. 265; amended 7-29-1991 by Ord. No. 302]
Upon application for building/connection permits beginning on July 1, 1988,
and continuing thereafter, each applicant shall remit to the Township of
East Norriton a tapping fee as set forth in § 18-11 below. No building/
connection permit shall be issued until said capital improvement permit fee
has been paid.
25.Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
26.Editor's Note: The names of the persons appointed as members of the first Board of the
Authority are on file in the Township offices and may be examined there during regular
business hours.
§ 18-6 EAST NORRITON CODE § 18-11
15:56
§ 18-11. Tapping fee. [Added 6-27-1988 by Ord. No. 265; amended
7-29-1991 by Ord. No. 302; 5-11-1999 by Ord. No. 407; 10-25-2005
by Ord. No. 482]
§ 18-12. Remittance of fees collected. [Added 6-27-1988 by Ord. No.
265; amended 5-11-1999 by Ord. No. 407]
On the 15th day of each month, the Township of East Norriton shall remit
to the East Norriton - Plymouth - Whitpain Joint Sewer Authority all permit
fees collected by the Township of East Norriton during the preceding
month.
§ 18-13. Connection fee/customer facilities fee. [Added 5-11-1999
by Ord. No. 407; amended 10-25-2005 by Ord. No. 482]
The Authority will not impose any connection or customer facilities fee, as
such terms are used in Pennsylvania Act 57 of 2003.28 The imposition of
such fees is not within the purview of the Authority.
A. A tapping fee of $2,337 will be charged on behalf of the East
Norriton - Plymouth - Whitpain Joint Sewer Authority. The tapping fee
will be imposed upon each new, expanded or converted commercial,
industrial or residential property which generates a sewage flow and is
located within East Norriton Township. Each of these properties will be
charged a tapping fee for each EDU allocated to them pursuant to the
formula(s) set forth in the Tapping Fee Calculation Summary, the most
recent copy of which shall be available at the Township offices. All
EDUs calculated will be rounded to the next higher number. This fee
consists solely of the capacity charge, as such term is used in Act 57 of
2003,27 and is in addition to the tapping fee for the collection and
capacity charge imposed by the Township, in accordance with Act 57 of
2003, as follows: [Amended 7-22-2008 by Ord. No. 507]
Type Fee
Residential (230 GPD) $920 per 230 GPD
Nonresidential (230 GPD) $1,107 per 230 GPD
Alternate nonhousehold method $4,027 per 200 GPD
Sewer connection inspection fee $440
B. The amount of the above fees may be changed by resolution by the
Board of Supervisors of East Norriton Township as they duly authorize
and enact from time to time.
27.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5607.
28.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5607.
§ 18-11 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 18-14
15:57
§ 18-14. Calculation of tapping fee. [Added 5-11-1999 by Ord. No.
407; amended 10-25-2005 by Ord. No. 482]
The tapping fee shall be imposed upon each property located within East
Norriton Township for each EDU allocated to such properties pursuant to
the formula set forth in this article. An "EDU" means an equivalent dwelling
unit with a sewage flow of 230 GPD. All EDUs calculated for this article shall
be rounded to the next higher number.
§ 18-15. Schedule of EDUs. [Added 5-11-1999 by Ord. No. 407;
amended 10-25-2005 by Ord. No. 482]
The following schedule shall be applicable for determining the number of
EDUs allocated to each use of property.
A. Single-family residences. Single-family residences shall have a fee
based on one EDU.
B. Multifamily residences. Duplexes, apartment buildings, garden
apartments and other multiple-residential properties shall require a fee
of one EDU per residential unit.
C. Residential conversion.
(1) Any single-family residence which is converted to two or more
residential units shall require a fee of one EDU for each additional
residential unit.
(2) Any duplex, apartment building, garden apartment or other
multiple-residential property which is expanded and/or enlarged to
provide for additional residential units shall require a fee of one
EDU for each additional residential unit.
D. Nonresidential use. EDUs for nonresidential uses, including new uses,
expansions or conversions shall be calculated using the following table.
Multiples uses for single connection permits shall be calculated
separately for each use. The types of uses and EDU equivalency factors
in the following table may be amended by a resolution of the Board of
Supervisors of East Norriton Township as they may authorize and enact
from time to time. [Amended 7-22-2008 by Ord. No. 507; 6-28-2011
by Ord. No. 537]
§ 18-14 EAST NORRITON CODE § 18-15
15:58
Table 1
Factors for Computing Nonresidential EDUs
EDU Equivalency
Type of Nonresidential
Use
Value
(EDU) Unit
Auto maintenance facility
(without fueling)
1.0 Service bay
Auto service station 0.75 Fueling position
Banquet facility 3.6 1,000 square feet
Bar/cocktail area 7.2 1,000 square feet
Barbershop 0.12 Chair
Beauty salon/hairdresser 0.24 Chair
Bowling alley 0.88 Lane/alley
Church 0.02 Seat
Commercial/office 0.6 1,000 square feet
Community college 0.425 1,000 square feet
Convenience store (without
fueling)
0.5 1,000 square feet
Convenience store (with
fueling, no food
preparation)
0.75 Fueling position
Convenience store (with
fueling and food
preparation)
0.875 Fueling position
Day-care school See "school"
Dentist office 0.88 Chair
Doctor office 0.88 Exam room
Funeral home 0.88 Viewing room
Health/fitness centers 2.64 1,000 square feet
Hospital 1.2 Bed
Industrial, light sanitary
only
1.56 1,000 square feet
Industrial, wet (includes
industrial processing area
for wet processes)
1.0 230 gallons of
process flow
Laundry, self-service 2.16 Washer
Motel/hotel 0.6 Room
Residence/executive
suites
0.9 Unit
§ 18-15 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 18-15
15:59
Table 1
Factors for Computing Nonresidential EDUs
EDU Equivalency
Type of Nonresidential
Use
Value
(EDU) Unit
Movie theater 0.02 Seat
Nursing home 0.6 Bed
Park, picnic (sanitary waste
only)
0.09 Picnic table
Restaurant
Conventional 2.5 1,000 square feet
Fast-food 2.0 1,000 square feet
Bar/Cocktail areas 2.0 1,000 square feet
Restaurant (all types) 8.76 1,000 square feet
Retail store
10,000 square feet 0.6 1,000 square feet
10,000 to 25,000 square
feet
0.36 1,000 square feet
"Big box" (more than
25,000 square feet)
0.24 1,000 square feet
School, public/private
Day, without cafeteria,
gym or showers
0.43 1,000 square feet
Day, with cafeteria, gym
or showers
0.72 1,000 square feet
Boarding 2.90 1,000 square feet
Swimming pool (include
entire fenced area)
1.74 1,000 square feet
Warehouse 1.0 10,000 square feet
E. Alternate nonresidential tapping fee calculation. The applicant may
elect to enter into an alternate nonresidential tapping fee agreement29
with the Township if the applicant can reasonably demonstrate, using
flow data for a period of at least one year and any other supporting
documentation supplied by the applicant and acceptable to the
Township, that the above nonresidential EDU conversion schedule does
not adequately reflect the volume of wastewater flow capacity to be
reserved. The rules and regulations governing an applicant's right to
utilize the alternate nonresidential tapping fee agreement shall be set
29.Editor's Note: A copy of said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 18-15 EAST NORRITON CODE § 18-15
15:60
forth in the alternate nonresidential tapping fee agreement. The
Township reserves the right to revise the rules and regulations
governing the alternate nonresidential tapping fee agreement EDU
calculations from time to time.
§ 18-15 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 18-15
15:61

ARTICLE III
Industrial Development Authority
[Adopted 3-25-2003 by Ord. No. 44930]
§ 18-16. Intent.
It is the desire of the Board of Supervisors of East Norriton Township,
Montgomery County, in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, to organize an
Industrial Development Authority in said county, said commonwealth, under
the Economic Development Financing Law.31
§ 18-17. Adoption of Articles of Incorporation.
In pursuit of said desire and intention and in conformity with the terms
and provisions of the Economic Development Financing Law, the proposed
Articles of Incorporation are hereby set forth as follows. See Exhibit A
attached hereto.32 The proposed Articles of Incorporation of said Authority
shall be executed by and on behalf of the Board of Supervisors of East
Norriton Township by the Chairman of said Board; the Seal of East Norriton
Township shall thereto be affixed and attested to by the Secretary of said
Board. After properly executed, the Articles of Incorporation shall be filed
with the Secretary of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
30.Editor's Note: This ordinance originally amended Ch. 11 but was renumbered as Art. III of
Ch. 18 by Ord. No. 462, adopted 3-16-2004, to fit the organizational structure of the Code.
31.Editor's Note: See 73 P.S. § 371 et seq.
32.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 18-16 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 18-17
15:63
Chapter 19
MUNICIPAL CLAIMS AND TAX LIENS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tax collection — See Ch. 46.
§ 19-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a schedule of reasonable attorneys'
fees for performance of certain activities necessary to collect municipal
claims and liens on behalf of the Township. These attorneys' fees shall
be collectible by the Township in the event that they are incurred in the
collection of any claim or lien resulting from the failure of any property
owner to pay amounts required by law for taxes, municipal improvements,
removal of nuisances, water rents or rates, sewer rates and lighting rates
and any other assessable or lienable Township services. In addition to these
fees, any and all costs incurred by the Township with respect to collection
and enforcement of a municipal claim or lien shall be due in addition to the
underlying claim or lien.
§ 19-2. Schedule of attorneys' fees. [Amended 9-8-1998 by Ord. No.
394]
Attorneys' fees imposed in proceedings to recover any delinquent municipal
claim or enforce any municipal lien will be equal to the time expended in
the collection matter multiplied by the then current hourly rate that the
Solicitor charges the Township on other matters. The Township approves
this schedule and finds it to be fair and reasonable for the services to
be rendered and shall impose these fees upon the property owner in
proceedings to recover delinquent municipal claims and liens, together with
all costs, penalties, expenses and interest incurred.
§ 19-3. Applicability of other laws and interest. [Amended
7-26-2011 by Ord. No. 539]
The fees set forth herein for attorneys’ fees related to collection of Township
claims and liens shall be in addition to and not in limitation of sums
permitted to be collected under any other laws and shall be in addition to
interest, where permitted. Interest will be charged at a rate of 10% per
annum on all liens filed by East Norriton Township except in the event of a
lien filed to recover a property owner’s assessment associated with a public
project for which the Township has obtained financing. In such event, the
lesser of 12% per annum or the financing rate will be applied.
Chapter 22
§ 18-17 EAST NORRITON CODE § 19-3
22:64
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
§ 22-1. Police powers granted. [Amended 3-17-1986 by Ord. No.
229]
The East Norriton Township Code Enforcement Officer, Building Inspector,
Fire Marshal, Zoning Officer, Plumbing Inspector and Parking Enforcement
Officer, as well as their deputies and assistants, are hereby granted such
police powers as may be necessary to file complaints, informations and
citations before the appropriate District Justice and to issue citations as
provided in Rule 51 of the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure.
§ 22-2. Limitation of powers.
The grant of the above power to the above-named East Norriton Township
officials shall not in any way be deemed to confer upon them any rights,
duties or obligations of police officers of East Norriton Township with the
exception of those powers necessary to properly administer their Township
functions. They shall not be considered policemen under the terms of the
Police Tenure Act33 or any other statute, ordinance, rule or regulation
dealing with terms and conditions of employment, illness or retirement.
Chapter 26
PENSION PLANS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 22.
Police Department — See Ch. 33.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 37.
Social security — See Ch. 40.
Pension Advisory Board — See Ch. A211.
33.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 811 et seq.
§ 19-3 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 22-2
22:65

ARTICLE I
Employee Pension Plan
[The current Employee Pension Plan and Pension Fund documents,
and any amendments thereto, are on file in the Township offices.]
§ 26-1. through § 26-13. (Reserved)
§ 26-1 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 26-1
22:67

ARTICLE II
Police Pension Plan
[The current Police Pension Plan and Pension Fund documents, and
any amendments thereto, are on file in the Township offices.]
§ 26-14. through § 26-23. (Reserved)
§ 26-14 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 26-14
22:69

ARTICLE III
Deferred Compensation Plan
[Adopted 2-18-1986 by Res. No. 1085]
§ 26-24. Adoption of plan.
The Township adopts the Deferred Compensation Plan, attached hereto as
Appendix A,34 and appoints the ICMA Retirement Corporation to serve as
administrator thereunder.
§ 26-25. Retirement Trust.
The Township hereby executes the ICMA Retirement Trust, attached hereto
as Appendix B.35
§ 26-26. Trustee appointed.
The Township hereby adopts the trust agreement, attached hereto as
Appendix C,36 and appoints the ICMA Retirement Corporation as trustee
thereunder and directs the ICMA Retirement Corporation, as trustee, to
invest all funds held under the Deferred Compensation Plan through the
ICMA Retirement Trust as soon as is practicable.
§ 26-27. Coordinator.
The Township Manager shall be the coordinator for this program and shall
receive necessary reports, notices, etc., from the ICMA Retirement
Corporation as administrator and shall cast, on behalf of the Township, any
required votes under the program. Administrative duties to carry out the
plan may be assigned to the appropriate departments.
34.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the office of the Township Manager and may be
examined there during regular business hours.
35.Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file in the office of the Township Manager and may be
examined there during regular business hours.
36.Editor's Note: Appendix C is on file in the office of the Township Manager and may be
examined there during regular business hours.
§ 26-24 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 26-27
22:71
Chapter 30
PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 30-1. Creation.
A Planning Commission is hereby created or established in accordance with
the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, being Act
No. 247 of 1968, P.L. 643, effective January 1, 1969.37
§ 30-2. Members; appointment; term; vacancy. [Amended
12-27-1973 by Ord. No. 101; 2-12-1974 by Ord. No. 102; 6-25-1990
by Ord. No. 289]
§ 30-3. Powers and duties.
The powers and duties of the Planning Commission shall be as set forth
in Sec. 209 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code38 and such
additional powers, duties and advisory functions as may be conferred upon
them by the Supervisors of East Norriton Township, provided that they are
not inconsistent with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
§ 30-4. Removal from office. [Added 6-25-1990 by Ord. No. 289]
Any member of a Planning Commission once qualified and appointed may
be removed from office for malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in
A. The Planning Commission shall be comprised of seven members who
shall be residents of the Township and who shall be appointed by the
Board of Supervisors. All members of the Commission shall serve
without compensation, but may be reimbursed for necessary and
reasonable expenses. Elected officers of the Township shall not serve on
the Planning Commission. [Amended 2-25-2003 by Ord. No. 447;
1-24-2006 by Ord. No. 485; 2-27-2018 by Ord. No. 576]
B. The term of each of the members of the Commission shall be for four
years or until his successor is appointed and qualified, except that the
terms of the members first appointed pursuant to this chapter shall be
so fixed that no more than three shall be reappointed or replaced
during any future calendar year.
C. The Chairman of the Planning Commission shall promptly notify the
Board of Supervisors concerning vacancies in the Commission, and
such vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term. If a vacancy shall
occur otherwise than by expiration of term, it shall be filled by
appointment for the unexpired term according to the terms of this
chapter.
37.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
38.Editor's Note: Section 209 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (53 P.S.
§ 10209) was repealed in 1972. See now 53 P.S. § 10209.1.
§ 26-27 EAST NORRITON CODE § 30-4
22:72
office or for other just cause by a majority vote of the Board of Supervisors
taken after the member has received 15 days advance notice of the intent
to take such a vote. A hearing shall be held in connection with the vote if
the member shall request it in writing. Any appointment to fill a vacancy
created by removal shall be only for the unexpired term.
§ 30-5. General provisions. [Added 6-25-1990 by Ord. No. 289]
The Commission shall elect its own Chairman and Vice Chairman and create
and fill such other offices as it may determine. Officers shall serve annual
terms and may succeed themselves in the same office. The Commission may
make and alter bylaws and rules and regulations to govern its procedures
consistent with the ordinances of East Norriton Township and the laws of
the commonwealth. The Commission shall keep a full record of its business
and shall annually make a written report by March 1 of each year of its
activities to the Board of Supervisors. Interim reports may be made as often
as may be necessary or as requested by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 30-6. Additional powers and duties. [Added 6-25-1990 by Ord. No.
289]
A. The Planning Commission shall, at the request of the Board of
Supervisors, have the power and shall be required to:
(1) Prepare the Comprehensive Plan, if any, for the development of
East Norriton Township as set forth in this Code and the
Municipalities Planning Code39 and present it for the consideration
of the Board of Supervisors.
(2) Maintain and keep on file records of its action. All records and files
of the Planning Commission shall be in the possession of the Board
of Supervisors.
B. The Planning Commission at the request of the Board of Supervisors
may:
(1) Make recommendations to the Board of Supervisors concerning the
adoption or amendment of an Official Map.
(2) Prepare and present to the Board of Supervisors of East Norriton
Township a zoning ordinance, and make recommendations to the
Board of Supervisors on proposed amendments to it as set forth in
this Code and the Municipalities Planning Code.
(3) Prepare, recommend and administer subdivision and land
development and planned residential development regulations, as
set forth in this Code and the Municipalities Planning Code.
39.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 30-4 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 30-6
22:73
(4) Prepare and present to the Board of Supervisors of East Norriton
Township a building code and a housing code and make
recommendations concerning proposed amendments thereto.
(5) Do such other acts or make such studies as may be necessary to
fulfill the duties and obligations imposed by this Code and the
Municipalities Planning Code.
(6) Prepare and present to the Board of Supervisors of East Norriton
Township an environmental study.
(7) Submit to the Board of Supervisors of East Norriton Township a
recommended capital improvements program.
(8) Prepare and present to the Board of Supervisors of East Norriton
Township a water survey, which shall be consistent with the State
Water Plan and any applicable water resources plan adopted by a
river basin commission. The water survey shall be conducted in
consultation with any public water suppliers in the area to be
surveyed.
(9) Promote public interest in and understanding of the
Comprehensive Plan, if any, and planning.
(10) Make recommendations to governmental, civic and private
agencies and individuals as to the effectiveness of the proposals of
such agencies and individuals.
(11) Hold public hearings and meetings.
(12) Present testimony before any board.
(13) Require from other departments and agencies of East Norriton
Township such available information as relates to the work of the
Planning Commission.
(14) In the performance of its functions, enter upon any land to make
examinations and surveys with the consent of the owner.
(15) Prepare and present to the Board of Supervisors of East Norriton
Township a study regarding the feasibility and practicability of
using renewable energy sources in specific areas within the
Township.
(16) Review the Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance, Official Map, provisions for planned residential
development and such other ordinances and regulations governing
the development of land no less frequently than it reviews the
Comprehensive Plan.
§ 30-6 EAST NORRITON CODE § 30-7
22:74
§ 30-7. Administrative and technical assistance. [Added 6-25-1990
by Ord. No. 289]
The Board of Supervisors may employ administrative and technical services
to aid in carrying out the provisions of this chapter either as consultants on
particular matters or as regular employees of East Norriton Township.
§ 30-8. Acceptance of assistance. [Added 6-25-1990 by Ord. No.
289]
The Planning Commission may, with the consent of the Board of
Supervisors, accept and utilize any funds, personnel or other assistance
made available by the county, the commonwealth or the federal government
or any of their agencies or from private sources. The Board of Supervisors
may enter into agreements or contracts regarding the acceptance or
utilization of the funds or assistance in accordance with the governmental
procedures of East Norriton Township.
Chapter 33
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pensions — See Ch. 26, Art. II.
§ 33-1. Adoption of manual.
The Police Department of East Norriton Township's Department
Organization Manual of Policy and Rules and Procedures, as adopted by
the Board of Supervisors of East Norriton Township at its June 15, 1987,
meeting, is hereby formally adopted by the Board of Supervisors of East
Norriton Township to be the official Police Department manual setting forth
rights, duties, obligations and penalties for police officers employed by
East Norriton Township. A copy of said manual is attached to this chapter,
incorporated by reference and labeled Exhibit A.40
§ 33-2. Amendments.
The Police Department of East Norriton Township's Department
Organization Manual of Policy and Rules and Procedures may be altered,
amended and changed from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors of East Norriton Township.
Chapter 35
40.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the office of the Township Manager and may be
examined there during regular business hours.
§ 30-7 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 33-2
33:75
RECORDS
§ 33-2 EAST NORRITON CODE § 33-2
33:76
ARTICLE I
Inspection and Reproduction
[Adopted 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 51141]
§ 35-1. Purpose.
The Right-to-Know Law, Act of February 14, 2008, No. 3, P.L. 6,42 as
amended, provides that townships and other agencies shall make available
records in accordance with the terms and limitations of the Right-to-Know
Law. The Township desires to revise procedures for the inspection of
records in order that the operations of the Township will not be disrupted
through requests for inspection and copying of Township records, while
assuring compliance with the revised provisions of the Right-to-Know Law.
The Township desires to set a policy which will provide for the reasonable
inspection and reproduction of the Township’s reasonable records by legal
residents of the United States.
§ 35-2. Rules and regulations.
The Board of Supervisors of East Norriton Township is hereby authorized to
adopt a resolution and amend such resolution from time to time as it deems
necessary to set rules and regulations setting forth reasonable policies for
requests for inspection and reproduction of records of the Township and
for imposing fees for inspecting and reproducing, as authorized by the
Pennsylvania Office of Open Records.
§ 35-3. Revisions.
The Board does hereby reserve the right, from time to time, to adopt
modifications of, supplements to, or amendments of its ordinances and
hereby authorizes any future changes to inspection and reproduction to be
done by a resolution of the Board.
41.Editor's Note: This ordinance repealed former Art. I, Inspection and Reproduction,
adopted 3-9-1992 by Ord. No. 310.
42.Editor’s Note: See N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.
§ 35-1 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 35-3
33:77
Chapter 37
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 22.
Pension plans — See Ch. 26.
Social security — See Ch. 40.
§ 35-3 EAST NORRITON CODE § 35-3
37:78
ARTICLE I
Board of Supervisors
[Adopted 12-11-1995 by Ord. No. 36243]
§ 37-1. Compensation.
Each supervisor of East Norriton Township elected or appointed to office
on or after the effective date of this article shall receive compensation as a
supervisor in the annual amount of $3,250.
§ 37-2. Payment.
Such compensation shall be payable quarterly in the third week of the last
month of each calendar quarter.
43.Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Ord. No. 356, adopted 10-24-1995.
§ 37-1 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 37-2
37:79

ARTICLE II
Other Officers and Employees
[The salaries and compensation of other officers and employees of
the Township of East Norriton are set forth from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors. A copy of the current salary
resolution is kept on file by the Township Manager for examination
and inspection by the public.]
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 37-2
37:81
Chapter 39
(RESERVED)
Chapter 40
SOCIAL SECURITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 22.
Pension plans — See Ch. 26.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 37.
§ 40-1. Authorization.
The Township of East Norriton is hereby authorized to execute and deliver
to the state agency44 a plan or plans and agreement required under Section
6 of said Enabling Act and the Social Security Act,45 to extend coverage to
employees and officers of the Township of East Norriton and do all other
necessary things to effectuate coverage of employees and officers under the
Old Age and Survivors Insurance System.
§ 40-2. Payroll deduction system.
The Treasurer is hereby authorized to establish a system of payroll
deduction, to be matched by payments by the Township of East Norriton,
to be made into the Contribution Fund of the Social Security Act through
the office of the state agency and to make charges to this tax to the fund or
funds from which wage or salary payments are issued to employees of the
Township of East Norriton. Such payments are to be made in accordance
with the provisions of the law and regulations promulgated by the state
agency and the Federal Security Administrator. Such payments which are
delinquent shall bear interest at the rate of 1/2 of 1% per month until such
time as payments are made.
§ 40-3. Appropriations to fund.
Appropriation is hereby made from the proper fund or funds of the
Township of East Norriton in the necessary amount to pay into the
Contribution Fund as provided in Section 4 of the Enabling Act46 and in
44.Editor's Note: The 1951 Session of the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, in regular session, enacted a statute, known as "Act No. 491," which is the
enabling Act provided for in Section 218 of Public Law 734, 81st Congress, which
designated the Secretary of Labor and Industry of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to
act as the state agency to implement the coverage of employees and officers under the
said Old Age and Survivors Insurance System.
45.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 201 et seq.
46.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 201 et seq.
§ 37-2 EAST NORRITON CODE § 40-3
40:82
accordance with the plan or plans and agreement. Authority is given to
the President and Secretary of the Board of Supervisors of the Township
of East Norriton to enter into an agreement with the state agency, which
agreement shall be in accordance with Act No. 491 and with Paragraph 218
of the Social Security Act.47 Such plan and agreement shall provide that
the participation of this Township of East Norriton shall commence as of
January 1, 1951, or if for any reason this date is not permitted, then at the
earliest date that is by law permissible.
Chapter 43
STORMWATER MAINTENANCE FUND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Stormwater management — See Ch. 175, Art.
X.
§ 43-1. Deposit required for installation in state rights-of-way.
Persons installing stormwater piping, controls, or best management
practices facilities that fall within state rights-of-way shall be required to
make a deposit to the East Norriton Township Stormwater Maintenance
Fund (the "maintenance fund"). The amount of the deposit shall be
calculated for 10 years of operation and maintenance expenses and at a
rate of $0.15 per cubic foot of pipe per year based on the total amount of
stormwater piping within the state right-of-way.
§ 43-2. Reduction or waiver of deposit.
If a proposed stormwater piping, controls or best management practices
facility also serves as a recreational facility, the Township may reduce or
waive the maintenance fund deposit based upon the value of the land for
public recreational purposes.
§ 43-3. Unused portion of deposit.
If, subsequent to deposit into the maintenance fund, a stormwater piping,
control or best management practices facility (whether publicly or privately
owned) is eliminated due to the installation of storm sewers or other storage
facilities, the unused portion of the deposit will be applied to the cost of
abandoning the facility and connecting to the storm sewer system or other
facility. Any remaining deposit amount after the costs of abandonment are
paid will be returned to the depositor.
47.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 201 et seq.
§ 40-3 SOCIAL SECURITY § 43-4
40:83
§ 43-4. Deposit required upon acceptance for dedication by
Township.
Should stormwater piping, controls or best management practices be
accepted by the Township for dedication, the Township shall require
persons installing stormwater piping, controls or best management
practices facilities to pay an amount to the maintenance fund. The amount
of the deposit shall be calculated for 10 years of operation and maintenance
expenses and at a rate of $0.025 per square foot of drainage area tributary
to the stormwater piping, controls, or best management practices facility.
§ 43-5. Fee for existing facilities.
The Township may require applicants to pay a fee, in accordance with the
Township's Fee Schedule, to the maintenance fund to cover stormwaterrelated
problems which may arise from the land development and earth
disturbance activities on existing stormwater piping, controls or best
management practices facilities.
Chapter 44
STREETLIGHT DISTRICTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
175.
Zoning — See Ch. 205.
§ 44-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "East Norriton Township Streetlight
Ordinance."
§ 44-2. Establishment.
In all cases where the owners of a majority of the linear-foot frontage
along any road, highway or portion thereof within the Township, including
those cases where a land developer, at the time of filing a subdivision
plan showing streetlights, petitions the Board of Supervisors to cause to
be installed streetlighting, it shall be the duty of the Township Manager to
establish a streetlight district which shall include all properties within 250
feet of such lighting and to review for approval the necessary contracts with
the supplier of energy for the streetlighting.
§ 44-3. Determination of cost and expense.
Upon the establishment of a streetlight district, the Township Manager
shall determine as nearly as possible the annual cost and expenses of
maintenance of streetlighting in the district and shall determine the costs
§ 43-4 EAST NORRITON CODE § 44-3
44:84
per front foot to be assessed on the individual lots within the district in
accordance with this chapter in order to recover from the lots benefited said
costs and expenses of streetlighting after receipt of bills for the same from
the supplier.
§ 44-4. Frontage on corner lots.
In any case where a corner lot is involved, the frontage of the lot for
purposes of this chapter shall be deemed to be the longer side of the lot
along a street within the light district.
§ 44-5. Assessment of lot abutting two streets.
In any case where a lot abuts two streets in any streetlight district but is
not a corner lot, assessment shall be made only for that portion of the lot
abutting on the street contiguous to the front yard of the lot.
§ 44-6. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FRONT YARD — The same definition as is contained in the East Norriton
Township Zoning Ordinance.48
§ 44-7. Assessment of vacant lots.
In cases of vacant lots, the assessment per front foot shall be only 25% of
the assessment per front foot against property with improvements thereon.
§ 44-8. Assessments to be filed with Tax Collector; collection.
After having determined the amount to be assessed against each lot in
each district, the Township Manager shall then file the assessment with the
Township Tax Collector for collection. In the event that the assessments are
not paid within 90 days of the day of notice from the Tax Collector, they shall
be placed in the hands of the Township Solicitor for collection in accordance
with the Act of May 1, 1933, P.L. 103, Art. VII, § 702, as amended.49
§ 44-9. Fund account.
Upon receipt from the Tax Collector of paid assessments, the Township
Treasurer shall keep the funds in a separate account and pay said fund
out only upon orders signed by the Chairman of the Township Board of
Supervisors and attested to by the Township Secretary.
Chapter 46
48.Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Zoning.
49.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65702.
§ 44-3 TAX COLLECTION § 44-9
46:85
TAX COLLECTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 182.
§ 44-9 EAST NORRITON CODE § 44-9
46:86
ARTICLE I
Miscellaneous Taxes
[Adopted 11-17-1986 by Ord. No. 240]
§ 46-1. Authorization and establishment.
The Department of Finance of East Norriton Township is hereby authorized
to retain a private agency to serve as the Tax Collector for the Township for
the collection, administration and enforcement of ordinances/resolutions of
the Township assessing the occupational privilege tax, the mercantile tax,
the business privilege tax, the amusement tax and the earned income tax.50
§ 46-2. Compensation.
The Township shall compensate any private agency retained pursuant
hereto at such rate as shall be mutually agreeable to the Township and the
private agency.
50.Editor's Note: See Ch. 182, Taxation.
§ 46-1 TAX COLLECTION § 46-2
46:87

ARTICLE II
Real Estate Tax Collector
[Adopted 9-21-1992 by Ord. No. 322]
§ 46-3. Compensation for elected official.
The compensation of the duly elected Tax Collector for the Township of East
Norriton for the collection of real estate taxes, commencing with January
1994, shall be the sum of $5,000 per annum.
§ 46-4. Real estate tax certification fees. [Added 12-11-1995 by Ord.
No. 361]
The Tax Collector is hereby authorized by the Township to collect and retain
fees for the certification of real estate taxes upon property located within
the Township of East Norriton. The amount of such fees shall be authorized
by resolution of the Board of Supervisors of the Township of East Norriton
as may be amended from time to time.
§ 46-3 TAX COLLECTION § 46-4
46:89
Chapter 46A
UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION GROUP TRUST
GENERAL REFERENCES
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 37. Workers' compensation — See Ch. 47.
§ 46A-1. Authorization; availability; modification.
§ 46A-2. Purpose.
The participation of the Township in the trust is authorized for the purpose
of pooling resources for the purpose of providing unemployment
compensation insurance for participating employers at reasonable cost.
§ 46A-3. Conditions for participation.
As set forth in greater detail in the restated trust agreement and as
otherwise stated herein, the following conditions apply to the participation
of the Township in the trust:
A. The Chairman of the Board of Supervisors and Secretary of the
Township are hereby authorized to adopt the restated trust agreement
and any other agreements necessary for the Township's participation in
the trust.51
B. The restated trust agreement is on file for inspection and review at the
Township's offices at 2501 Stanbridge Street, East Norriton, PA 19401.
C. The restated trust agreement may be subsequently modified or
amended in accordance with its terms, but in no event shall such
modifications or amendments divert any of the trust funds from the
purposes of the trust. The Township may withdraw from the trust in
accordance with the restated trust agreement, including if the Board of
Supervisors determines the modifications or amendments are not in the
best interests of the Township.
A. Each participating employer must meet the admission and eligibility
requirements set forth therein;
B. Each participating employer agrees to pay all contributions when due
as provided in the restated trust agreement or as otherwise established
by the Board of Trustees; and
C. Each participating employer complies with all other conditions of the
restated trust agreement.
51.Editor's Note: Refers to the PSATS Unemployment Group Trust.
§ 46-4 EAST NORRITON CODE § 46A-4
46:90
§ 46A-4. Withdrawal.
The Township agrees to participate in the trust and may withdraw for any
reason and in accordance with the restated trust agreement, provided that
it has fulfilled all its financial obligations to the trust upon withdrawal.
§ 46A-5. Effective date.
The effective date of the Township's agreement to and joinder in the
restated trust agreement and the participation of the Township in the trust
pursuant to the terms of the restated trust agreement will be July 16, 2014.
§ 46A-6. Delegation of powers.
Each participating employer delegates to the Board of Trustees the powers
enumerated in the restated trust agreement.
§ 46A-7. Organizational structure.
The organizational structure of the trust shall consist of a Board of Trustees.
Under the restated trust agreement, the Board of Trustees is authorized
to, among other things, enter into contracts with third parties to perform
various services necessary for the administration of the trust.
§ 46A-8. Provision of funds.
The funds required for the operation of the trust shall be provided by the
participating employers through scheduled appropriations as determined
by the Board of Trustees.
§ 46A-9. Contracts.
The trust is empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group
insurance and employee benefits, including social security, for employees of
the trust, if any.
§ 46A-10. Compliance with terms and conditions.
As a condition of participating in the trust, the Township agrees to comply
with all of the terms and conditions in the restated trust agreement.
§ 46A-11. Certified copy.
The Secretary of the Township shall provide a certified copy of this chapter
upon its enactment to the Board of Trustees of the trust.
§ 46A-12. Additional actions.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township is hereby authorized to take any
and all such other actions as may be necessary or appropriate to carry
out the purposes of this chapter and comply with the requirements of
§ 46A-4 TAX COLLECTION § 46A-12
46:91
the attached restated trust agreement and any duly adopted amendments
thereto.
§ 46A-13. Duration.
The duration of the term of the Township's participation in the trust and
obligations under the restated trust agreement shall continue until
withdrawal from the trust by the Township in accordance with the terms of
the restated trust agreement.
§ 46A-14. Findings and determinations.
The Board of Supervisors hereby specifically finds and determines as
follows:
A. The conditions of the intergovernmental cooperative agreement are set
forth in the restated trust agreement incorporated by reference herein.
B. The Township shall participate in the trust in accordance with the
restated trust agreement until it withdraws by giving notice to the
Board of Trustees in accordance with the terms of the restated trust
agreement.
C. The purpose and objectives of the intergovernmental cooperative
arrangement, including powers and scope of authority delegated to the
Board of Trustees, are set forth in the incorporated restated trust
agreement.
D. The manner and extent of financing of the agreement are that:
(1) Funds to implement the Township's obligations under the
agreement shall come from the normal and usual budgeted
amounts for Township employee compensation and employee
benefits; and
(2) No borrowing is anticipated to be required.
E. The trust shall be managed by the Board of Trustees pursuant to the
terms of the restated trust agreement.
F. All assets and property, real or personal, of the trust shall be titled to,
acquired, managed, licensed or disposed of by the trust, and its Board
of Trustees, in accordance with the terms of the restated trust
agreement.
G. The trust, in accordance with the restated trust agreement, shall be
empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group insurance and
employee welfare benefits to be offered to participating employers for
their eligible employee and dependents.
§ 46A-12 EAST NORRITON CODE § 46A-15
46:92
§ 46A-15. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are severable; and in the event that any
provision is held invalid, void, illegal, or unconstitutional by any court, it is
the intent of the governing body that such determination by the court shall
not affect or render void the remaining provisions of this chapter. It is the
declared intent of the governing body that this chapter would have been
enacted if any provision subsequently declared to be void, invalid, illegal or
unconstitutional had not been included at the time of enactment.
§ 46A-16. Continuation of rights and liabilities.
Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to affect any rights or liabilities
of the Township, or to affect any cause of action, existing prior to the
enactment of this chapter.
§ 46A-17. Repealer.
Any and all terms, conditions, and provisions of any ordinance or resolution
of East Norriton Township in conflict with the terms, conditions and
provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
§ 46A-18. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective immediately upon its enactment.
§ 46A-19. Authority.
This chapter is being enacted pursuant to the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Intergovernmental Cooperation Law, Act of July 12, 1972, No. 180, as
amended, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
Chapter 47
WORKERS' COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 22. Pension plans — See Ch. 26.
§ 46A-15 WORKERS' COMPENSATION § 46A-19
47:93

ARTICLE I
Delaware Valley Workers' Compensation Trust
[Adopted 5-28-1991 by Ord. No. 300]
§ 47-1. Authorization.
The Board of Supervisors of East Norriton Township is hereby authorized
to execute the Delaware Workers' Compensation Intergovernmental
Agreement for the participation of East Norriton Township in the Delaware
Valley Workers' Compensation Trust, which agreement shall be
substantially in the form as attached hereto as Exhibit A. The agreement is
on file for inspection and review at the offices of East Norriton Township,
Pennsylvania. This agreement may be modified after the enactment of this
article to conform to any requirements imposed by the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry Bureau of Workers'
Compensation.
§ 47-2. Purpose.
The participation of East Norriton Township in the Delaware Valley
Workers' Compensation Trust is authorized for the purposes of enabling
East Norriton Township to obtain a self-insurance exemption for the
payment of workers' compensation claims from the Pennsylvania
Department of Labor and Industry pursuant to 77 P.S. § 501 in an effort
to ultimately reduce the cost of workers' compensation claims through the
creation of a joint fund to be used for the payment of workers' compensation
claims on behalf of all participants in the Delaware Valley Workers'
Compensation Trust.
§ 47-3. Conditions for participation.
As set forth in the Delaware Valley Workers' Compensation
Intergovernmental Agreement, the following conditions, among others,
apply to the participation of East Norriton in the Delaware Valley Workers'
Compensation Trust:
A. Each participating municipality meets the admission and eligibility
requirements set forth therein.
B. Each participating municipality agrees to pay all annual contributions
and any assessments which are required for the creation of the General
Operating and Restricted Surplus Funds created pursuant to the
Delaware Valley Workers' Compensation Intergovernmental
Agreement.
C. Each participating municipality uses its best efforts to provide
appropriations for the payment of any contributions or assessments
required by the trust for the payment of workers' compensation
benefits.
§ 47-1 WORKERS' COMPENSATION § 47-3
47:95
§ 47-4. Self-insurance exemption.
The participation of East Norriton Township in the Delaware Valley
Workers' Compensation Trust will not be effective unless and until it is
granted a self-insurance exemption for the payment of workers'
compensation claims by the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry
pursuant to 77 P.S. § 501 and any regulations promulgated thereunder.
§ 47-5. Duration; conditions for withdrawal.
East Norriton Township agrees to participate in the trust for a minimum
period of two years, subject to the requirement that it continue to retain a
self-insurance exemption for the payment of workers' compensation claims
from the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry. After the
expiration of that minimum two-year period, each participating municipality
may withdraw under the following conditions, subject to the right of
arbitration as provided in the Delaware Valley Workers' Compensation
Intergovernmental Agreement:
D. Each participating municipality institutes any and all loss-prevention
measures or risk-management procedures as may be required for the
purpose of minimizing or eliminating risks to its employees which could
contribute to losses.
E. Each participating municipality cooperates fully with the trust's service
and fiscal agents, attorneys, claims adjusters and any other agents or
employees of the trust with respect to the investigation, defense and
settlement of claims.
F. Each participating municipality designates a contact person to be
responsible for all contacts with the trust.
G. Each participating municipality provides any information to the
administrator or Board of Trustees as may be required to effect the
purposes and objectives of the trust.
H. Each participating municipality complies with all applicable statutes
and regulations governing the payment of workers' compensation
claims, including but not limited to the Pennsylvania Workmen's
Compensation Act.52
A. An opinion is rendered by the trust certified actuary that such
withdrawal will not result in the number of participants' falling below
the minimum required to assure the fiscal and actuarial soundness of
the trust itself;
B. The withdrawing municipality is not then in default of its obligation to
pay premiums, contributions or assessments;
52.Editor's Note: See 77 P.S. § 1 et seq.
§ 47-3 EAST NORRITON CODE § 47-5
47:96
§ 47-6. When effective.
The effective date of the participating of East Norriton Township in the
Delaware Valley Workers' Compensation Trust will be January 1, 1992,
provided that a self-insurance exemption for the payment of workers'
compensation claims is obtained by it from the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry before that date.
§ 47-7. Powers delegated.
Each participating municipality delegates to the Board of Trustees of the
Delaware Valley Workers' Compensation Trust the powers enumerated in
the intergovernmental agreement, including the right to expel participants
under certain conditions.
§ 47-8. Contributions and assessments.
All contributions and assessments paid by East Norriton Township shall be
made with funds appropriated by East Norriton Township for that purpose.
§ 47-9. Organization.
The organizational structure of the trust shall consist of a Board of Trustees,
an administrator, a claims administration/loss-control consultant and
various service agents appointed by the Board of Trustees in accordance
with the Delaware Valley Workers' Compensation Intergovernmental
Agreement and any bylaws adopted pursuant thereto.
§ 47-10. Provision of funds.
As set forth in the Delaware Valley Workers' Compensation
Intergovernmental Agreement, the funds required for the creation and
operation of the trust shall be provided by the participating municipalities
through annual appropriations.
C. The withdrawing municipality shall pay the full amount of a termination
contribution, as determined by the Board of Trustees in accordance
with the Delaware Valley Workers' Compensation Intergovernmental
Agreement and any bylaws adopted by the participants pursuant to that
agreement; and
D. The Board of Trustees shall have received a certification from the trust
actuary that the withdrawal of the municipality will not reduce the
actuarial soundness of the trust and, if any municipal debt has been
incurred by the participants to finance any portion of the trust reserves,
an opinion is obtained from bond counsel that such withdrawal will not
adversely affect the tax-exempt status of any interest paid and any debt
incurred by the participating municipalities or any legal entity created
for the purpose of incurring such debt. As used herein, the term "debt"
includes any municipal bonds, certificates, letters of credit or other
instruments of municipal indebtedness.
§ 47-5 WORKERS' COMPENSATION § 47-11
47:97
§ 47-11. Contracts.
The Delaware Valley Workers' Compensation Trust is empowered to enter
into contracts for policies of group insurance and employee benefits,
including social security, for any of its employees.
§ 47-12. Additional conditions.
As a condition of participating in the Delaware Valley Workers'
Compensation Trust, East Norriton Township will agree to:
§ 47-13. Construal of provisions.
Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to expand or in any
manner modify the Township's obligations or responsibilities under the
agreement, and nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to confer
any rights to any persons or parties in excess of those contained in the
agreement.
A. Pay all annual contributions or assessments as may be required by the
Board of Trustees.
B. Appoint a representative to sit on the Board of Trustees and designate a
contact person for the purpose of communicating with the trust or its
representatives.
C. Agree not to withdraw from the trust for a period of two years following
its admission to the trust, provided that it maintains a self-insurance
exemption for the payment of workers' compensation benefits from the
Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry.
D. Withdraw from the trust only upon satisfaction of the conditions set
forth in the Delaware Valley Workers' Compensation Intergovernmental
Agreement.
E. Perform all covenants contained in the Delaware Valley Workers'
Compensation Intergovernmental Agreement and delegate to the Board
of Trustees the powers and authorities enumerated in that agreement.
F. Comply with all the conditions set forth in the Delaware Valley Workers'
Compensation Intergovernmental Agreement governing the handling
and payment of claims, including the defense and settlement thereof.
G. Appropriate the funds needed to pay all contributions and assessments
as may be required by the Board of Trustees in accordance with the
Delaware Valley Workers' Compensation Intergovernmental
Agreement.
H. Cooperate with the trust, its agents or employees and provide the trust
with all information it needs for the operation of the trust, including any
underwriting or claims data which may be requested by the Board of
Trustees or its designee.
§ 47-11 EAST NORRITON CODE § 47-14
47:98
§ 47-14. Statutory authority.
This article is being enacted pursuant to 53 P.S. § 65741.
§ 47-14 WORKERS' COMPENSATION § 47-14
47:99
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 54
ALARM DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency Management Agency — See Ch. 9.
Fire Department — See Ch. 10.
Police Department — See Ch. 33.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 95.
Noise — See Ch. 127.
§ 54-1. Definitions and word usage.
A. As used in this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall
have the following meanings given herein, unless the context
specifically and clearly indicates otherwise:
AUDIBLE ALARM — Any device, bell, horn or siren which is attached
to the interior or exterior of a building and emits a warning signal
audible outside the building and designed to attract attention when
activated by a criminal act or other emergency requiring police and/or
fire personnel to respond.
AUTOMATIC PROTECTION DEVICE — An electrically operated
instrument composed of sensory apparatus and related hardware which
automatically transmits a prerecorded voice alarm over regular
telephone line by direct or indirect connection to the Police and/or Fire
Department upon receipt of a stimulus from a sensory apparatus that
has detected a physical force or condition inherently characteristic of a
fire or intrusion.
FALSE ALARM — Any signal activated by an automatic protection
device, any audible alarm or any other kind of direct or indirect signal
given to the police and/or fire communications center, to which the
police and/or fire company respond, which is not the result of a fire,
burglary, robbery or attempted burglary or robbery or similar
emergency.
FIRE DEPARTMENT — The Norriton Fire Engine Company or any other
fire company responding pursuant to any mutual aid agreement.
PERSON — Any person or persons, male or female, corporation,
partnership, association, company, individual, owner, occupant, lessee
or any agency, organization or other entity recognized by law as the
subject of rights and duties.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Township of East Norriton Police
Department or any other Police Department responding pursuant to an
intermunicipal police agreement.
§ 47-14 EAST NORRITON CODE § 54-1
47:100
§ 54-2. Timing mechanisms required.
After the enactment of this chapter, persons must equip audible alarms with
a timing mechanism that will disengage the audible alarm after a maximum
period of 15 minutes. Audible alarms without such a timing mechanism
shall be unlawful in the Township and must be disconnected by the persons
within 60 days from the effective date of this chapter. Excepted from this
requirement are fire-suppression systems with audible alarms activated by
the flow of water.
§ 54-3. Testing.
No person shall conduct any test or demonstration of an automatic
protection device without first obtaining permission from the Police and
Fire Departments. Where the equipment is keyed through an intermediary,
no such permission is necessary unless the alarm or signal is to be relayed
to the Police and/or Fire Department.
§ 54-4. False alarms.
§ 54-5. Violations and penalties.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of East Norriton, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania.
B. Words used in the singular include the plural; words in the plural
include the singular; and words used in the present tense include the
future.
C. The word "shall" is always mandatory.
A. Any person who installs or permits to be installed, in any building used
or occupied for any purpose, any answering device, audible alarm,
automatic protection device and/or central station protective system,
and which equipment is so poorly designed, constructed, regulated or
installed, as a result whereof false alarms are transmitted to the
Township Police Department, the Norriton Fire Engine Company or any
other municipal office or officer, shall be in violation of this chapter.
B. Any person who owns, leases or occupies a building which has an
answering service, audible alarm, automatic protection device and/or
central station protective system installed, and such equipment results
in continual accidental activation, then, in such case, said person shall
be in violation of this chapter. For the purposes of this section,
"continual accidental activation" shall be defined to mean three
accidental activations within a six-month period with respect to calls to
the Police Department and two accidental activations within a sixmonth
period with respect to calls to the fire company.
A. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter, upon
being adjudged guilty thereof in any proceeding brought by virtue
§ 54-1 WORKERS' COMPENSATION § 54-5
47:101
Chapter 59
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
hereof before the District Justice in and for said Township, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine as follows:
(1) For the first offense, a written warning shall be issued by the Chief
of Police or the Fire Marshal.
(2) For the second offense, a fine in an amount not to exceed $100, plus
costs. [Amended 9-27-1982 by Ord. No. 178; 10-22-2013 by
Ord. No. 549]
(3) For the third offense, a fine in an amount not to exceed $200, plus
costs. [Amended 9-27-1982 by Ord. No. 178; 10-22-2013 by
Ord. No. 549]
(4) For the fourth offense and subsequent offenses, a fine in an amount
not to exceed $400, plus costs. [Amended 9-27-1982 by Ord. No.
178; 10-22-2013 by Ord. No. 549]
B. Offenses shall be accumulated on a moving twelve-month basis. Any
offenses more than one-year old shall not be considered in determining
whether an offense is a first or subsequent offense. In the event that the
false alarms have been caused by malfunctions of the system rather
than by user error, then the person responsible must demonstrate after
the first offense that corrective measures have been taken. Failure to so
demonstrate corrective measures shall result in a doubling of the
appropriate fine.
C. In default of paying any fine plus costs, the offender shall be committed
to the county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 54-5 EAST NORRITON CODE § 54-5
59:102
ARTICLE I
Consumption and Possession
[Adopted 6-22-1981 by Ord. No. 160; amended in its entirety
12-19-1988 by Ord. No. 274]
§ 59-1. Consumption restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage and/
or malt or brewed beverage as defined in the Pennsylvania Liquor Code53
or to possess any such beverage with the intent to consume the same while
in or upon or adjacent to highways, roadways, trafficways, alleys, sidewalks
and parks within the Township of East Norriton.
§ 59-2. Possession.
Possession of an open alcoholic and/or malt or brewed beverage container
by any person as described in the foregoing section shall create the
presumption that such person did consume or intend to consume the
contents thereof in violation of this article.
§ 59-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person, corporation or other entity who shall violate any of the
provisions of this article or who should fail to comply with any notice
of violation herein, upon conviction before a District Justice within the
magisterial district within which the Township of East Norriton is a part,
shall be fined not more than $600 plus costs of prosecution after a summary
proceeding brought in the name of the Township before said District Justice.
A new and separate offense shall be deemed to be committed for each day
that such violation exists. In default of the payment of any fine imposed and
the costs, the person or persons that are charged may be sentenced to be
committed to the county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
53.Editor's Note: See 47 P.S. § 4-493.
§ 59-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 59-3
59:103

ARTICLE II
Intermunicipal Liquor License Transfers
[Adopted 6-24-2003 by Ord. No. 45554]
§ 59-4. Applications.
A. Any applicant seeking an intermunicipal transfer of a license or
economic development liquor license under Act 141 of the Liquor
Code55 shall complete the Township's application form which shall be
available from the Township.
B. The Township application may be amended from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
C. The Township's application shall contain, but is not limited to, a request
for the following information:
(1) The applicant's name, address, telephone, and fax number.
(2) The applicant's representative or attorney name, address,
telephone number, and fax number.
(3) Location and name of the establishment of the liquor license
proposed to be transferred or issued.
(4) License No./LID No. of the liquor license proposed to be
transferred.
(5) Proposed location of the liquor license to be transferred or issued,
including street address, parcel number and block and unit
number.
(6) The name of the establishment sought to be licensed and the
proposed use.
(7) Type of liquor license proposed to be transferred or issued.
(8) Present zoning classification of proposed location of the liquor
license to be transferred or issued.
(9) Anticipated date of liquor license transfer or issuance and
commencement of operations.
(10) Other locations owned or operated by the applicant which
currently hold liquor licenses, including name, address and liquor
license number of these establishments.
54.Editor's Note: This ordinance was originally adopted as Ch. 211 but was renumbered as
Ch. 59, Art. II, by Ord. No. 461, adopted 3-16-2004, to fit the organizational structure of
the Code.
55.Editor's Note: See 47 P.S. § 1-101 et seq.
§ 59-4 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 59-4
59:105
§ 59-5. Public hearing.
(11) Whether the applicant or anyone associated with locations owned
or operated by the applicant which currently holds liquor licenses
has ever been cited with liquor law violations.
(12) Whether the applicant has had a liquor license transfer or
application denied.
(13) Whether the applicant, or if a corporation, any officer or director of
the corporation, or if a partnership or association, any member or
partner of the partnership or association, has been convicted or
found guilty of a felony within the past five years.
(14) Name, address and distance from proposed licensed premises of:
(a) Nearest licensed establishments.
(b) Nearest schools.
(c) Nearest public playgrounds.
(d) Nearest churches.
(e) Nearest charitable institutions.
(f) Nearest hospital.
(15) List of existing liquor licenses in East Norriton Township which are
inactive, in safekeeping and/or for sale, including name, address
and telephone number of contact person for each.
(16) Verification by the applicant that the information contained in the
application is true and correct; that the presentation of false
information shall subject the applicant to possible arrest, fines, and
imprisonment; and acknowledgment that submission of false
information may constitute grounds for denial of a liquor license
transfer or issuance.
A. The Township shall hold a public hearing in conformity with Act 141 of
the Liquor Code, and at the public hearing a court reporter shall be
present to make a transcript of the hearing.
B. The Township shall have the right to post the property upon which the
liquor license is sought but shall not be required to do so.
C. The Township shall publish a public notice of its intention to hold a
public hearing once each week for two successive weeks in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Township. Such notice shall
state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the
matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be
more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than
seven days from the date of the hearing.
§ 59-4 EAST NORRITON CODE § 59-5
59:106
§ 59-6. Fees.
There shall be a fee accompanying the application to be set by resolution,
from time to time, by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 59-7. Written decision.
D. The Township shall mail or deliver a notice of the hearing to the owner
or to the occupier of every lot on the same street within 500 feet of the
location of the lot upon which the liquor license would be transferred or
issued, and to the owner or occupier of every lot not on the same street
within 150 feet of the location of the lot upon which the liquor license
would be transferred or issued, provided that failure to give such notice
shall not invalidate any action taken by the Township.
A. The Township shall render a written decision by resolution to approve
or disapprove the applicant's request for an intermunicipal transfer of a
liquor license or for the issuance of an economic development license
within 45 days of the last public hearing.
B. The Township shall approve the request unless it finds that doing so
would adversely affect the welfare, health, peace and morals of the
Township or its residents.
C. A decision by the Board of Supervisors to deny the request may be
appealed to the Court of Common Pleas of Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania, within the time periods otherwise provided by law.
§ 59-5 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 59-7
59:107
Chapter 63
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peach and good order — See Ch. 144.
§ 63-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
JUKEBOX — Any music vending machine, contrivance or device which, upon
insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc or key into any slot, crevice or
other opening or by the payment of any price, operates or may be operated
for the emission of songs, music or similar amusement.
MECHANICAL OR ELECTRONIC AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any machine,
contrivance or device which upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate,
disc or key into any slot, crevice or other opening or by the payment of any
price, may be operated or used as a game, entertainment or amusement,
whether or not registering a score and whether or not a prize is offered.
It shall include but not be limited to such devices as marble machines,
pinball machines, skill ball, mechanical grab machines, mechanical bowling
machines, photoelectric shooting or target machines, electronic video
games, air-hockey tables, football games and all games, operations or
transactions similar thereto under whatever name they may be designated
or described. It shall not include devices or machines whose sole purpose is
to dispense merchandise such as candy, cigarettes, etc.
OPERATOR — Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or association
displaying or maintaining for use and operation any jukebox or mechanical
amusement device or otherwise permitting the use or operation of such
devices for a fee or charge.
PERSON — Every natural person, copartnership, association or
corporation, and whenever used in any clause prescribing or imposing a
penalty, the term, as applied to copartnership or associations, shall mean
the partners or members thereof, and as applied to a corporation, the
officers thereof.
PLACE OF AMUSEMENT — Any place authorized as such by license.
ZONING OFFICER — The Zoning Officer of the Township of East Norriton
or his designate.
§ 63-2. Registration and license required.
It shall be unlawful for any operator to display or keep or maintain for use
and operation or otherwise permit the use and operation of any jukebox
and/or any mechanical amusement device or other similar machine without
§ 59-7 EAST NORRITON CODE § 63-2
63:108
first having registered with and obtained a license from the Zoning Officer
as prescribed herein.
§ 63-3. Application.
§ 63-4. Fees.
A. Any person(s) desiring to procure a license for a mechanical or
electronic device shall apply therefor in writing to the Zoning Officer.
(1) Such application shall set forth the full name and address of the
applicant, the address at which such device(s) is to be located,
together with:
(a) A plan of the premises showing the location or locations where
the jukebox, mechanical amusement device or similar machine
or device is to be displayed or maintained and indicating the
same as a supervised area. No loitering shall be permitted on
the premises. This plan will show all doorways and aisle widths
of three feet. Each device must have a minimum of 15 square
feet of floor area. No device shall be placed within 10 feet of
any exterior doorway.
(b) The type, manufacturer and serial number of each jukebox or
mechanical device for which application is made.
(2) Such information shall be furnished over the signature of the
applicant and shall be made under oath or affirmation.
B. No license shall be granted until a period of 10 days shall have elapsed
from the date of application, during which time the Zoning Officer may,
at his or her discretion, investigate the facts set forth in the application.
C. Upon approval of the application, the Zoning Officer shall issue a
license for each location where a jukebox or mechanical or electronic
amusement device is to be displayed or maintained and may also issue a
seal to be affixed to each jukebox or mechanical or electronic device
registered and licensed under this chapter.
A. Registration and license fees shall be paid by the operator to the Zoning
Officer at the time that application is filed. Such fees shall be as follows:
(1) For each jukebox: $25 per year or fraction of year thereof, which
shall be apportioned based upon the number of months remaining
in any license year as determined by § 63-6.
(2) For each mechanical or electronic amusement device: $100 per
year or fraction of year thereof, which shall be apportioned based
upon the number of months remaining in any license year as
determined by § 63-6.
B. No deductions or refunds of any fee shall be granted in case of a fee
payable for less than a full calendar year or in the case of any device
§ 63-2 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 63-4
63:109
§ 63-5. Regulations.
§ 63-6. Expiration of license; renewal.
Licenses issued under this chapter expire on June 30 of each year.
Applications for renewal, accompanied by the required annual fee, shall be
submitted in the month of June and may consist of a signed verification of
the original application contents so long as there have been no changes.
§ 63-7. Transfers.
Licenses shall apply only to the operator and location to which issued,
and any transfer shall require an amendment of the original application,
approval by the Zoning Officer and payment of the fee specified in § 63-4B
destroyed, stolen, sold or otherwise disposed of or transferred after
payment of the fee. In the event of the transfer of the registration of
any device, there shall be a transfer fee of $25 for that device.
C. In the case of the loss, defacement or destruction of any original license
or seal, the person to whom such certificate or seal issued shall apply to
the Zoning Officer, who will then issue a new seal or license upon
payment of a fee of $5.
A. A copy of the license must be visibly posted upon the premises where
any jukebox or mechanical or electronic device is displayed or
maintained for use and operation, and the seal which will be provided
shall be affixed to the jukebox or mechanical or electronic amusement
device for which issued in accordance with the directions of the Zoning
Officer.
B. Any premises upon which any jukebox or mechanical or electronic
amusement device is displayed or maintained shall be open to
examination and inspection by duly authorized agents of East Norriton
Township and/or the East Norriton Township Police Department during
all hours that such premises are open to use by the public.
C. No mechanical or electronic device shall be used for gambling or other
illegal purposes.
D. Any operator granted a license shall not permit the operation of any
device by a person under the age of 18 years of age during the regular
class hours of any day in which schools located in the Township are in
session or during hours of curfew.
E. After the East Norriton Township Police Department has responded to
complaints pertaining to disturbances related to the operation of such
devices at any licensed premises, the Board of Supervisors will have the
right to review the complaints, and, if decided the complaints were
legitimate, it will have the right to suspend licensure and enforce the
removal of all devices from the licensed premises for the remainder of
that calendar year.
§ 63-4 EAST NORRITON CODE § 63-7
63:110
above. A new seal may be issued for a replacement for a jukebox or
mechanical or electronic device previously registered under this chapter
only upon amendment of the original application, approval by the Zoning
Officer and payment of the fee specified in § 63-4C above.
§ 63-8. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 72
(RESERVED)
Chapter 73
CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 72.
Sewers — See Ch. 162.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 168.
§ 73-1. Word usage and definitions.
The following words and phrases as used in this chapter shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly
indicates a different meaning. The masculine includes the feminine, the
singular includes the plural and the plural includes the singular.
A. Any person, corporation or other entity who shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter or who should fail to comply with any notice
of violation herein, upon conviction before a District Justice within the
magisterial district within which the Township of East Norriton is a
part, shall be fined not more than $600 plus costs of prosecution after a
summary proceeding brought in the name of the Township before said
District Justice. A new and separate offense shall be deemed to be
committed for each day that such violation exists. In default of the
payment of any fine imposed and the costs, the person or persons that
are charged may be sentenced to be committed to the county jail for a
period not exceeding 30 days. [Amended 12-19-1988 by Ord. No.
274]
B. It is expressly understood that the permits issued for the operation of
said machines or devices shall be for amusement purposes only. Any
indication of gambling, i.e., the awarding of cash or premiums, shall
constitute a breach of this chapter, and the licensee shall be liable to
prosecution under this chapter in addition to appropriate criminal
proceedings.
§ 63-7 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 73-1
63:111
CONTRACT — An agreement, whether oral or written and whether
contained in one or more documents, between a contractor and an owner of
real property or another contractor for the performance or work, including
all labor, services and materials to be furnished and performed thereunder.
CONTRACTOR — Any person who undertakes or offers to perform
construction, repair, reroof, remodeling, rehabilitation, demolition, paving,
electrical and any other residential or nonresidential construction or
specialty contractor or demolition work in the Township, whether as a
general contractor, subcontractor, specialty contractor, certified electrical
inspector or home improvement contractor with respect to the property
owner. Contractor does not include a bona fide employee of the contractor.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, limited partnership, association,
corporation, trust, limited liability company or other legally recognizable
entity.
REGISTRATION YEAR — Starting the first day of the month following the
date of adoption of this chapter ending December 31 of that year for the
first year and beginning January 1 and running for 12 months and ending
December 31 of the same calendar year thereafter.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of East Norriton.
§ 73-2. Enforcement.
The Code Enforcement Officer of East Norriton Township or his authorized
representative shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 73-3. Authorization to perform certain work.
Registration by a contractor pursuant to this chapter shall not be construed
to authorize the registered contractor to perform any particular type of
work or conduct any particular type of business which is reserved to
qualified licensees under other provisions of federal, state or local law.
§ 73-4. Registration required; application; issuance; expiration.
A. Every person desiring to continue to engage in or hereafter to begin to
engage in the business of acting as a contractor in the Township shall,
prior to commencing business in such registration year, apply for
registration to act as a contractor in the Township.
B. Such application for registration as a contractor shall be made by the
completion of an application furnished by the Code Enforcement
Department and the payment of the prescribed registration fee. Each
completed application must contain the information required
hereinafter by the chapter, and each applicant must present
satisfactory proof of insurance. Each application for registration shall
be signed by an applicant if a natural person, and in the case of an
association or a partnership by a member or partner thereof, and in the
case of a corporation by an officer thereof.
§ 73-1 EAST NORRITON CODE § 73-4
63:112
§ 73-5. Exceptions.
§ 73-6. Insurance requirements.
C. Each successful applicant shall be issued a registration card.
D. All contractors' registration shall expire at midnight on December 31 of
each calendar year unless the registration is revoked or suspended
prior thereto under the terms of this chapter.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the official transactions
of any authorized representative of the government of the United
States, any state or commonwealth of the United States, any political
subdivision of any state or commonwealth or any agency or
instrumentality of the foregoing governments; provided, however, that
no person engaged by the representative of any of the foregoing shall
act as a contractor in the Township unless such person shall first have
complied with and have been registered under the provisions of this
chapter.
B. No contractor registration shall be required of any person who
performs labor or services for a contractor for wage or salary.
C. No contractor registration shall be required for homeowners
performing work on the homeowner's primary residence.
D. No contractor registration shall be required for maintenance men,
housekeeping, handymen, and the like who work for wage or salary and
who are employees, as defined by the Internal Revenue Code, of the
property owner and/or occupant or lease holder of the real property on
which work is being performed.
E. No contractor registration shall be required for contractors who are
required to register in accordance with the Pennsylvania Home
Improvement Consumer Protection Act (73 P.S. §§ 517.1 to 517.19).
A. No contractor registration shall be issued unless the applicant files a
certificate of insurance with the Code Enforcement Officer at the time
of registration application. The certificate of insurance shall contain a
provision that the coverages afforded under the policy will not be
canceled unless at least 30 days' prior notice of such cancellation has
been given to the Township. The certificate of insurance must evidence
policies of insurance, maintained at the expense of the applicant, for
public liability, property damage, products liability and completed
operations, each of which must have a single occurrence limit of no less
than $50,000. The reasonable limits of insurance for blasting and
demolition contractors shall be determined by the Code Enforcement
Department at the time of application, based on the nature and extent
of the applicant's proposed operations.
B. All types and limits of insurance for which certificates are presented at
the time of application shall be maintained throughout the registration
§ 73-4 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 73-6
63:113
§ 73-7. Fees.
§ 73-8. Contents of application.
The application for contractor registration shall be available at the
Township from the Code Enforcement Department. The application shall
require a written answer to all questions contained thereon. The application
will not be considered complete and will not be reviewed unless all
questions are answered. The application form shall be signed by the
applicant. The questions and information required on the application form
shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
§ 73-9. Notification of changes.
Each registered contractor shall, within 10 days after a change in
ownership, directors, officers, members, management, address, phone
number or trade name, notify the Code Enforcement Department of such
change in writing.
§ 73-10. Refusal to issue or renew registration.
No registration shall be issued or renewed under the following
circumstances:
year, or the registration shall be suspended or revoked as hereinafter
set forth in the chapter.
A. The annual contractor registration fee shall be in the amount set forth
in the Township Fee Schedule.56
B. There shall not be a prorated reduction in the registration fee.
A. The names of owners, partners, directors, members, and officers of the
applicant and the business address and trade names of applicant.
B. A statement as to whether or not any municipalities, including the
Township, have refused to issue or have revoked any similar
contractor's registration or licenses of the applicant within two years
prior to the date of the application. In the event that there has been
such denial or revocation, the applicant must explain in writing the
reasons for such denial.
A. If the applicant falsely answered any question or questions contained
on the application form.
B. If the applicant has been convicted within two years prior to the date of
application for any crimes or offenses related to the applicant's work as
a contractor under any federal and state criminal statute or common
law criminal offense or for violation of any municipal ordinance. The
56.Editor's Note: Said schedule is on file in the Township offices.
§ 73-6 EAST NORRITON CODE § 73-10
63:114
§ 73-11. Refusal to issue permits.
No permit shall be issued to any contractor until such time that the
contractor has obtained a contractor's registration. Furthermore, no permit
shall be issued to any contractor who is required to register in accordance
with the Pennsylvania Home Improvement Consumer Protection Act (73 P.S.
§§ 517.1 to 517.19) until such time that the contractor demonstrates that
the contractor is registered in accordance with said act.
§ 73-12. Revocation of registration.
The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized revoke any registration issued
under the provisions of this chapter under the following circumstances:
term "conviction" shall include guilty pleas and pleas of nolo
contendere.
A. If the registered contractor falsely answered any question or questions
contained on an application for contractor registration or renewal of
licensing previously submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. If the registered contractor fails to maintain, during the registration
year, the policies of insurance required under the provisions of this
chapter.
C. If the registered contractor violates any of the terms or provisions of
the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code, as amended, or its
successor or any terms or provisions of this chapter.
D. If the registered contractor violates any condition or requirement of a
building permit, sewer construction permit or highway permit issued by
the Township.
E. If the registered contractor willfully deviates from or disregards any
plans or specifications for any contracting job in any material respect
without first obtaining the consent of the owner, in writing, to any such
change and without first notifying the Code Enforcement Officer of any
such change.
F. If the registered contractor does any business through any person who
is subject to the registration requirements of this chapter and who is
not registered as required by this chapter.
G. If the registered contractor engages in the contracting business in the
Township under any name other than the name which the Contractor
registered.
H. If the registered contractor fails to comply with an order, demand or
requirement lawfully made by Code Enforcement Officer or his
authorized representative under the authority of this chapter or any
other Township Code.
§ 73-10 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 73-13
63:115
§ 73-13. Right to appeal.
Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the Code
Enforcement Officer to the Board of Appeals. An application for appeal shall
be based on a claim that the true intent of this chapter or the rules legally
adopted hereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this
chapter do not fully apply, or an agreed party for revision of revocation of
registration, refusal to issue or renew registration.
§ 73-14. Board decision.
The Board of Appeals shall render its decision by way of resolution. Copies
shall be furnished to the appellant and the Code Enforcement Officer. The
Code Enforcement Officer shall, upon receiving the decision of the Board,
take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the Board.
§ 73-15. Court review.
Any person, whether or not a previous party of the appeal, shall have the
right to apply to the appropriate court for a writ of certiorari to correct
errors of law. Application for review shall be made in the manner and time
required by law following the filing of the decision of the Board of Appeals.
§ 73-16. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are severable, and if any section, clause,
sentence, part or provision thereof shall be held illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision of the
court shall not affect or impair the remaining sections, sentences, clauses,
parts or provisions of this chapter. It is hereby declared to be the intent of
the Board that this chapter would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid
or unconstitutional section, sentence, clause, part or provision had not been
included herein.
§ 73-17. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect and be in force from and after its approval as
required by law.
§ 73-18. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person who fails to correct a violation or institute a remedial action
as ordered by the Code Enforcement Officer or who violates a provision
or fails to comply with any requirements of this Code or of the other
applicable provisions of the Township Code shall be subject upon
summary conviction, for each violation, to a fine of not less than $50 nor
more than $600 plus costs of prosecution; and in default of payment of
such fine and cost to imprisonment not exceeding 30 days. Each day's
failure to comply herewith shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 73-13 EAST NORRITON CODE § 73-18
63:116
Chapter 74
CONSTRUCTION CODE, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Historical Advisory Commission — See Ch. 11.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 30.
Building construction — See Ch. 72.
Contractor registration — See Ch. 73.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 95.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 105.
Grading and excavations — See Ch. 114.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 125.
Plumbing — See Ch. 150.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 152.
Sewers — See Ch. 162.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
175.
Zoning — See Ch. 205.
§ 74-1. Adoption of state-mandated construction standards.
B. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the
Township Solicitor from initiating appropriate actions or proceedings at
law or in equity to effect the purposes of this chapter.
A. The Municipality hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions
of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S.
§§ 7210.101 to 7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its
regulations.
B. The section is hereby amended to include the following additional
provisions:
(1) Uniform Construction Code. The Uniform Construction Code,
contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401 to 405, as amended from
time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by
reference as the Building Code of East Norriton Township.
(2) International Fuel Gas Code. The International Fuel Gas Code is
contained in the Uniform Construction Code, pursuant to 34 Pa.
Code § 403.21(a)(4), and is, therefore, adopted and incorporated
herein by reference.
(3) Codes and appendixes adopted. This adoption shall include all of
the codes specifically incorporated by reference in the Code under,
inter alia, § 403.21 of the Code, as provided for under the Act, and
all subsequent additions or successor codes. In addition, the
following appendixes to the International Residential Code 2003
are hereby adopted: A, B, C, F, G and H. The following appendixes
of the International Fire Code are hereby adopted: B, C, D, E, F and
G. Upon adoption by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of
§ 73-18 CONSTRUCTION CODE, UNIFORM § 74-1
74:117
§ 74-2. Insertions to codes.
The following are insertions for the codes incorporated by reference in the
Uniform Construction Code:
§ 74-3. Administration.
Administration and enforcement of the code within this municipality shall
be undertaken in any of the following ways as determined by the governing
body of this municipality from time to time by resolution:
successor codes, those codes and the appendixes corresponding to
those listed are hereby adopted.
A. International Building Code:
(1) Section 1612.3, insert "East Norriton Township."
(2) Section 1612.3, insert date "October 19, 2001" of FEMA Flood
Study.
B. ICC Electrical Code:
(1) Section 404.2, insert "Fee Schedule adopted by East Norriton
Township, which can be amended from time to time by resolution."
C. International Fuel Gas Code:
(1) Section 106.5.2, insert "Fee Schedule adopted by East Norriton
Township, which can be amended from time to time by resolution."
D. International Mechanical Code:
(1) Section 106.5.2, insert "Fee Schedule adopted by East Norriton
Township, which can be amended from time to time by resolution."
E. International Plumbing Code:
(1) Section 106.6.2, insert "Fee Schedule adopted by East Norriton
Township, which can be amended from time to time by resolution."
(2) Section 305.6.1, insert "36 inches."
(3) Section 904.1, insert "12 inches."
F. International Residential Code:
(1) Section R301.2(1), insert "information available from the Building
Code Official."
(2) Section P2603.6.1, insert "36 inches."
(3) Section P3103.1, insert "12 inches."
§ 74-1 EAST NORRITON CODE § 74-3
74:118
§ 74-4. Appeals.
A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors of East Norriton Township in conformity with the requirements
of the relevant provisions of the code, as amended from time to time,
and for the purposes set forth therein. If, at any time, enforcement and
administration is undertaken jointly with one or more other municipalities,
the Board of Appeals shall be established by joint action of the participating
municipalities.
§ 74-5. Effect on other provisions.
All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were adopted
by this municipality on or before July 1, 1999, which equal or exceed the
requirements of the code, including but not limited to Ordinance Nos. 352,
387, 388 and 389, shall continue in full force and effect until such time
as such provisions fail to equal or exceed the minimum requirement of the
code, as amended from time to time.
§ 74-6. Fees.
Fees assessable by the Municipality for the administration and enforcement
undertaken pursuant to this Chapter 74 shall be established by the
governing body by resolution from time to time.
Chapter 77
A. By the designation of an employee of the municipality to serve as the
Municipal Code Official to act on behalf of the municipality.
B. By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of the municipality.
C. By entering into an intermunicipal agreement with one or more other
municipalities for the joint administration and enforcement of this Act.
D. By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this Act on behalf of this
municipality.
E. By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan reviews, inspections, and enforcement of
structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and utility
and miscellaneous use structures.
A. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this chapter and whose requirements
are less than the minimum requirement of the code are hereby
amended to conform with the comparable provisions of the code.
B. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of East Norriton
Township not governed by the code shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 74-3 CABLE TELEVISION CONNECTIONS § 74-6
77:119
CABLE TELEVISION CONNECTIONS
§ 77-1. Definitions; word usage.
§ 77-2. Prohibited acts.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM — A system of coaxial cables, microwave
links, television origination facilities, a control terminal, remote
transmitter-receivers that connect to ancillary devices and other
electrical conductors and equipment used or to be used primarily to
receive television, digital or radio signals directly or indirectly by cable,
microwave or air and to transmit the signals to subscribers or from
subscribers to the control terminal with relay capabilities to remote
receiving points.
FRANCHISE — Includes any authorization granted by the Township
of East Norriton in terms of a franchise privilege, permit, license or
otherwise to construct or have constructed, operate, maintain and
provide a cable television service to the citizens of the Township of East
Norriton.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or
organization of any kind.
B. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future; words in the plural number include the singular; and
words in the singular number include the plural number.
C. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to receive or to make or allow to be
made to that person's property any unauthorized connection, whether
physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any
part of the cable television system of any provider of cable television
services franchised by the Township of East Norriton for the purpose of
that person enabling himself or others to receive and/or relay television
signals, radio signals, pictures, programs, sounds or any other
information or intelligence transmitted over the cable television system
of the authorized franchise without payment to the franchisee of the
scheduled rate of charges established from time to time for the various
services being supplied through the cable television system to the
citizens of East Norriton Township.
B. It shall be unlawful for any persons, without the consent of the owner or
authorized franchisee, to willfully tamper with, remove or injure any
cable wires or other equipment used for the distribution of television
signals, radio signals, pictures, programs, sounds or any other
information or intelligence transmitted and/or received over the cable
§ 74-6 EAST NORRITON CODE § 77-2
77:120
§ 77-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1988 by Ord. No.
274]
Any person, corporation or other entity who shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter or who should fail to comply with any notice
of violation herein, upon conviction before a District Justice within the
magisterial district within which the Township of East Norriton is a part,
shall be fined not more than $600 plus costs of prosecution after a summary
proceeding brought in the name of the Township before said District Justice.
A new and separate offense shall be deemed to be committed for each day
that such violation exists. In default of the payment of any fine imposed and
the costs, the person or persons that are charged may be sentenced to be
committed to the county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 78
CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE AND RATES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cable television connections — See Ch. 77.
§ 78-1. Township to follow federal rate regulations.
East Norriton Township hereby resolves to follow the rate regulations
established by the Federal Communications Commission for cable service
for which it has established a franchise.
§ 78-2. Annual public hearing.
Each fiscal year of East Norriton Township, the Township shall hold a
hearing to review the rates and service of the cable franchisee(s) operating
within the Township. Such hearing shall be held annually within the month
of September or October. The Township shall give written notice to the
cable franchisee(s) operating within the Township of the date of the public
hearing and shall publish notice of the public hearing consistent with the
requirements of state statute.
§ 78-3. Issues to be presented at hearing.
The following issues shall be presented at the hearing:
television system of any duly authorized franchisee of the Township of
East Norriton.
A. Rate changes proposed by the franchisee(s) during the year following
the hearing [to be presented by franchisee(s)].
§ 77-2 CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE AND RATES § 78-3
78:121
§ 78-4. Authority of Township.
The Township shall have all authority granted to it under applicable federal
and state statutes and regulations relating to regulation of rates and service
for cable television.
Chapter 82
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Establishment of adult age — See Ch. 4.
§ 82-1. Definitions. [Amended 12-19-1988 by Ord. No. 274]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ESTABLISHMENT — Any privately owned place or business carried on for
a profit or any place of amusement or entertainment to which the public is
invited.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
OPERATOR — Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation
operating, managing or conducting any establishment; and whenever used
in any clause prescribing a penalty, the term operator, as applied to
associations or partnerships, shall include the members or partners thereof
and, as applied to corporations, shall include the officers thereof.
PARENT — Any natural parent of a minor, a guardian or any adult person,
18 years of age or over, responsible for the care and custody of a
minor.[Amended 12-19-1972 by Ord. No. 89]
B. Service changes proposed by the franchisee(s) during the year
following the hearing [to be presented by franchisee(s)].
C. Rate changes made during the year preceding the hearing by the
franchisee(s) [to be presented by franchisee(s)].
D. Service changes made by the franchisee(s) during the year preceding
the hearing [to be presented by franchisee(s)].
E. The annual financial statement of the franchisee(s) [to be presented by
franchisee(s)].
F. Public complaints and comments to be presented by the public and the
Township staff and supervisors with comment by the franchisee(s).
G. Other topics which may impact upon or justify rate and service changes
by the franchisee(s).
§ 78-3 EAST NORRITON CODE § 82-1
82:122
PUBLIC PLACE — Any street, highway, road, alley, park, playground, public
building, public ground or vacant lot.
REMAIN — To loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon.
§ 82-2. Unlawful conduct of minors.
§ 82-3. Unlawful conduct of parents.
§ 82-4. Unlawful conduct of owners and operators of
establishments.
§ 82-5. Violations and penalties.
A. It shall be unlawful for any minor to remain in or upon any public place
or any establishment between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 6:30 a.m. of
the following day, except that on Fridays and Saturdays the hours shall
be from 12:00 midnight to 6:00 a.m. [Amended 12-19-1988 by Ord.
No. 274]
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any minor accompanied
by a parent or to a minor upon an errand or other legitimate business
directed by such minor's parent or to any minor who is engaged in
gainful lawful employment during the curfew hours.
C. Each violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a
separate offense.
A. It shall be unlawful for any parent knowingly to permit any minor to
remain in or upon any public place or any establishment between the
hours of 10:30 p.m. and 6:30 a.m. of the following day, except that on
Fridays and Saturdays the hours shall be from 12:00 midnight to 6:00
a.m. [Amended 12-19-1988 by Ord. No. 274]
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any minor accompanied
by a parent or to a minor upon an errand of other legitimate business
directed by such minor's parent or to any minor who is engaged in
gainful lawful employment during the curfew hours.
C. Each violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a
separate offense.
A. It shall be unlawful for any operator of any establishment or his agents
or employees knowingly to permit any minor to remain upon the
premises of said establishment between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and
6:30 a.m. of the following day, except that on Fridays and Saturdays the
hours shall be from 12:00 midnight to 6:00 a.m. [Amended
12-19-1988 by Ord. No. 274]
B. Each violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 82-1 CURFEW § 82-5
82:123
§ 82-6. Special events.
Where there are special events, programs or functions by properly
organized and supervised organizations to advance legitimate recreation,
character development, religious training and school activities in the
building of good citizenship in young people, the East Norriton Police
Department will grant special consideration in such cases upon receipt of
notice thereof, and the children will be permitted to proceed directly home
from the event without incident.
Chapter 87
A. Any police officer who finds a minor violating the provisions of this
chapter shall obtain information from such minor as to his name and
address, age and the name and address of his parents or parent. The
minor shall thereupon be instructed to proceed to his home forthwith
and, if possible, shall be accompanied by the police officer. The police
officer shall ascertain, if possible, if the parent or parents are at home
and, if so, notify them verbally of the violation of both the parent and
the child. If the parent or parents are not found at home, the police
officer shall make such report to his superior officer. In all cases,
whether or not verbal notice has been given, a written notice shall also
be mailed to the parent or parents of the minor advising them of the
violation of this chapter.
B. Any parent who shall permit a minor to violate any of the provisions of
this chapter or who should fail to comply with any notice of violation
herein, upon conviction before a District Justice within the magisterial
district within which the Township of East Norriton is a part, shall be
fined not more than $600 plus costs of prosecution after a summary
proceeding brought in the name of the Township before said District
Justice. A new and separate offense shall be deemed to be committed
for each day that such violation exists. In default of the payment of any
fine imposed and the costs, the person or persons that are charged may
be sentenced to be committed to the county jail for a period not
exceeding 30 days. [Amended 12-19-1988 by Ord. No. 274]
C. Any operator of any establishment and any agents or employees of any
operator who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or who
should fail to comply with any notice of violation herein, upon
conviction before a District Justice within the magisterial district within
which the Township of East Norriton is a part, shall be fined not more
than $600 plus costs of prosecution after a summary proceeding
brought in the name of the Township before said District Justice. A new
and separate offense shall be deemed to be committed for each day that
such violation exists. In default of the payment of any fine imposed and
the costs, the person or persons that are charged may be sentenced to
be committed to the county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days. All
fines imposed and collected shall be paid into the Township treasury for
the use of the Township. [Amended 12-19-1988 by Ord. No. 274]
§ 82-5 EAST NORRITON CODE § 82-6
82:124
DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 129.
§ 82-6 CURFEW § 82-6
82:125

ARTICLE I
Piggeries
[Adopted 11-1-1949 by Ord. No. 5]
§ 87-1. Establishment and maintenance prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to set up, establish, conduct or maintain any piggery in
said Township of East Norriton in any manner whatsoever.
§ 87-2. Accumulation of refuse prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to permit any accumulation of garbage, manure or
refuse from any piggery on any private or public property, vacant or
occupied, within the Township of East Norriton.
§ 87-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1988 by Ord. No.
274]
Any person, corporation or other entity who shall violate any of the
provisions of this article or who should fail to comply with any notice
of violation herein, upon conviction before a District Justice within the
magisterial district within which the Township of East Norriton is a part,
shall be fined not more than $600 plus costs of prosecution after a summary
proceeding brought in the name of the Township before said District Justice.
A new and separate offense shall be deemed to be committed for each day
that such violation exists. In default of the payment of any fine imposed and
the costs, the person or persons that are charged may be sentenced to be
committed to the county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 87-1 CURFEW § 87-3
82:127

ARTICLE II
Beasts of Burden
[Adopted 9-12-1966 by Ord. No. 47]
§ 87-4. Prohibited acts; control and restraint required.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any cattle, horses,
donkeys, burros or any beasts of burden to permit such animals to leave the
premises of said owner or custodian and traverse the roads and highways
in said Township or to wander upon or across property of the citizens of
said Township unattended and without proper and necessary restraint and
control. It shall be the duty of said owner or custodian of said animals to
provide such measures as will control and restrain said animals upon the
premises so that they do not cause or threaten to cause danger to the health
and safety of the citizens of said Township or cause or threaten to cause
damage to property within said Township.
§ 87-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1988 by Ord. No.
274]
Any person, corporation or other entity who shall violate any of the
provisions of this article or who should fail to comply with any notice
of violation herein, upon conviction before a District Justice within the
magisterial district within which the Township of East Norriton is a part,
shall be fined not more than $600 plus costs of prosecution after a summary
proceeding brought in the name of the Township before said District Justice.
A new and separate offense shall be deemed to be committed for each day
that such violation exists. In default of the payment of any fine imposed and
the costs, the person or persons that are charged may be sentenced to be
committed to the county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 87-4 CURFEW § 87-5
82:129

ARTICLE III
Dogs
[Adopted 10-10-1972 by Ord. No. 86; amended 6-11-1974 by Ord.
No. 108; 12-19-1988 by Ord. No. 274; 6-26-1989 by Ord. No. 277]
§ 87-6. Harboring of certain animals and activities restricted.
A. Any animal or fowl, domestic or otherwise, is hereby declared to be
committing a nuisance if such animal or fowl:
(1) Repeatedly barks, howls, crows, cockles, yelps or makes other
similar or offensive sounds for a continuous, unabated period of
one hour between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or for a
continuous, unabated period of two hours during all other hours.
(2) Bites without provocation or molests any person without
provocation.
(3) Runs unrestrained, or trespasses upon, or scratches, digs or
defecates upon, or otherwise causes damage to any lawn, tree,
shrub, plant, building or any other public or private property, other
than the property of the owner or person in charge or control of
such animal or fowl.
(4) Creates any condition emitting foul, offensive or noxious odors or
which may allow vectors (insects and rodents capable of carrying
disease) to have access to excrementitious matter, whether upon
the property of the owner or other private or public property, any of
which may be deleterious or detrimental to the public health.
B. It shall be unlawful for any owner or person having custody, control or
charge of such animal or fowl to permit it to commit or fail to prevent it
from committing any nuisance described in Subsection A above. It shall
be unlawful for any owner or person having control, custody or charge
of any such animal or fowl to permit the excrement of such animal or
fowl to flow upon, seep, leak or otherwise travel to and upon any lawn,
tree, shrub, plant, building or any other public or private property,
other than the property of the owner or person in charge or control of
such animal or fowl [except as limited by Subsection A(4)]. The
nuisance shall be considered abated, if applicable, when the owner or
person in charge or control of such animal or fowl immediately removes
all excrement deposited by such animal and disposes of the same in a
sanitary manner or completely repairs the damage done by such animal
or fowl.
C. It shall be unlawful for any owner or custodian, or person having
control of any dog, to fail to restrain it by means of a leash while it is on
any public or private property, other than the private property of the
owner, custodian or person in charge or having control of the dog.
[Amended 11-18-2014 by Ord. No. 558]
§ 87-6 CURFEW § 87-7
82:131
§ 87-7. Violations and penalties.
In all cases where a police officer, the Code Enforcement Officer or Animal
Control Officer of East Norriton Township shall first give notice of the
offense to the owner or person having custody or control of the animal or
fowl in question on a form noting the time and place of the offense and the
nature of the offense charged, and such notice is the first notice served upon
such owner or other person for the offense cited therein, no prosecution
shall be instituted for 72 hours thereafter for the offense set forth in such
notice. If, during said seventy-two-hour period, the offender shall abate and
correct the offense for which notice was issued and shall voluntarily appear
at the office of the Township during regular business hours and voluntarily
enter a plea of guilty and pay a fine of $15 to the Township, no prosecution
for such offense shall thereafter be brought. However, the foregoing shall
not preclude the enforcement of these provisions for continuing or future
offenses. In the case of offenses continuing or occurring after 72 hours
following notice of the first offense, each day and incident of violation of
the provisions of this article shall constitute a separate offense subject to a
separate fine not to exceed $1,000 for each separate offense.
§ 87-8. Severability.
If any sentence, clause, section or part of this article is for any reason found
to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality
or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this article. It is hereby declared as
the intent of the Board of Supervisors of East Norriton Township that this
article would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid
sentence, clause or section or part thereof not been included therein.
§ 87-7 EAST NORRITON CODE § 87-8
82:132
Chapter 90
DRUGS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
§ 87-8 DRUGS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 87-8
90:133

ARTICLE I
Municipal Drug Task Force Agreement
[Adopted 8-27-1990 by Ord. No. 292]
§ 90-1. Intent.
The Township of East Norriton has evidenced its intent to participate in
the Municipal Drug Task Force activities in cooperation with the
commonwealth's Office of the Attorney General designed to interdict the
illegal use and trafficking of narcotics and other illegal drugs within its
municipal boundaries as well as within the boundaries of nearby
communities.
§ 90-2. Intergovernmental cooperation.
The Agreement57 may include intergovernmental cooperative activities with
adjacent and nearby municipal governments as part of a regional effort to
interdict illegal drug activities.
§ 90-3. Police force.
The Township of East Norriton of Montgomery County shall utilize the
services of its police force, both full-time as well as part-time, under the
conditions set forth in the Agreement and in compliance with the Municipal
Police Jurisdiction Act, 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 8953.
§ 90-4. Establishment of procedures.
The Township of East Norriton of Montgomery County shall establish,
pursuant to the terms of the Agreement which is attached hereto and
incorporated as a part of this article, appropriate procedures to comply with
all relevant provisions of the Agreement and relevant regulations, direction
and guidance from the Office of the Attorney General.
§ 90-5. Term.
The term of the Agreement shall commence on September 1, 1990, and may
be terminated at any time upon 30 days' written notice.
§ 90-6. Coordination of municipal police.
The purpose and objectives of the Agreement include regionwide
coordination of municipal police activities in an effort to combat illegal
narcotics and drug trafficking.
57.Editor's Note: The Municipal Drug Task Force Agreement (hereinafter referred to as the
"Agreement") is on file for inspection and review in the Township offices, together with the
Municipal Police Cooperative Agreement.
§ 90-1 DRUGS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 90-7
90:135
§ 90-7. Funds.
The Agreement shall be financed with the assistance of funds supplied by
the Office of the Attorney General of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 90-8. Organization.
The organizational structure necessary to implement the terms of this
Agreement shall be covered by directives, procedures and guidance from
the Office of the Attorney General and other area police departments.
§ 90-9. Disposal of property.
All property, real or personal, acquired, managed or disposed of pursuant to
this Agreement shall be in accordance with both the terms of the Agreement
as well as the directives, procedures and guidance of the Office of the
Attorney General.
§ 90-10. Municipal responsibility.
The municipality shall retain responsibility for the management, control and
direction of its employees with assistance, financial or otherwise, from the
Office of the Attorney General.
§ 90-7 EAST NORRITON CODE § 90-10
90:136
Chapter 92
DUMPS AND DUMPING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dumps and dumping — See Ch. 92. Hazardous wastes — See Ch. 118.
§ 92-1. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, association or corporation
to discard, dump, abandon, deposit, throw, scatter or cast off any waste
materials, filth, dirt, rubbish, ashes, junk, garbage or any other unclean
matter, so as to endanger the health, cleanliness, comfort and safety of the
citizens within said Township, in or upon any public highway or public or
private property, vacant or occupied, within the Township of East Norriton.
§ 92-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1988 by Ord. No.
274]
Any person, corporation or other entity who shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter or who should fail to comply with any notice
of violation herein, upon conviction before a District Justice within the
magisterial district within which the Township of East Norriton is a part,
shall be fined not more than $600 plus costs of prosecution after a summary
proceeding brought in the name of the Township before said District Justice.
A new and separate offense shall be deemed to be committed for each day
that such violation exists. In default of the payment of any fine imposed and
the costs, the person or persons that are charged may be sentenced to be
committed to the county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 95
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 10.
Building construction — See Ch. 72.
Firearms — See Ch. 97.
Hazardous wastes — See Ch. 118.
Fire insurance — See Ch. 120, Art. I.
Kerosene heating and storage — See Ch. 122.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 125.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 152.
§ 95-1. Adoption and amendment of International Fire Code.
The 2009 International Fire Code, and any subsequent revisions thereof
which shall automatically be incorporated herein by reference, save and
§ 90-10 DUMPS AND DUMPING § 95-1
92:137
except such portions of the International Fire Code as are hereinafter
deleted, modified or amended, are hereby adopted and incorporated as
if set forth at length herein. The 2009 International Fire Code, and any
subsequent revision thereto, is hereby adopted by reference as Chapter 84
of the East Norriton Township Code of Ordinances to be known as the "Fire
Code" with the following amendments and additions:
A. Section 101.1 is amended to insert "East Norriton Township,
Montgomery County, Pennsylvania".
B. Section 108.4 is added as follows:
108.4 Other circumstances. Should no Board of Appeals be
appointed, the first level of appeal shall be to the Fire Marshal. The
next level of appeal shall be to the Township Manager. The final level
of appeal shall be to the Board of Supervisors. All appeals beyond this
level shall be to the Pennsylvania Court System.
C. Section 109.3 is amended to read as follows:
109.3 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of
this Code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof
or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do any work in violation of
the approved construction documents or directive of the code official,
or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code,
shall be guilty of a summary offense, punishable by a fine not to exceed
$1,000 or by imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or both such fine
and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after due notice
has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. In addition to
the above penalties, any person who shall violate a provision of this
Code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements
thereof, shall be subject, in addition to the penalties imposed above, to
monetary penalties for all court costs, legal costs, attorneys' fees and
other miscellaneous costs incurred by East Norriton Township during
successful prosecution of that person by East Norriton Township.
D. Section 111.4 is amended to read as follows:
111.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work
after having been served with a stop-work order, except such work
as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall be in violation of this Code and shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of Section 109.3 of this Code.
E. Section 114 is added as follows:
Section 114 Fire Inspection.
114.1 General. East Norriton Township shall conduct a systematic
inspection of all properties within East Norriton Township to
determine compliance with this Code.
Exception: Single and multifamily dwellings.
§ 95-1 EAST NORRITON CODE § 95-1
92:138
114.2 Frequency. The frequency of inspection shall be determined as
necessary by the fire code official.
114.3 Process. Following the first inspection, a report, invoice, and
applicable permits will be sent to the occupant via regular mail for
each occupiable space including common areas of a building.
114.4 Reinspection. If during the first inspection any violations of
this Code are found, a reinspection will take place following the
expiration of the time limit identified in the report for the requirements
to be corrected. If violations are found at the conclusion of the fourth
reinspection, the occupant will be subject to the penalty provisions of
Section 109.3 of this Code.
114.5 Fees. An invoice will be issued at the completion of each
inspection and shall be payable within 30 days of the date thereof. Two
additional notices will be sent out at 60 and 90 days if payment is not
received. If payment is not received within 120 days of the date of the
first invoice, the occupant will be subject to the penalty provisions of
Section 109.3 of this Code.
F. Section 308.1.4 is amended to delete Exception 2, which reads, "Where
buildings, balconies, and decks are protected by an automatic sprinkler
system."
G. Section 507.5.3 is amended to add subsection 4 as follows:
4. All privately owned and maintained fire hydrants shall have the
body and caps painted yellow. All bonnets (domes) will be painted
to meet the following color scheme: four- to six-inch mains shall
have red bonnets; eight- to twelve-inch mains shall have green
bonnets; and sixteen-inch and larger mains shall have blue
bonnets.
H. Section 509.3 is added as follows:
509.3 Remote identification. Where fire protection system controls
are not located within five feet of the main entrance, an approved sign
shall be posted indicating the location of the fire protection system
controls.
I. Section 903.2.
(1) Section 903.2 is hereby revised to provide as follows:
903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in
new buildings and structures shall be installed and maintained in
full operating condition, as specified in this code, in the locations
indicated in Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.12; all buildings with
a gross floor area of more than 2,000 square feet, other than
single-family detached residences, shall be provided with a fully
automatic fire suppression system.
§ 95-1 DUMPS AND DUMPING § 95-1
92:139
§ 95-2. Repealer.
The provisions of this chapter shall be considered amendments to the
provisions of the International Fire Code, current edition, and any
provisions of the International Fire Code that are inconsistent with or
contrary to the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed.
Chapter 97
(RESERVED)
Chapter 105
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 72.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 95.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
175.
Zoning — See Ch. 205.
§ 105-1. Applicability.
In order to prevent excessive damage to buildings and structures due to
flooding conditions, the following provisions shall apply to all proposed
construction or development occurring in the FP Floodplain Conservation
District designated in the East Norriton Township Zoning Ordinance, as
amended.58
§ 105-2. Standards for residential structures.
(2) Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.10.1 are hereby revised by deleting
therefrom all references that are inconsistent with the
requirements of Section 903.2 as hereby revised.
J. All appendixes are hereby adopted as written in the 2009 International
Fire Code.
A. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures shall
have the lowest floor, including the basement, elevated to at least 1 1/2
feet above the base flood elevation.
B. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any kind
to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than 50% of its
market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the base flood
elevation.
58.Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Zoning.
§ 95-1 EAST NORRITON CODE § 105-2
105:140
§ 105-3. Standards for nonresidential structures.
C. Existing structures located in a designated floodway shall not be
expanded or enlarged unless the effect of the proposed expansion or
enlargement on flood heights is fully offset by accompanying stream
improvements.
D. For all new construction and substantial improvements, those fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement
and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces and exterior walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement
must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: [Added
12-19-1996 by Ord. No. 377]
(1) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided.
(2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
grade.
(3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters.
A. All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential
structures shall have the lowest floor, including the basement, elevated
or floodproofed to at least 1 1/2 feet above the base flood elevation.
B. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any kind
to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than 50% of its
market value, shall be elevated or floodproofed to the base flood
elevation.
C. Existing structures located in a designated floodway shall not be
expanded or enlarged unless the effect of the proposed expansion or
enlargement on flood heights is fully offset by accompanying stream
improvements.
D. For all new construction and substantial improvements, those fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement
and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces and exterior walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement
must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: [Added
12-19-1996 by Ord. No. 377]
§ 105-2 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 105-3
105:141
§ 105-4. Reconstruction.
Structures located within the Floodplain Conservation District may be
rebuilt if destroyed by fire or other catastrophe, provided that the
reconstruction will not result in an increase in the base flood elevation, as
referenced in the Flood Insurance Study, East Norriton Township.
§ 105-5. Requirements for fill.
If fill is used to raise the finished surface of the lowest floor 1 1/2 feet above
the base flood elevation, the following requirements apply:
§ 105-6. Placement of buildings and structures.
All buildings and structures shall be constructed and placed on the lot
so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of water. In so doing,
consideration shall be given to their effect upon the flow and height of
floodwaters.
§ 105-7. Anchoring.
(1) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided.
(2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
grade.
(3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters.
A. Fill shall extend beyond a structure for a sufficient distance to provide
acceptable access. For residential structures, fill shall extend laterally
15 feet beyond the building line from all points. For nonresidential
structures, fill shall be placed to provide access acceptable for the
intended use. At-grade access, with fill extending laterally 15 feet
beyond the building line, shall be provided to a minimum of 25% of the
perimeter of a nonresidential structure.
B. Fill shall consist of soil or rock materials only.
C. Fill material shall be compacted to provide the necessary stability and
resistance to erosion, scouring or settling.
D. Fill slopes shall be no steeper than one vertical on two horizontal,
unless substantiating data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to
and approved by the Building Inspector.
E. Fill shall be used only to the extent to which it does not adversely affect
adjacent properties.
§ 105-3 EAST NORRITON CODE § 105-7
105:142
§ 105-8. Floor, wall and ceiling requirements.
Where located at or below the base flood elevation:
§ 105-9. Electrical systems.
§ 105-10. Plumbing.
§ 105-11. Paints and adhesives.
Where located at or below the base flood elevation:
A. All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with
accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse or other
movement, thus reducing the threat to life and property and decreasing
the possibility of the blockage of bridge openings and other restricted
sections of the watercourse.
B. All air ducts, large pipes and storage tanks located at or below the base
flood elevation shall be firmly anchored in accordance with accepted
engineering practices to prevent flotation.
A. Wood flooring shall be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of
the flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain, without incurring
structural damage to the building.
B. Plywood shall be of an exterior or marine grade and of a water-resistant
or waterproof variety.
C. Walls and ceilings in nonresidential structures shall have sufficient wet
strength and be so installed as to survive inundation.
D. Window frames, door frames, door jambs and other components shall
be made of metal or other water-resistant material.
A. All electric water heaters, electric furnaces, electric air-conditioning
and ventilating systems and other electrical equipment or apparatus
shall be permitted only at elevations above the base flood elevation.
B. No electrical distribution panels shall be allowed at an elevation less
than three feet above the base flood elevation.
C. Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
A. Water heaters, furnaces and other mechanical equipment or apparatus
shall be permitted only at elevations above the base flood elevation.
B. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to preclude the
infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the
systems into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made for the
drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater infiltration
occurs.
§ 105-7 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 105-11
105:143
§ 105-12. Storage of materials.
No materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or, in time of flooding,
could be injurious to human, animal or plant life shall be stored below the
base flood elevation.
§ 105-13. Manufactured homes and manufactured home parks.
[Amended 12-19-1996 by Ord. No. 377]
A. Adhesives shall have a bonding strength that is unaffected by
inundation (i.e., marine or water-resistant quality).
B. All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) shall be sealed with
a marine or water-resistant quality or similar product.
C. Paints or other finishes shall be capable of surviving inundation (i.e.,
marine or water-resistant quality).
A. All manufactured homes, including those substantially damaged, and
any improvements thereto shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse
or lateral movement by providing over-the-top and frame ties to ground
anchors in accordance with the following:
(1) Over-the-top ties shall be provided at each of the four corners of the
manufactured home, with two additional ties per side at
intermediate locations for units 50 feet or more in length and one
additional tie per side for units less than 50 feet in length.
(2) Frame ties shall be provided at each corner of the manufactured
home, with five additional ties per side at intermediate locations for
units 50 feet or more in length and four additional ties per side for
units less than 50 feet in length.
(3) All components of the anchoring system shall be capable of
carrying a force of 4,800 pounds and resisting a minimum wind
velocity of 90 miles per hour.
B. All manufactured homes, including those substantially damaged, and
any improvements thereto shall also be elevated on a permanent
foundation in accordance with the following requirements.
(1) The stands or lots shall be elevated on compacted fill or on pilings
so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home will be at least
1 1/2 feet above the base flood elevation.
(2) Adequate surface drainage is provided, as required in the East
Norriton Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance,
as amended.59
(3) Adequate access for a hauler is provided.
59.Editor's Note: See Ch. 175, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 105-11 EAST NORRITON CODE § 105-13
105:144
§ 105-14. Relief from strict requirements.
(4) Where pilings are used for elevation, the lots shall be large enough
to permit steps; piling foundations shall be placed in stable soil no
more than 10 feet apart; and reinforcement shall be provided for
pilings that will extend for six feet or more above the ground level.
C. An evacuation plan indicating alternate vehicular access and escape
routes shall be filed with the appropriate disaster preparedness
authorities for manufactured home parks and manufactured home
subdivisions.
D. Placement of a manufactured home on a lot or in a manufactured home
park shall require a building permit under this chapter.
A. If compliance with the elevation or floodproofing requirements stated in
this chapter would result in an exceptional hardship for a prospective
builder, developer or landowner, the Township Supervisors may, upon
request, grant relief from the strict application of the requirement.
B. Relief issued shall conform to the following general guidelines:
(1) Any new residential structure or substantial improvement of a
residential structure which cannot be elevated to 1 1/2 feet above
the base flood elevation shall be elevated to the maximum extent
possible and floodproofed for the remaining height to the abovespecified
level in accordance with the requirements established for
the W1 - W4 Classes in the Office of the Chief of Engineers, United
States Army, Publication Number EP 1165 2 314, June 1972, and as
subsequently amended.
(2) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any
kind to an existing residential structure, to an extent or amount of
less than 50% of its market value, which cannot be elevated and/or
floodproofed to the base flood elevation shall be elevated to the
maximum extent possible and floodproofed for the remaining
height to the base flood elevation in accordance with the
requirements established for the W3 - W4 Classes in the
publication referenced in Subsection B(1).
(3) Any new nonresidential structure or substantial improvement of a
nonresidential structure which cannot be elevated or floodproofed
to the required specifications shall be elevated to the maximum
extent possible and floodproofed for the remaining height to at
least 1 1/2 feet above the base flood elevation or floodproofed to at
least 1 1/2 feet above the base flood elevation. The floodproofing
measures shall satisfy the requirements of the W3 - W4 Classes in
the publication referenced in Subsection B(1).
(4) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any
kind to an existing nonresidential structure, to an extent or amount
of less than 50% of its market value, which cannot be elevated or
§ 105-13 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 105-14
105:145
floodproofed to the base flood elevation shall be elevated to the
maximum extent possible and floodproofed for the remaining
height to the base flood elevation or be floodproofed to the base
flood elevation. The floodproofing measures shall satisfy the
requirements of the W3 - W4 Classes in the publication referenced
in Subsection B(1).
C. Requests for relief from the strict application of the provisions of this
chapter may be granted by the Township in accordance with the
following procedures and criteria:
(1) No relief shall be granted for any construction, development, use or
activity within any floodway that would cause any increase in the
base flood elevation.
(2) If granted, relief shall involve only the least modification necessary.
(3) In granting relief, the Township may attach whatever reasonable
conditions and safeguards it considers necessary in order to
protect the public health, safety and welfare and to achieve the
objectives of this chapter.
(4) Whenever a relief is granted, the Township shall notify the
applicant in writing that:
(a) The granting of relief may result in increased premium rates
for flood insurance.
(b) Such relief may increase the risks to life and property.
(5) In reviewing any request for relief, the Township shall consider but
not be limited to the following:
(a) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(b) That failure to grant the relief would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(c) That the granting of the relief will not result in any
unacceptable or prohibited increased flood heights, additional
threats to public safety or extraordinary public expense, create
nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or
conflict with any other applicable local or state ordinances and
regulations.
(6) A complete record of all requests for relief and related actions shall
be maintained by the Township. In addition, a report of all
variances granted during the year shall be included in the annual
report to the Federal Insurance Administration.
§ 105-14 EAST NORRITON CODE § 105-15
105:146
§ 105-15. Administration. [Amended 12-19-1996 by Ord. No. 377]
To ensure that the aforementioned flood damage controls are being
employed in all new construction and improvements within the Floodplain
Conservation District, the Building Inspector shall provide the applicant
information concerning the location of the district boundaries relative to his
proposed construction or improvements and the water surface elevation of
the one-hundred-year flood at the proposed construction site. The source
of this information shall be the Flood Insurance Study for East Norriton
Township, as prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA), in the Flood Insurance Study and on the accompanying maps,
dated December 19, 1996, or the most recent revision thereof.
§ 105-16. Information to be included on application for building
permit.
In addition to the permit application requirements normally required under
the East Norriton Township Building Code,60 as amended, the Township
Building Inspector shall require the following specific information to be
included as part of the application for a building permit:
A. For structures to be elevated:
(1) A plan showing the size of the proposed structure and its relation to
the lot where it is to be constructed.
(2) A determination of elevations of the existing ground, proposed
finished ground and lowest floors certified by a registered
professional engineer, surveyor or architect.
(3) Plans showing the method of elevating the proposed structure,
including details of proposed fills, pile structures, retaining walls,
foundations, erosion protection measures, etc. When required by
the Building Inspector, these plans shall be prepared by a
registered professional engineer or architect.
(4) Plans showing the methods used to protect utilities (including
sewer, water, telephone, electric, gas, etc.) from flooding to an
elevation at least one foot above the base flood elevation at the
building site.
B. For structures to be floodproofed:
(1) Plans showing details of all floodproofing measures, prepared by a
registered professional engineer or architect, and showing the size
of the proposed structure and its relation to the lot where it is to be
constructed.
60.Editor's Note: See Ch. 72, Building Construction.
§ 105-15 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 105-16
105:147
§ 105-17. Review by Montgomery County Conservation District.
A copy of all applications and plans for construction or development in
the Floodplain Conservation District to be considered for approval shall be
submitted by the Township Building Inspector to the Montgomery County
Conservation District for review and comment prior to the issuance of a
building permit. The recommendations of the Conservation District shall be
considered by the Township Building Inspector for possible incorporation
into the proposed plan.
§ 105-18. Review by Building Inspector.
Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the Township Building
Inspector shall review the application for a permit to determine if all
(2) A determination of elevations of existing ground, proposed finished
ground, lowest floors and floodproofing limits, certified by a
registered professional engineer, surveyor or architect.
(3) A certificate prepared by the registered professional engineer or
architect who prepared the plans in Subsection B(1) above that the
structure in question, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, is designed so that:
(a) Below an elevation one foot above the base flood elevation, the
structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water.
(b) The structure will withstand the hydrostatic, hydrodynamic,
buoyant, impact and other forces resulting from the flood
depths, velocities, pressures and other factors associated with
the base flood.
C. For structures to be floodproofed in accordance with the W3 - W4 Class
requirements in the Office of the Chief of Engineers, United States
Army, Publication Number EP 1165 2 314, June 1972, and as
subsequently amended:
(1) Plans showing details of all floodproofing measures, prepared by a
registered professional engineer or architect, and showing the size
of the proposed structure and its relation to the lot where it is to be
constructed.
(2) A determination of elevations of existing ground, proposed finished
ground, lowest floors and floodproofing limits, certified by a
registered professional engineer, surveyor or architect.
(3) A certificate prepared by the registered professional engineer or
architect who prepared the plans in Subsection C(1) above that the
structure in question, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, is designed to satisfy the floodproofing requirements of
the W3 - W4 Classes in the above-referenced publication.
§ 105-16 EAST NORRITON CODE § 105-18
105:148
other necessary governmental permits, such as those required by state and
federal laws, have been obtained, including those required by Act 537, the
Pennsylvania Water Obstruction Act of 1913 and the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act Amendments of 1972, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1334. No permit
shall be issued until this determination has been made.
§ 105-19. Start of construction.
For purposes of implementation of these provisions, "start of construction"
shall be considered as defined in § 105-20 of this chapter.
§ 105-20. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BASE FLOOD — The flood which has been selected to serve as the basis
upon which the floodplain management provisions of this chapter and other
ordinances have been prepared; for purposes of this chapter, the onehundred-
year flood, as referenced in the current East Norriton Township
Flood Insurance Study, prepared by the Federal Insurance Administration,
Federal Emergency Management Agency.[Amended 12-19-1996 by Ord.
No. 377]
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year flood elevation, as
referenced in the East Norriton Township Flood Insurance Study, prepared
by the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management
Agency. Within the approximated floodplain, the one-hundred-year flood
elevation shall be established as a point on the boundary of the
approximated floodplain nearest to the construction site in
question.[Amended 12-19-1996 by Ord. No. 377]
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.[Added 12-19-1996 by Ord. No. 377]
CONSTRUCTION — The construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair,
extension, alteration or relocation of a building or structure, including the
placement of manufactured homes.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, the
placement of manufactured homes, streets and other paving, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, excavation or drilling operations, storage of
equipment or materials and the subdivision of land.[Amended 12-19-1996
by Ord. No. 377]
FLOOD — A temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities or structures and their contents. Such measures are set forth in
floodproofing regulations published by the Office of the Chief Engineer,
§ 105-18 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 105-20
105:149
United States Army, Publication Number EP 1165 2 314, June 1972, and as
subsequently amended. "Floodproofing" measures for all new construction
and substantial improvements of structures shall satisfy the requirements
of the Completely Dry Spaces (W1) and Essentially Dry Spaces (W2) Classes
referenced in these regulations. In said publication, where reference is
made to below or above the BFD (base flood datum), it shall be interpreted
as meaning below or above the base flood elevation. Said regulations are
contained in the Building Code of East Norriton Township, as amended.61
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:[Added 12-19-1996 by
Ord. No. 377]
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area is not considered
a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built as to
render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design
requirements of this chapter.[Added 12-19-1996 by Ord. No. 377]
MOBILE HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without
a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. It does
not include recreational vehicles or travel trailers. The term includes, but is
not limited to, the definition of a "mobile home" as set forth in regulations
governing the Mobile Home Safety and Construction Standards Program
(24 CFR 3282.7a).
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction, as
herein defined, commenced on or after the effective date of this chapter.
This term does not apply to any work on a structure existing before the
effective date of this chapter.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a State Inventory of Historic Places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a Local Inventory of Historic Places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either by an approved state program as determined by the
Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in
states without approved programs.
D.
61.Editor's Note: See Ch. 72, Building Construction.
§ 105-20 EAST NORRITON CODE § 105-20
105:150
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that has one chance in 100, or
a one-percent chance, of being equaled or exceeded in any given year;
for the purposes of this chapter, the "one-hundred-year flood" (base flood)
as defined by the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency
Management Agency, in the Flood Insurance Study, East Norriton
Township.[Amended 12-19-1996 by Ord. No. 377]
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is built on a single chassis;
400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck;
and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal
use.[Added 12-19-1996 by Ord. No. 377]
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The first placement of permanent
construction of a structure, other than a manufactured home, on a site,
such as the pouring of slabs or footings or any work beyond the stage of
excavation. Permanent construction does not include any preparation, such
as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not as part of the main structure.
For a structure, other than a manufactured home, without a basement
or poured footings, the start of construction includes the first permanent
framing or assembly of the structure or any part thereof on its piling or
foundation. For manufactured homes not within a manufactured home park
or manufactured home subdivision, start of construction means the affixing
of the manufactured home to its permanent site. For manufactured homes
within manufactured home parks or manufactured home subdivisions, start
of construction is the date on which the construction of facilities for
servicing the site on which the manufactured home is to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the construction of streets, either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads, and installation of utilities) is
completed.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached
to the ground, including but not limited to buildings, factories, sheds,
cabins, manufactured homes and other similar items.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the costs of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred.[Added 12-19-1996 by Ord. No. 377]
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair
is started or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored,
before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, substantial
improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether
§ 105-20 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 105-20
105:151
or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The
term does not, however, include either:
§ 105-21. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
Chapter 110
GARAGE SALES
§ 110-1. Purpose; scope.
§ 110-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARAGE SALE — Includes all sales entitled "garage sale," "yard sale," "lawn
sale," "attic sale," "rummage sale," "flea market" or any similar casual sale
of at least five items of tangible personal property which is advertised by
any means whereby the public at large is or can be made aware of said sale.
Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state
or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of a structure listed on a National Register of Historic
Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
B.
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur on
rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This
chapter does not imply that areas outside the Floodplain Conservation
District or that land uses permitted within such district will be free from
flooding or flood damage.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of East Norriton
Township or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and license sales of tangible
personal property in residentially zoned districts for up to only 72
hours.
B. This chapter does not permit unlimited commercial sales on a
residentially zoned property, nor can a garage sale license be construed
as a zoning change for the property involved. The provisions of this
chapter shall not apply to persons selling goods pursuant to an order or
process of a court of competent jurisdiction or persons acting in
accordance with their powers and duties as public officials.
§ 105-20 EAST NORRITON CODE § 110-2
105:152
PERSON — Includes individuals, families, groups of individuals or families,
voluntary associations and corporations.
TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY — Personal property that has not been
especially obtained for the purpose of the garage sale.
§ 110-3. Licensing.
Two garage sales per property shall be permitted each calendar year
without a license; however, a garage sale license shall be required for all
subsequent sales. Application for a garage sale license shall be made on
a form provided by the East Norriton Township Zoning Officer. No garage
sale may be conducted for more than three consecutive calendar days (72
hours). The fee for each license shall be $10.
§ 110-4. Signs.
§ 110-5. Permitted hours.
Garage sales may be conducted during daylight hours only.
§ 110-6. Responsibility of traffic control.
Traffic control of vehicles and attendees shall be the responsibility of the
person holding the garage sale.
§ 110-7. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 114
A. On site: Only one sign measuring four square feet shall be allowed.
B. Off site: Only two signs each measuring two square feet shall be
allowed. All off-site signs are to be removed within 48 hours of the
event. If off-site signs are not removed within 48 hours, they may be
removed by the Zoning Officer.
A. Any person who shall violate a provision of this chapter or who shall fail
to comply with any of the requirements thereof shall be guilty of a
summary offense, punishable by a fine not to exceed $250 or by
imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has
been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
B. In addition to the above penalties, any person who shall violate a
provision of this chapter, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the
requirements thereof, shall be subject, in addition to the penalties
imposed above, to monetary penalties for all court costs, legal costs,
attorneys' fees and other miscellaneous costs incurred by East Norriton
Township during successful prosecution of that person by East Norriton
Township.
§ 110-2 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 110-7
105:153
GRADING AND EXCAVATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform Construction Code — See Ch. 74.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 105.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 166.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 168.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
175.
Zoning — See Ch. 205.
§ 114-1. Regulations.
§ 114-2. Measures to minimize erosion and sedimentation.
The following measures are effective in minimizing erosion and
sedimentation and shall be included where applicable in the control plan:
A. No changes shall be made in the contour of the land and no grading,
excavating, removal or destruction of the topsoil, trees or other
vegetative cover of the land shall be commenced until such time that a
plan for minimizing erosion and sedimentation has been processed,
reviewed and approved by the Township.
B. Measures used to control erosion and reduce sedimentation shall, as a
minimum, meet the standards and specifications of the Montgomery
County Conservation District and the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection. The Township Engineer, or other officials as
designated, shall ensure compliance with the appropriate
specifications, copies of which are available from the Montgomery
County Conservation District or Township Secretary. [Amended
11-18-2014 by Ord. No. 558]
A. Stripping of vegetation, regrading or other development shall be done
in such a way that will minimize erosion.
B. Plans shall preserve salient natural features, keep cut and fill
operations to a minimum and ensure conformity with topography so as
to create the least erosion potential and adequately handle the volume
and velocity of surface water runoff.
C. Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and
supplemented.
D. The disturbed area and the duration of exposure shall be kept to a
practical minimum.
E. Disturbed soils shall be stabilized as quickly as possible.
F. Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect exposed
critical areas during grading operations.
§ 110-7 EAST NORRITON CODE § 114-2
105:154
§ 114-3. Drainage provisions; excavations and fill.
In order to provide more suitable sites for building and other uses, improve
surface drainage and control erosion, the following requirements shall be
met:
G. The permanent (final) vegetation and mechanical erosion control and
drainage measures shall be installed as soon as practical.
H. Provisions shall be made to effectively accommodate the increased
runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after
grading operations. Where necessary, the rate of surface water runoff
will be mechanically retarded.
I. Sediment in the runoff water shall be trapped until the disturbed area is
stabilized by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps or
similar measures.
A. All land within the graded area shall be graded to drain and dispose of
surface water without ponding.
B. All drainage provisions shall be of such design to adequately handle the
surface runoff and carry it to the nearest suitable outlet such as a
curbed street, storm drain or natural watercourse. Where drainage
swales are used to divert surface waters, they shall be sodded or
planted as required and shall be of such slope, shape and size as to
conform to the requirements of the Township.
C. Concentration of surface water shall only be permitted in swales or
watercourses.
D. The following are rules which should be followed with respect to
excavations and fills:
(1) Cut and fill slopes shall not be steeper than three to one unless
stabilized by a retaining wall or cribbing, except as approved by the
Board when handled under special conditions.
(2) Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent surface water from
damaging the out face of excavations or the sloping surfaces of fills.
(3) Cut and fills shall not endanger adjoining property.
(4) Fill shall be placed and compacted so as to minimize sliding or
erosion of the soil.
(5) Fills shall not encroach on natural watercourses or constructed
channels.
(6) Fills placed adjacent to natural watercourses or constructed
channels shall have suitable protection against erosion during
periods of flooding.
§ 114-2 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 114-3
105:155
§ 114-4. Responsibility.
§ 114-5. Permit; deposit. [Amended 11-18-2014 by Ord. No. 558]
The plan for minimizing erosion and sedimentation described in § 114-1 of
this chapter shall be submitted through the Township Zoning Officer to the
Township Engineer for review and approval. At the time of submission, an
escrow shall be established pursuant to § 166-42.
(7) Grading shall not be done in such a way so as to divert water onto
the property of another landowner without the written consent of
the Board of Supervisors and the affected property owner.
(8) During grading operations, necessary measures for dust control
will be exercised.
(9) Grading equipment will not be allowed to cross live streams.
Provision will be made for the installation of culverts or bridges as
recommended by the Township Engineer and approved in writing
by the Board of Supervisors and the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection. [Amended 11-18-2014 by Ord. No.
558]
A. Whenever sedimentation is caused by stripping vegetation, regrading
or other development, it shall be the responsibility of the person,
corporation or other entity causing such sedimentation to remove it
from all adjoining surfaces, drainage systems and watercourses and to
repair any damage at his expense as quickly as possible.
B. It is the responsibility of any person, corporation or other entity doing
any act on or across a stream, watercourse or swale or upon the
floodplain right-of-way thereof to maintain as nearly as possible in its
present state the stream, watercourse, swale, floodplain or right-of-way
during the pendency of the activity and to return it to its original or
equal condition after such activity is completed.
C. Maintenance of drainage facilities or watercourses originating and
completely on private property is the responsibility of the owner to their
point of open discharge at the property line or at a communal
watercourse within the property.
D. No person, corporation or other entity shall block, impede the flow of,
alter, construct any structure or deposit any material or thing or commit
any act which will affect normal or flood flow in any stream or
watercourse without having obtained prior approval from the Township
and/or the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection,
whichever is applicable. [Amended 11-18-2014 by Ord. No. 558]
§ 114-3 EAST NORRITON CODE § 114-6
105:156
§ 114-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1988 by Ord. No.
274]
Any person, corporation or other entity who shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter or who should fail to comply with any notice
of violation herein, upon conviction before a District Justice within the
magisterial district within which the Township of East Norriton is a part,
shall be fined not more than $600 plus costs of prosecution after a summary
proceeding brought in the name of the Township before said District Justice.
A new and separate offense shall be deemed to be committed for each day
that such violation exists. In default of the payment of any fine imposed and
the costs, the person or persons that are charged may be sentenced to be
committed to the county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 118
HAZARDOUS WASTES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 129. Use and occupancy permits — See Ch. 190.
§ 114-6 HAZARDOUS WASTES § 114-6
118:157

ARTICLE I
Hazardous Substances
[Adopted 7-21-1986 by Ord. No. 234]
§ 118-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABATE — The cleanup or removal of deposited hazardous substances,
including such actions as may be necessary to monitor, assess and evaluate
the potential threat of hazardous substances to the public health, safety and
welfare, actions to prevent, minimize and mitigate damage to the public
health and the disposal of removed materials.
DEPOSIT — Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emptying, discharging,
injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping or disposing.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE — Includes all the substances listed as
hazardous substances by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources, the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry and the
United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the various
regulations in place at the time of the adoption of this chapter.
PERSON — An individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership, joint
venture or other private or commercial entity.
§ 118-2. Nuisance.
The existence of hazardous substances deposited negligently or
intentionally upon public roadways, public lands or private property within
the Township shall be deemed a public nuisance and shall be abated
immediately by the person responsible for such deposit of hazardous
substances.
§ 118-3. Notice.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township, by its employees or agents, shall
serve notice upon the person responsible for the public nuisance. The notice
shall sufficiently describe the condition complained of and shall require the
nuisance to be abated within 10 days of the mailing of the notice.
§ 118-4. Abatement.
Should any person responsible for a public nuisance as described herein
fail; neglect or refuse to abate such condition to the satisfaction of the
Board of Supervisors, or if the Board of Supervisors shall determine that the
nature of the hazardous substance negligently or intentionally deposited is
of such nature as to pose an immediate threat to the public health, safety
and welfare, the Township shall act to abate said public nuisance, and
any cost of abatement by the Township shall be paid by the person who
negligently or intentionally deposited the hazardous substance.
§ 118-1 HAZARDOUS WASTES § 118-5
118:159
§ 118-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1988 by Ord. No.
274]
Any person, corporation or other entity who shall violate any of the
provisions of this article or who should fail to comply with any notice
of violation herein, upon conviction before a District Justice within the
magisterial district within which the Township of East Norriton is a part,
shall be fined not more than $600 plus costs of prosecution after a summary
proceeding brought in the name of the Township before said District Justice.
A new and separate offense shall be deemed to be committed for each day
that such violation exists. In default of the payment of any fine imposed and
the costs, the person or persons that are charged may be sentenced to be
committed to the county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 118-5 EAST NORRITON CODE § 118-5
118:160
ARTICLE II
Right-To-Know Policy
[Adopted 11-16-1987 by Ord. No. 256]
§ 118-6. Policy adopted.
The East Norriton Township Right-to-Know Policy Statement is hereby
formally adopted by the Board of Supervisors of East Norriton Township to
be the official Township statement regarding compliance with the Worker
and Community Right-To-Know Act.62 A true and correct copy of said policy
statement is attached to this article, incorporated by reference and labeled
Exhibit A.63
§ 118-7. Survey form required; additional information.
A. Every existing business of whatsoever kind located within the Township
of East Norriton is required to provide the Township with a completed
survey form, a sample of which is attached hereto as Exhibit B64 and
made a part hereof, listing, for example, hazardous materials stored
within the business, the location of the materials, any appropriate
safety and security regulations or measures, a designated emergency
coordinator and the location of material safety date sheets, as required
by the Worker and Community Right-To-Know Act.
B. Each business shall attach to said survey form an accurate plot plan for
the business depicting the types and amounts of hazardous materials
and how and where the materials are stored. The plot plan shall also
indicate any resources available to control spills, leaks, etc.
C. Each business shall attach to said survey form an inventory listing
which shall include the following information: the chemical name, the
brand name, the United Nations number, the North American number
and the Department of Transportation number.
D. Each business shall update said inventory listings annually and provide
the updated inventory listing by June 1 of each year to the East Norriton
Township emergency response agencies, including the Emergency
Management Coordinator, the Police Department, the Fire Department
and all ambulance companies.
E. Said information shall be supplied to the Township within six months
from the enactment of this article.
62.Editor's Note: See 45 P.S. § 1201 et seq.
63.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices and can be examined there
during regular business hours.
64.Editor's Note: Exhibit B is on file in the Township offices and can be examined there
during regular business hours.
§ 118-6 HAZARDOUS WASTES § 118-8
118:161
§ 118-8. Time limit for providing necessary information.
All enterprises subsequently commencing business within the Township
after the enactment of this article shall provide the Township with the
information as set forth in § 118-7 above within 60 days after receiving from
the Township a use and occupancy permit.
§ 118-9. Signs and labels.
All businesses of whatsoever kind located within the Township of East
Norriton shall place highly visible placarding, signs or other such notice on
the exterior of all buildings in compliance with NFPA 704M and maintain
similar labels in interior storage areas.
§ 118-10. Safety data material.
All businesses of whatsoever kind located within the Township of East
Norriton shall maintain material safety data sheets for each hazardous
material as required by the Worker and Community Right-To-Know Act.
§ 118-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1988 by Ord.
No. 274]
Any person, corporation or other entity who shall violate any of the
provisions of this article or who should fail to comply with any notice
of violation herein, upon conviction before a District Justice within the
magisterial district within which the Township of East Norriton is a part,
shall be fined not more than $600 plus costs of prosecution after a summary
proceeding brought in the name of the Township before said District Justice.
A new a separate offense shall be deemed to be committed for each day
that such violation exists. In default of the payment of any fine imposed and
the costs, the person or persons that are charged may be sentenced to be
committed to the county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 118-8 EAST NORRITON CODE § 118-11
118:162
Chapter 120
INSURANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 95.
§ 118-11 HAZARDOUS WASTES § 118-11
118:163

ARTICLE I
Fire Insurance
[Adopted 3-8-1993 by Ord. No. 329; amended in its entirety
6-22-2010 by Ord. No. 527]
§ 120-1. Designation of officer.
The Manager of the Township of East Norriton or such official's designee is
hereby appointed as the designated officer who is authorized to carry out
all responsibilities and duties stated herein.
§ 120-2. Municipal certificate required.
No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter the "insuring
agent") doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a
claim of a named insured for fire damage to a structure located within
the Township of East Norriton (hereinafter "the municipality") where the
amount recoverable for the fire loss to the structure under all policies
exceeds $7,500 unless the insurance company, association or exchange is
furnished with a certificate pursuant to this article and unless there is
compliance with the procedure set forth in this article and Act 93 of 1994,
40 P.S. § 638, as may be amended.
§ 120-3. Procedures for payment and transfer of proceeds.
Where, pursuant to Act 93 of 1994, 40 P.S. § 638, as amended, the Municipal
Treasurer issues a certificate indicating that there are no delinquent taxes,
assessments, penalties or user charges against the subject real property,
the insuring agent shall pay the claim of the named insured; provided,
however, that if the loss as agreed upon by the named insured and the
insuring agent equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of liability
on all fire policies covering the building or other structure, the following
procedures must be followed:
A. The insuring agent shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to the
designated officer of the municipality in the aggregate of $2,000 for
each $15,000 of a claim and for each fraction of that amount of a claim,
this subsection to be applied such that if the claim is $15,000 or less,
the amount transferred to the municipality shall be $2,000; or
B. If at the time of a loss report, the named insured has submitted a
contractor's signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or
securing the building or other structure in an amount less than the
amount calculated under the foregoing transfer formula, the insuring
agent shall transfer from the insurance proceeds the amount specified
in the estimate.
C. The transfer of proceeds shall be on pro rata basis by all companies,
associations or exchanges insuring the building or other structure.
§ 120-1 HAZARDOUS WASTES § 120-3
118:165
D. After the transfer, the named insured may submit a contractor's signed
estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or securing the building or
other structure, and the designated officer shall return the amount of
the funds transferred to the municipality in excess of the estimate to the
named insured if the municipality has not commenced to remove, repair
or secure the building or other structure.
E. Upon receipt of proceeds under this section, the municipality shall do
the following:
(1) The designated officer shall place the proceeds in the separate fund
to be used solely as security against the total costs of removing,
repairing or securing the building or structure which are incurred
by the municipality. Such costs shall include, without limitation,
any engineering, legal or administrative costs incurred by the
municipality in connection with such removal, repair or securing of
the building or any proceedings related thereto.
(2) It is the obligation of the insuring agent, when transferring the
proceeds, to provide the municipality with the name and address of
the named insured. Upon receipt of the transferred funds and the
name and address of the named insured, the designated officer
shall contact the named insured, certify that the proceeds have
been received by the municipality and notify the named insured
that the procedures under this subsection shall be followed.
(3) When repairs, removal or securing of the building or other
structure have been completed in accordance with all applicable
regulations and orders of the municipality and the required proof of
such completion received by the designated officer, and if the
municipality has not incurred any costs for repairs, removal or
securing, the fund shall be returned to the named insured. If the
municipality has incurred costs for repairs, removal or securing of
the building or other structure, the costs shall be paid from the
fund, and, if excess funds remain, the municipality shall transfer
the remaining finds to the named insured.
(4) To the extent that interest is earned on proceeds held by the
municipality pursuant to this section and not returned to the named
insured, such interest shall belong to the municipality. To the extent
that proceeds are returned to the named insured, interest earned
on such proceeds shall be distributed to the named insured at the
time that the proceeds are returned.
F. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of the
municipality to recover any deficiency. Furthermore, nothing in this
section shall be construed to prohibit the municipality and the named
insured from entering into an agreement that permits the transfer of
funds to the named insured if some other reasonable disposition of the
damaged property has been negotiated.
§ 120-3 EAST NORRITON CODE § 120-4
118:166
§ 120-4. Adoption of additional procedures.
The Board of Supervisors may by resolution adopt procedures and
regulations to implement Act 93 of 199465 and this article and may by
resolution fix reasonable fees to be charged for municipal activities or
services provided pursuant to Act 93 of 199466 and this article, including but
not limited to issuance of certificates and bills, performance of inspections
and opening separate fund accounts.
§ 120-5. Violations and penalties.
Any owner of property, any named insured or any insuring agent who
violates this article shall be subject to a penalty of up to $1,000 per
violation.
65.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638 et seq.
66.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638 et seq.
§ 120-4 HAZARDOUS WASTES § 120-5
118:167
Chapter 122
KEROSENE HEATING AND STORAGE
§ 122-1. Permitted places of use.
The use of kerosene heating units is permitted only in single-family, twin
or half-double residential units and multiple-dwelling-unit complexes (i.e.,
townhouses) in which individual units are separated by approved fire walls.
§ 122-2. Prohibited places of use.
§ 122-3. Required protection.
The required protection for use of portable kerosene heating units in
commercial establishments, industrial establishments and public offices is
as follows:
§ 122-4. Places of public assembly prohibited use.
Under no circumstances are portable kerosene heating units permitted
in places of public assembly, including but not limited to schools and
institutions.
§ 122-5. Indoor storage.
All containers used for the indoor storage of kerosene fuel in commercial
establishments, industrial establishments or public offices shall be metal
construction with positive screw-type spout, shall be approved safety can
under Underwriter's Laboratories, Inc., regulations or Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania State Police Fire Marshal regulations, with a maximum size of
five United States gallons. The container shall be labeled "kerosene" with at
least two-inch-high letters. A total maximum of five gallons may be stored
in a building, subject to the regulations contained herein. Storage must be
A. The use of portable kerosene heating units is not permitted in
apartment houses, multiple dwellings with three or more dwelling
units, boardinghouses, motels or hotels.
B. The use of portable kerosene heating units is not permitted in
commercial establishments, industrial establishments or public offices,
except where the protection required by this chapter is provided.
A. The portable kerosene heating unit shall be surrounded by a one-halfinch
square wire mesh frame so as to prevent persons from coming into
contact with the portable kerosene heating unit.
B. The portable kerosene heating unit shall have a minimum six-inch
clearance between the kerosene heating unit and the wire-mesh frame
protection screen.
C. All protection material shall be noncombustible.
§ 120-5 EAST NORRITON CODE § 122-5
122:168
at least 10 feet distant from any permanent heating unit, boiler, furnace
or wood-burning stove or the portable kerosene heating unit. The storage
container must be deemed not to be a hazard area by the East Norriton
Township Fire Marshal.
§ 122-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1988 by Ord. No.
274]
Any person, corporation or other entity who shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter or who should fail to comply with any notice
of violation herein, upon conviction before a District Justice within the
magisterial district within which the Township of East Norriton is a part,
shall be fined not more than $600 plus costs of prosecution after a summary
proceeding brought in the name of the Township before said District Justice.
A new and separate offense shall be deemed to be committed for each day
that such violation exists. In default of the payment of any fine imposed and
the costs, the person or persons that are charged may be sentenced to be
committed to the county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 125
(RESERVED)
Chapter 127
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm devices — See Ch. 54.
Amusement devices — See Ch. 63.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 144.
§ 122-5 KEROSENE HEATING AND STORAGE § 122-6
122:169

ARTICLE I
Regulations and Restrictions
[Adopted 8-22-1994 by Ord. No. 342]
§ 127-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "East Norriton Township Noise
Ordinance."
§ 127-2. Statutory authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to Section 702 of the Second Class
Township Code, clauses XII, XXIX, XXXV, XLI, LXII, 53 P.S. §§ 65712, 65729,
65735, 65741 and 65762.
§ 127-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to ensure that public health, safety and welfare
shall not be abridged by the making and creating of noise pollution or
of public nuisances from disturbing, excessive or offensive noises in the
Township. The residents of the Township recognize that uncontrolled noise
represents a danger to the health and welfare of their neighbors and that
each person in the community is entitled to live in an environment in which
the level of impulsive and amplified noise is minimized for the community
good. It is the purpose and scope of this article to provide regulations
defining the maximum sound levels that vehicles, appliances and equipment
shall be allowed to produce at specified distances from these devices and
also to provide for the prohibition of other kinds of offensive noises. These
regulations and prohibitions are intended to protect the physical, mental
and social well-being of the residents of the Township.
§ 127-4. Legislative findings.
The Board of Supervisors finds that the failure of individuals, businesses,
industries, persons maintaining animals, social gatherings and other
activities to regulate the noise emanating from their premises constitutes a
violation of the peace and enjoyment of the residents of the Township and a
public nuisance. Specifically, such noise emanating from home occupations,
businesses, industries, sound amplification equipment, radios, electronic
sound recording equipment, vehicles, persons maintaining animals, social
gatherings and other activities:
A. Creates a nuisance in that residents are deprived of the enjoyment of
their homes, disturbed in their sleep or otherwise prevented from the
quiet enjoyment of their residential premises;
B. Affects the property values of residences in the residential district of
the Township;
C. Affects the public welfare by reflecting negatively on the residential
districts established for the Township;
§ 127-1 KEROSENE HEATING AND STORAGE § 127-4
122:171
§ 127-5. Definitions.
D. Disturbs the peace and good order of the Township; and
E. Creates noise pollution.
A. All acoustical terminology shall be interpreted in accordance with that
contained in ANSI S1.1, "Acoustical Terminology." All other words and
terms not defined herein shall be used with a meaning of standard
usage.
B. The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have,
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the meanings given to
them in this section.
ANSI — American National Standards Institute or its successors.
DECIBEL (dB) — A unit of sound level which is a division of a
logarithmic scale used to express the ratio of the sound pressure of
the source to the pressure of an arbitrarily chosen reference pressure;
the ratio is expressed on the decibel scale by multiplying its base 10
logarithm by 20.
EXCESSIVE NOISE — That sound which is:
FLUCTUATING NOISE — A noise whose sound level varies significantly
with time.
IMPULSIVE NOISE — Characterized by brief excursions of sound level.
The duration of a single impulse is usually less than one second.
INTERMITTENT NOISE — A noise whose sound level exceeds the
ambient noise levels at least twice during the period of observation,
which is one minute or more. The period of time during which the level
of the noise remains at an essentially constant value different from that
of the ambient is on the order of one second or more.
NIGHTTIME — 9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., prevailing time.
NOISE — Any sound emitted by a person, animal, appliance,
equipment, instrument or other device.
NOISE LEVEL — Airborne sound levels expressed in dB and obtained
by the use of specific frequency dependent weighting networks, as
specified in the referenced standards and indicated by proper notation;
if "A" weighting is employed, the sound level is identified as dB(A).
NOISE POLLUTION — Noise of such loudness and character from a
single source or from multiple sources, which is or may be predicted
Injurious or which unreasonably interferes with the comfortable
enjoyment of life and property. Measured noise levels in excess of
limits established in these regulations or those specified in valid
permits are declared to be "excessive noise."
(1)
(2) Annoying to a person of ordinary sensibilities.
§ 127-4 EAST NORRITON CODE § 127-5
122:172
§ 127-6. Noise limits.
The following limits are established for noise in the Township:
with reasonable certainty to be injurious to health or which
unreasonably interferes with the enjoyment of property or with any
lawful business or activity. Noise/sound pressure levels exceeding those
permitted in any district shall constitute "noise pollution."
PARTY — A social gathering.
PERIOD OF OBSERVATION — The time interval during which
acoustical data are obtained. The period of observation is determined
by the characteristics of the noise being measured and the
instrumentation being used. The period of observation must be at least
as long as the response time of the instrumentation. The greater the
variance in individual sound level, the longer must be the observation
time for a given expected accuracy of measurement.
PERSON — Includes an individual, firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company, corporation or any other similar entity.
SAE, INCORPORATED — Society of Automotive Engineers.
SOUND LEVEL — Noise level.
SOUND-LEVEL METER — An instrument or combination of
instruments which meets or exceeds the requirements for an ANSI Type
S1A or Type S2A sound-level meter.
STEADY NOISE — A noise whose level remains essentially constant
(i.e., fluctuations are less than five dB) during the period of observation.
VEHICLE — Any device or combination of devices used for or capable
of being used for transporting persons or property. "Vehicles" include
but are not limited to the following: automobiles, trucks, buses,
motorcycles, motorized bicycles, snowmobiles, scooters, all-terrain
vehicles, go-carts, racers and like devices, farm machinery, industrial
machinery, highway graders, trailers, graders and semitrailers.
ZONING DISTRICTS — Those districts as set forth on the Zoning Map
of the Township.67
A. General standards. No person shall create or allow the creation of any
noise or operate or cause to be operated any source of sound on
property in any zoning district owned, leased, occupied or otherwise
controlled by such person, which causes the sound level, when
measured at or beyond the boundaries of the lot on which such
activities take place, to exceed the noise levels specified below in the
various zoning districts unless otherwise specifically set forth herein.
Noise levels shall be measured at the setback lines of the properties
adjacent to the property from which the noise is emanating.
67.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Township offices and may be examined
there during regular business hours.
§ 127-5 KEROSENE HEATING AND STORAGE § 127-6
122:173
Zoning Districts
Noise Level
(decibels)
All residential districts, including RO
Residential Office District, RP Residential
Professional District and MR Medium Density
Residential and such other residential
districts as may be added to Chapter 205,
Zoning, from time to time
62
B. Special regulations. No person shall create or permit to be created any
sound which can be heard at the residence of any neighbor in any
residential district, as follows:
(1) Any amplified sound.
(2) Any repetitive animal sound.
(3) Sound from a party exceeding 70 dB(A).
(4) Sound from appliance or equipment exceeding 55 dB(A), except
where exempted below.
(5) Sound from any commercial or industrial activity whether located
in a residential or other district.
C. Vehicles. No person shall operate either a motor vehicle of a type
subject to registration, except police and fire equipment and
ambulances or other government emergency vehicles, at any time or
under any condition of grade, load, acceleration or declaration in such a
manner as to exceed the following noise limits for the category of motor
vehicles based on a distance of 50 feet from the center of the lane
traveled on within the speed limit specified in this section under test
procedures established by this article.
Type of Vehicle
Speed Limit of
35 MPH or Less
[dB(A)]
Speed Limit of
35 MPH or More
[dB(A)]
Any motor vehicle with a
manufacturer's gross
combination weight rating of
10,000 pounds or more and any
combination of vehicles towed
by such motor vehicle
86 90
Any other vehicle or any
combination of vehicles towed
by such motor vehicle
76 82
Any motorcycle or motor-driven
cycle
78 82
§ 127-6 EAST NORRITON CODE § 127-6
122:174
§ 127-7. Exemptions.
Noise emitted from the following sources shall be exempt from the noise
standards specified herein:
D. Equipment. No person shall operate any powered equipment or
powered hand tool that produces a maximum noise level exceeding the
following noise limits at a distance of 50 feet, under test procedures
established by this article.
Type of Equipment
Noise Limit
[dB(A)]
Construction and industrial machinery, such
as crawler-tractors, dozers, rotary drills and
augers, loaders, power shovels, cranes,
derricks, motor graders, paving machines,
off-highway trucks, ditchers, trenchers,
compactors, scrapers, pavement breakers,
truck loaders, conveyer belts, stone crushers,
compressors and pneumatic power
equipment, but not including pile drivers
86
Agricultural tractors and equipment 86
Powered commercial equipment of 2
horsepower or fewer intended for infrequent
use in residential areas, such as chain saws,
pavement breakers, log chippers, powered
hand tools, etc.
84
Powered equipment intended for repetitive
use in residential areas, such as lawn
mowers, small lawn and garden tools, riding
tractors, snow removal equipment, etc.
70
Portable and standby electrical generators,
provided that generators are used only during
times of loss of utility-provided power, except
that such generators may be exercised for a
period of no more than 1 hour from 7:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m. [Added 11-18-2014 by Ord.
No. 558]
84
A. All safety signals and warning devices (e.g., intrusion alarms and
backup alarms on trucks); authorized vehicles when responding to
emergencies (e.g., police, fire, ambulance sirens or any other device
used to alert persons to an emergency or used during the conduct of
emergency work).
B. The provision, repair and maintenance of municipal services or public
utilities.
§ 127-6 KEROSENE HEATING AND STORAGE § 127-7
122:175
§ 127-8. Special waivers.
A temporary waiver from strict compliance with the noise standards
specified herein may be granted to persons during emergency
circumstances, as determined by the Noise Enforcement Officer, to permit
reasonable time to effect repairs and/or adjustments to equipment,
appliances, instruments and other sound-emitting devices which, when in
use, exceed the noise level limits, provided that the use of such devices shall
be essential to preserve and protect health and safety or to comply with
other lawful rules, regulations and ordinances.
§ 127-9. Noise Enforcement Officer.
For the administration of this article, the Board of Supervisors shall appoint
a person or persons as Noise Enforcement Officer(s) who shall not hold
C. Bells, chimes and carillons used for religious purposes or in conjunction
with national celebrations or public holidays; existing bells, chimes and
carillons that are currently in use for any purpose.
D. Appliances, lawn and garden equipment, snow removal equipment and
household power tools in use between the hours of 7:00 a.m. (prevailing
time) and 9:00 p.m. (prevailing time), provided that such are operated
within the manufacturer's specifications and with all standard noisereducing
equipment in use, unmodified and in proper operating
condition.
E. Heavy construction equipment when being used for a relatively short
period of time on a specific short-term project (such as constructing a
building; constructing, repairing or cleaning a road; drilling a well; and
other similar short-term, specific construction, demolition or repair
projects) in use between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.,
prevailing time, for the duration of such short-term, specific project,
provided that such heavy construction equipment is operated within the
manufacturer specifications and with all standard noise-reducing
equipment in use, unmodified and in proper operating condition.
F. Air conditioners, fans, heating units and similar comfort devices,
provided that such are operated within the manufacturer's
specifications and reasonable measures are taken to reduce noise levels
as approved by the Noise Enforcement Officer.
G. Airplanes, helicopters and normal activities of properly licensed
airports.
H. Musical, recreational and athletic events conducted by or permitted by
schools or local government.
I. Activities permitted by special waiver, as provided herein, according to
the terms and conditions of said waiver; activities conducted in
accordance with a special activity permit approved by the Board of
Township Supervisors.
§ 127-7 EAST NORRITON CODE § 127-9
122:176
any elective office in the Township and who shall be qualified by training
and experience to perform the necessary measurements and procedures
required to determine violations of this article. Township police officers
shall also be Noise Enforcement Officers. The duties of the Noise
Enforcement Officer shall be:
§ 127-10. Enforcement procedures.
The following procedures and penalties are prescribed for enforcement of
this article:
A. To make inspections and observations of noise conditions, and to
investigate complaints.
B. To issue all warnings, citations and special waivers as provided herein
and to undertake all other activities necessary for the enforcement and
administration of this article.
C. To prepare and maintain records of all activities undertaken in the
course of the administration or enforcement of this article.
A. Citations. If it is determined by the Noise Enforcement Officer that a
noise level in excess of the levels permitted by this article shall have
been caused or permitted by any person, the Officer may issue a
citation to such person causing or permitting said noise level and
prosecute the same before the District Justice.
B. Injunctions. In addition, the Noise Enforcement Officer may, after
obtaining approval by the Board of Supervisors, file legal or equitable
actions in court in the name of the Township to abate or enjoin
violations of this article.
C. Other penalties. Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair any
cause of action or to impair any equitable or legal action of any person
or the public for injury or damage arising from the emission or release
into the atmosphere or ground from any source whatever of noise in
such place or manner or at such levels which may give rise to such
cause of action.
D. Public nuisance. Any emission of noise from any source in excess of the
limitations established herein is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance and may be abated by administrative or judicial proceedings,
fines and penalties herein provided.
E. Other remedies. Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair any
cause of action or legal remedy thereof, of any person or the public for
injury or damage arising from the emission or release into the
atmosphere or ground from any source whatever of noise on such place
or manner or at such levels which may give rise to such cause of action.
§ 127-9 KEROSENE HEATING AND STORAGE § 127-10
122:177
§ 127-11. Relationship with other restrictions.
The provisions of this article are not intended to interfere with, abrogate
or annul other rules, regulations or ordinances, including Title 18 (Crimes
Code) and Title 75 (Vehicle Code), Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes. If
more stringent requirements concerning noise abatement are contained
in the other statutes, rules, regulations or ordinances, the more stringent
regulation shall apply.
§ 127-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 and, in default of payment, to imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 30 days. Every day that a violation of this article continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
F. Noise pollution. This chapter is enacted as an ordinance for protection
of the public health and safety and for the control of noise pollution in
the Township.
§ 127-10 EAST NORRITON CODE § 127-12
122:178
ARTICLE II
Engine Brake Retarders
[Adopted 1-7-2013 by Ord. No. 546]
§ 127-13. Title.
This article shall be known as the "East Norriton Township Engine Brake
Retarder Ordinance."
§ 127-14. Findings.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of East Norriton, Montgomery
County, Pennsylvania, finds as a fact that the operation of an engine brake
on a gasoline-powered or diesel-powered motor vehicle not equipped with
exhaust mufflers, or equipped with defective or modified exhaust mufflers
(commonly referred to as engine brake retarders), so as to create excessive
noise through the use of said engine brake, adversely affects the public
health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Township of East Norriton
and, therefore, is a nuisance in fact.
§ 127-15. Operation on certain roads prohibited.
No gasoline-powered or diesel-powered motor vehicle shall be operated on
the following streets, roads, alleys or highways within the Township of East
Norriton, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, utilizing, in said operation,
an engine brake, without exhaust mufflers, or with defective or modified
exhaust mufflers (commonly referred to as engine brake retarders),
permitting excessive noise to be created by said motor vehicle:
Township Line Road (SR 3001): Trooper Road to North Wales Road
Eastbound from Trooper Road:
147 feet past Trooper Road
100 feet past Potshop Road
400 feet past Whitehall Road
80 feet before North Wales Road
Westbound from North Wales Road:
150 feet past North Wales Road
500 feet past Whitehall Road
50 feet past Potshop Road
150 feet before Trooper Road
Potshop Road (TWP): Schultz Road to Germantown Pike
Southbound from Schultz Road:
100 feet past Schultz Road
100 feet before Germantown Pike
§ 127-13 KEROSENE HEATING AND STORAGE § 127-15
122:179
Northbound from Germantown Pike:
100 feet past Germantown Pike
200 feet past Woodland Road
§ 127-16. Erection of signs.
East Norriton Township shall erect, in accordance with the PennDOT
approval, notice provisions ("signs") indicating that engine brake retarders
are prohibited at the locations identified in § 127-15 of this article.
§ 127-17. Prohibition not applicable in emergency situations.
This article shall not apply to emergency driving situations requiring the
utilization of an engine brake to protect the safety and property of the
residents of East Norriton Township, other motor vehicle operators,
pedestrians, and the operator and passengers of the motor vehicle involved
in said emergency situation.
§ 127-18. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person, firm, corporation or organization violating any of the
provisions of this article shall, upon summary conviction before a
District Magistrate having jurisdiction, be guilty of violating § 3111 of
the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3111, and shall be
deemed a nuisance under this article and shall be punishable by a
minimum fine or not less than $100 and a maximum fine of not more
than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution and, in default of the payment
thereof, shall be sentenced to undergo imprisonment in the Township of
East Norriton for a period not to exceed 10 days or imprisonment in the
county jail for a period not to exceed 30 days.
B. In addition, East Norriton Township may institute an action for
injunctive relief to prohibit or abate any activity in violation of the
provisions of this article when repeated violations by the same person,
firm, corporation or organization occur.
§ 127-15 EAST NORRITON CODE § 127-18
122:180
Chapter 129
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dumps and dumping — See Ch. 92.
Hazardous wastes — See Ch. 118.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 144.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 152.
§ 129-1. Definitions; word usage.
A. Word usage. For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases,
words and derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and
words in the singular number include the plural number.
B. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ABANDONED VEHICLES —
COMBINATION — Two or more vehicles physically interconnected in
tandem.[Added 11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 359]
COMMERCIAL EQUIPMENT — An implement used in, engaged in or
intended to be used in an operation or activity of commerce.[Added
11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 359]
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — A vehicle occupied with, engaged in or
intended to be used in commerce.[Added 11-13-1995 by Ord. No.
359]
A vehicle (other than pedalcycle):
That is inoperable and is left unattended on public property for
more than 48 hours;
(a)
That has remained illegally on public property for a period of
more than 48 hours;
(b)
Without a valid registration plate or certificate of inspection or
title, left unattended on or along a highway; or
(c)
That has remained on private property with or without the
consent of the owner or person in control of the property for
more than 48 hours.
(d)
(1)
Vehicles and equipment used or to be used in construction or in the
operation or maintenance of public utility facilities, which are left
in a manner which does not interfere with the normal movement of
traffic, shall not be considered to be abandoned.
(2)
§ 127-18 NUISANCES § 129-1
129:181
§ 129-2. Unlawful acts.
FARM TRUCK — A truck determined by the department to be used
exclusively for agricultural purposes.[Added 11-13-1995 by Ord. No.
359]
GROSS COMBINATION WEIGHT RATING — The value specified by
the manufacturer as the loaded weight of a combination.[Added
11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 359]
GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING — The value specified by the
manufacturer as the loaded weight of a single vehicle.[Added
11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 359]
GROSS WEIGHT — The combined weight of a vehicle or combination of
vehicles and its load and driver.[Added 11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 359]
JUNKED VEHICLES — Any motor vehicle, valueless except as junk.
MANUFACTURER — A person engaged in the business of constructing
or assembling vehicles, motors or bodies of vehicles.[Added
11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 359]
PAYLOAD — The revenue producing or useful load that a vehicle can
carry.[Added 11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 359]
PERSON — Includes any natural person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices used
exclusively upon rails or tracks.[Added 11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 359]
A. It shall be unlawful to throw, deposit or dump any paper, trash, rubbish,
ashes, junk, waste, garbage or discarded materials of any kind,
including but not limited to refrigerators, electrical or gas ranges,
worn-out tires, plumbing or electrical fixtures, building supplies, tree
limbs, grass or other vegetation in or on any private or public property,
vacant or occupied, within the Township of East Norriton or to maintain
any accumulations of such materials in or on any public or private
property, vacant or occupied, within said Township creates a condition
which endangers the safety, health or comfort of the citizens of the
Township of East Norriton.
B. It shall be unlawful to store or deposit any abandoned or junked vehicle
or part thereof in or on any highway or public or private property,
vacant or occupied, within the Township of East Norriton.
C. It shall be unlawful to carry on or maintain any offensive manufacture
or business anywhere within the Township of East Norriton that creates
a condition which endangers the safety, health or comfort of the citizens
of East Norriton Township.
§ 129-1 EAST NORRITON CODE § 129-2
129:182
§ 129-3. Notice of nuisance.
The violation of any of the foregoing sections shall be deemed to be and
constitute a nuisance. Whenever it is found that any person maintains such
nuisance or nuisances within the Township of East Norriton, the Board of
Supervisors of the Township, by its employees or agents, shall serve notice
upon the person maintaining such nuisance. The notice shall sufficiently
describe the condition complained of and shall require the nuisance to be
made safe, corrected or to be removed within 10 days of the mailing of the
notice.
§ 129-4. Abatement.
Should such person fail, neglect or refuse to make such conditions safe or
to correct or remove to the satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors or its
D. It shall be unlawful to erect, use, maintain, occupy or own any unsafe or
dangerous building, structure or physical condition or any part thereof
anywhere within the Township of East Norriton.
E. It shall be unlawful to park or store any commercial vehicles, including,
but not limited to, trucks, farm trucks, buses, combinations, tractortrailers
and trailers, more than 19 feet in length or 85 inches in width or
more than 11,000 pounds gross weight, gross vehicle weight rating or
gross combination weight rating as those terms are defined in the
Motor Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania68 or having a manufacturerspecified
payload greater than 5,800 pounds or any vehicle equipped
with exterior equipment, including, but not limited to, a hoist, ladder or
towing mechanisms (typically utilized in pursuit of a commercial
endeavor), or to park or store any commercial equipment weighing
more than 500 pounds upon any residentially zoned property within the
Township of East Norriton, except for those commercial vehicles or
commercial equipment being used for the delivery of goods or the
rendering of services in the normal course of business or construction,
unless the vehicle or equipment is parked or stored at all times in a fully
enclosed garage. Two recreational vehicles per property are excluded
from this restriction, provided that: [Added 8-26-1991 by Ord. No.
305; amended 11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 359; 1-23-2001 by Ord.
No. 427; 2-22-2005 by Ord. No. 476]
(1) The vehicles belong to the property owner;
(2) The vehicles are currently licensed and inspected, if required, and
they are operable; and
(3) The vehicles are not to be parked within 20 feet of any property line
except if parked in a driveway which is in accordance with
Township ordinances or which has otherwise been approved by the
Township.
68.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 129-2 NUISANCES § 129-4
129:183
employees or agents, then the Board of Supervisors may abate or cause to
be abated said nuisance, and the expense of such abatement shall be paid
by the responsible person.
§ 129-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1988 by Ord. No.
274]
Any person, corporation or other entity who shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter or who should fail to comply with any notice
of violation herein, upon conviction before a District Justice within the
magisterial district within which the Township of East Norriton is a part,
shall be fined not more than $600 plus costs of prosecution after a summary
proceeding brought in the name of the Township before said District Justice.
A new and separate offense shall be deemed to be committed for each day
that such violation exists. In default of the payment of any fine imposed and
the costs, the person or persons that are charged may be sentenced to be
committed to the county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 135
PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 196.
§ 135-1. Consent of property owner required.
No person shall park or leave unattended a vehicle on private property
without the consent of the owner or other person in control of possession
of the property; except in the case of an emergency or disablement of the
vehicle, in which case the operator shall arrange for the removal of the
vehicle as soon as possible.
§ 135-2. Applicability.
The provisions of § 135-1 shall not apply to private parking lots, unless such
lots are posted to notify the public of any parking restrictions, in which case
the operator of a vehicle should not violate said posted restrictions. For the
purpose of this section, "private parking lot" means a parking lot open to
the public and used for parking with or without charge.
§ 135-3. Violations and penalties. [Added 12-19-1988 by Ord. No.
274]
Any person, corporation or other entity who shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter or who should fail to comply with any notice
of violation herein, upon conviction before a District Justice within the
magisterial district within which the Township of East Norriton is a part,
§ 129-4 EAST NORRITON CODE § 135-3
135:184
shall be fined not more than $600 plus costs of prosecution after a summary
proceeding brought in the name of the Township before said District Justice.
A new and separate offense shall be deemed to be committed for each day
that such violation exists. In default of the payment of any fine imposed and
the costs, the person or persons that are charged may be sentenced to be
committed to the county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 139
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 59.
Curfew — See Ch. 82.
Dogs and other animals — See Ch. 87.
Noise — See Ch. 127.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 144.
§ 135-3 PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY § 135-3
135:185

ARTICLE I
Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 4-23-2002 by Ord. No. 438]
§ 139-1. Applicability.
The following rules and regulations are applicable to all East Norriton
Township parks and recreation areas.
§ 139-2. Supersession of prior regulations.
This article supersedes Ordinance 94 of the East Norriton Township Board
of Supervisors dated May 8, 1973.69
§ 139-2.1. Hours of operation; exceptions.
All Township parks are open to all Township residents and guests from
sunrise until sunset throughout the year, with the special exception of
special events such as ballfield usage, pavilion rentals, Township sponsored
special events and special permit activities as authorized by the Board of
Supervisors.
§ 139-2.2. Age restrictions.
Children under the age of six years old must be accompanied by an adult.
§ 139-2.3. Prohibited acts.
The following are prohibited:
A. Possession or use of alcoholic beverages or drugs which are in violation
of the law.
B. Boisterous, immoral or indecent conduct.
C. Gambling.
D. Discarding of trash, garbage or other litter except into containers
provided for that purpose.
E. Damaging, defacing, destroying or moving Township-owned property,
trees, shrubs, signs, structures, equipment, or other material.
F. Parking of any vehicle except on designated areas.
G. (Reserved)70
H. Fires, except in facilities provided for such purpose.
69.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 94, adopted 5-8-1973, as amended, was included as former
Art. I of this chapter.
70.Editor's Note: Former Subsection G, regarding possession or discharge of firearms, was
repealed 2-24-2015 by Ord. No. 562.
§ 139-1 PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY § 139-2.3
135:187
§ 139-2.4. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision herein shall be guilty of a summary
offense and upon conviction thereof shall be liable for a fine of not less than
$25 nor more than $300 or, in default thereof, to imprisonment for not more
than five days.
I. Pets, except when kept on a leash. [Amended 11-18-2014 by Ord.
No. 558]
J. Swimming or throwing of any objects in the pond.
K. Fishing in pond or streams which violates the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania regulations concerning licensing or seasons.
L. Minibikes, motorcycles, go-carts, ATVs or other self-propelled vehicles
other than automobiles in parking areas.
M. Trapping of animals.
N. Archery, except in specially designated areas if provided.
§ 139-2.3 EAST NORRITON CODE § 139-2.4
135:188
ARTICLE II
Ballfields
[Adopted 5-13-1985 by Res. No. 1058]
§ 139-3. Rules and regulations.
The following rules and regulations shall govern the use of Township-owned
ballfields:
A. There shall be no climbing on fences or backstops.
B. There shall be no riding bicycles on or around the field area.
C. There shall be no riding bicycles on dirt piles.
D. The field must be completely vacated at the first sign of a thunderstorm.
(No one is allowed in dugouts.)
E. There shall be no jumping off bleachers.
F. The field must be cleaned of all litter at the end of each game.
G. The infield must be raked after each game.
H. Proper adult supervision is required at the field at all times.
I. Improper language or behavior will not be tolerated.
J. Cars are to be parked on macadam only (no parking on the grass).
K. There shall be no alcoholic beverages permitted in the park.
L. In case of an accident or injury, use the red phone at the rear of the
police station to call a police officer if an ambulance is needed.
M. All accidents or injuries at this facility must be reported to the Director
of Parks and Recreation within 24 hours.
N. All games are to be played at the highest level of sportsmanship.
§ 139-3 PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY § 139-3
135:189
Chapter 144
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 59.
Curfew — See Ch. 82.
Dogs and other animals — See Ch. 87.
Firearms and hunting — See Ch. 97.
Nuisances — See Ch. 129.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 139.
§ 139-3 EAST NORRITON CODE § 139-3
144:190
ARTICLE I
Disturbing the Peace
[Adopted 8-24-1970 by Ord. No. 67]
§ 144-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISTURBING THE PEACE — Within the limits of the Township of East
Norriton, any act, word or conduct causing or tending to cause a
disturbance of the peace and good order of said Township or causing or
tending to cause any danger, discomfort or annoyance to the inhabitants
of said Township or users of the Township thoroughfares, and shall include
obstructing any public highway, road, street, lane, alley, park, square or
sidewalk, idly standing, loafing, fighting, drunkenness, vagrancy, begging,
the making of unnecessary noises, profanity, indecent language, reckless or
careless driving or any other use of vehicles by owners or occupants thereof
as shall endanger the safety or interfere with the comfort and convenience
of persons using or residing near the thoroughfares of said Township.
§ 144-2. Unlawful acts.
All of the foregoing acts and/or offenses coming within the definition of
"disturbing the peace" are hereby declared to be unlawful.
§ 144-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1988 by Ord. No.
274]
Any person, corporation or other entity who shall violate any of the
provisions of this article or who should fail to comply with any notice
of violation herein, upon conviction before a District Justice within the
magisterial district within which the Township of East Norriton is a part,
shall be fined not more than $600 plus costs of prosecution after a summary
proceeding brought in the name of the Township before said District Justice.
A new and separate offense shall be deemed to be committed for each day
that such violation exists. In default of the payment of any fine imposed and
the costs, the person or persons that are charged may be sentenced to be
committed to the county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 144-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 144-3
144:191

ARTICLE II
Real and Personal Property
[Adopted 11-9-1970 by Ord. No. 68]
§ 144-4. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, association or corporation
to:
§ 144-5. Advertising devices.
With permission of the owner of any property, temporary show cards,
posters or other advertising devices not larger than 12 inches by 18 inches
may be placed for a period not exceeding 21 days upon deposit with the
Township Secretary of a certified check in the amount of $50 to be held
in escrow to guarantee the removal of the temporary show cards, posters
or other advertising devices upon the expiration of the twenty-one-day
period. If the temporary show cards, posters or other advertising devices
have been removed at the expiration of the twenty-one-day period, the
Township Secretary shall refund the fifty-dollar check. If the temporary
show cards, poster or other advertising devices have not been removed, the
escrow deposit shall be forfeited, and the temporary show cards, posters or
other advertising devices shall be removed at the direction of the Township
Secretary by Township employees. This temporary permit may be renewed
for one additional twenty-one-day period only.
§ 144-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1988 by Ord. No.
274]
Any person, corporation or other entity who shall violate any of the
provisions of this article or who should fail to comply with any notice
of violation herein, upon conviction before a District Justice within the
magisterial district within which the Township of East Norriton is a part,
shall be fined not more than $600 plus costs of prosecution after a summary
proceeding brought in the name of the Township before said District Justice.
A. Willfully, maliciously, wantonly, negligently or otherwise injure, deface,
destroy or remove real property or improvements thereto or personal
property belonging to the Township of East Norriton.
B. Throw or permit to be deposited or scattered upon any sidewalk, alley,
street or other public passageway any waste or other material of any
kind.
C. Fasten in any way any show card, poster or other advertising device
upon public or private property in the Township unless legally
authorized to do so by the owner thereof.
D. Tamper with, injure, deface, destroy or remove any sign, notice, marker,
fire alarm, fire hydrant, topographical survey monument or any
personal property erected or placed by the Township.
§ 144-4 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 144-6
144:193
A new and separate offense shall be deemed to be committed for each day
that such violation exists. In default of the payment of any fine imposed and
the costs, the person or persons that are charged may be sentenced to be
committed to the county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 144-6 EAST NORRITON CODE § 144-6
144:194
ARTICLE III
Picketing
[Adopted 11-14-1972 by Ord. No. 87]
§ 144-7. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PICKETING — The act of standing upon or patrolling any public street,
sidewalk or any other public place where persons may lawfully assemble, by
one or more persons, for the purpose of:
§ 144-8. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, association or corporation
to:
§ 144-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1988 by Ord. No.
274]
Any person, corporation or other entity who shall violate any of the
provisions of this article or who should fail to comply with any notice
of violation herein, upon conviction before a District Justice within the
magisterial district within which the Township of East Norriton is a part,
shall be fined not more than $600 plus costs of prosecution after a summary
proceeding brought in the name of the Township before said District Justice.
A new and separate offense shall be deemed to be committed for each day
that such violation exists. In default of the payment of any fine imposed and
the costs, the person or persons that are charged may be sentenced to be
committed to the county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
Persuading other persons to cease patronizing, contracting with,
employing or leaving the employ of any person or persons; or
A.
Giving publicity to or communicating information regarding the
existence, facts or merits of a labor dispute or other controversy.
B.
A. Engage in picketing by force, violence, duress, breach of the peace or
threat of any of the foregoing.
B. Engage in picketing in such a manner as to prevent ingress and egress
to or from any premises.
C. Engage in picketing in such a manner as to obstruct, prevent or
interfere with the free or unobstructed use of any public street or
sidewalk by other persons.
D. Engage in picketing other than in a reasonable and peaceful manner.
§ 144-7 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 144-9
144:195
Chapter 148
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 129.
§ 148-1. License required. [Amended 11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 360]
Every transient merchant, peddler or solicitor engaged in the selling,
soliciting or canvassing of goods, wares or things of value or the receiving of
services or things of value is forbidden to visit private places of business or
residences without first having received from the authorized representative
of East Norriton Township a license permitting such selling, soliciting or
canvassing.
§ 148-2. Board to set rules and regulations.
The Board of Supervisors of East Norriton Township shall be empowered
to make and provide such rules and regulations from time to time as may
be necessary to supervise any such transient merchant, peddler or solicitor
concerning the manner in which such person may engage in selling,
soliciting and canvassing, the information required to obtain a license, the
cost of such license fee and any other proper and necessary regulation
to protect the health, safety, welfare and morals of the citizens of East
Norriton Township.
§ 148-2.1. Hours. [Added 11-18-2014 by Ord. No. 558]
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to engage in peddling
or soliciting before 10:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m.
§ 148-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1988 by Ord. No.
274]
Any person, corporation or other entity who shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter or who should fail to comply with any notice
of violation herein, upon conviction before a District Justice within the
magisterial district within which the Township of East Norriton is a part,
shall be fined not more than $600 plus costs of prosecution after a summary
proceeding brought in the name of the Township before said District Justice.
A new and separate offense shall be deemed to be committed for each day
that such violation exists. In default of the payment of any fine imposed and
the costs, the person or persons that are charged may be sentenced to be
committed to the county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 150
§ 144-9 EAST NORRITON CODE § 148-3
144:196
(RESERVED)
Chapter 152
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform Construction Code — See Ch. 74.
Dumps and dumping — See Ch. 92.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 95.
Garage sales — See Ch. 110.
Kerosene heating and storage — See Ch. 122.
Nuisances — See Ch. 129.
Parking on private property — See Ch. 135.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 144.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 168.
Zoning — See Ch. 205.
§ 152-1. Adoption and amendment of International Property
Maintenance Code. [Amended 3-27-2018 by Ord. No. 579]
The 2015 International Property Maintenance Code and Appendix A, and
any subsequent revisions thereof which shall automatically be incorporated
herein by reference, save and except such portions of the 2015 International
Property Maintenance Code as are hereinafter deleted, modified or
amended, is hereby adopted and incorporated as if set forth at length
herein. The 2015 International Property Maintenance Code, and any
subsequent revision thereto, is hereby adopted by reference as Chapter
152 of the East Norriton Township Code of Ordinances to be known as
the "Property Maintenance Code" with the following amendments and
additions.
§ 152-2. Repealer.
The provisions of this chapter shall be considered amendments to the
provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code, current edition,
and any provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code that are
inconsistent with or contrary to the provisions of this chapter are hereby
repealed.
§ 152-3. Deletions, additions, and insertions.
The International Property Maintenance Code is amended and revised in
the following respects:
A. Section 101.1 is amended to insert "East Norriton Township,
Montgomery County, Pennsylvania".
B. Section 101.5 is added as follows:
§ 148-3 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 152-3
144:197
101.5. Compliance with other regulations. No license, permit or
other certification of compliance with this part shall constitute a
defense to any violation of any other ordinance of the Township of
East Norriton applicable to any structure or premise, nor shall any
provision herein relieve any owner, operator or occupant from
complying with any such other provision, nor any official of the
Township from enforcing such other ordinance or provision.
C. Section 102.3 is amended to read as follows:
102.3. Application of other codes. Repairs, additions, or alterations
to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance
with the provisions of the building, plumbing, mechanical, and
electrical codes as adopted by the Township of East Norriton. Nothing
in this Code shall be construed to cancel, modify, or set aside any
provisions of the East Norriton Township Zoning Ordinance.71 The
International Residential Code shall apply to one- and two-family
dwellings.
D. Section 103.5 is amended to read as follows:
103.5 Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by the
Department in carrying out its responsibilities under this Code shall be
as set forth in the East Norriton Township Fee Schedule72 as adopted
by the Board of Supervisors, and which may be amended from time to
time by resolution of same.
E. Section 104.7 is added as follows:
104.7 Coordination of inspections. Whenever in the enforcement
of this Code or another code or ordinance the responsibility of more
than one code official of the jurisdiction is involved, it shall be the
duty of the code officials involved to coordinate their inspections and
administrative orders as much as practical so that the owners and
occupants of the structure shall not be subjected to visits by numerous
inspectors or multiple or conflicting orders. Whenever an inspector
from any agency or department observes an apparent or actual
violation of some provision of law, ordinance or code not within the
inspector's authority to enforce, the inspector shall report the findings
to the code official having jurisdiction.
F. Section 106.4 is amended to read as follows:
71.Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Zoning.
72.Editor's Note: Said schedule is on file in the Township offices.
§ 152-3 EAST NORRITON CODE § 152-3
144:198
106.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of
this Code or who shall fail to comply with any of the requirements
thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do any work in
violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the
code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions
of this Code, shall be guilty of a summary offense, punishable by
a fine not to exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment not exceeding 30
days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation
continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate
offense. In addition to the above penalties, any person who shall
violate a provision of this Code, or fail to comply therewith, or with
any of the requirements thereof, shall be subject, in addition to the
penalties imposed above, to monetary penalties for all court costs,
legal costs, attorneys' fees and other miscellaneous costs incurred by
East Norriton Township during successful prosecution of that person
by East Norriton Township.
G. Section 108.1.3.1 is added as follows:
108.1.3.1 Service, facility, equipment or utility. No owner,
operator, or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment, or
utility which is required by this Code to be removed, shut off or
discontinued, except for such temporary interruption as may be
necessary while actual repairs or alterations are in process or during
temporary emergencies when discontinuance of service is approved by
the appropriate authority.
H. Section 108.1.4 is amended to add "and East Norriton Township Zoning
Code." after "under this code".
I. Section 108.2 is amended to read:
108.2 Closing of vacant structures. If the structure or part thereof
is vacant and/or in danger of structural collapse, the code official shall
be permitted to post a placard of condemnation on the premises and
order the structure closed up so it will not be an attractive nuisance to
the general public. Upon failure of the owner to close up the premises
within time specified in the order, the code official shall cause it to
be closed up through any available public agency or by contract or
arrangement by private persons and the cost thereof shall be charged
against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall
be a lien upon such real estate and may be collected by any other
legal resources. The requirements for securing vacant buildings are in
accordance with the Building Code of Township Ordinances.
J. Section 110.1 is amended as follows: Delete all after "remove at owners
option." and add as follows: "Whenever the code official determines that
the cost of such repairs would exceed 50% of the current value of such
structure, such repairs shall be presumed unreasonable and it shall be
presumed for the purpose of this section that such structure is a public
§ 152-3 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 152-3
144:199
nuisance which shall be ordered razed without option on the part of the
owner to repair.
K. Section 110.3 is amended to read:
Section 110.3 Failure to comply. Whenever the owner of a property
fails to comply with a demolition order within the time prescribed, the
code official shall cause the structure or part thereof to be razed and
removed, either through an available public agency or by contract or
arrangement with private persons, and the cost of razing and removing
such structure plus 10% administrative costs shall be charged against
the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien
upon such real estate.
L. Section 110.1.1 is added as follows:
110.1.1 Extermination. All demolition shall be preceded by an
inspection of the premises by a certified exterminator to determine
whether or not extermination procedures are necessary. If the
premises are found to be infested, appropriate extermination shall take
place in accordance with Section 309 of this Code before, during and
after demolition. Certification of extermination must be submitted by a
certified exterminator to the code official. Demolition shall commence
within 10 days of certification.
M. Section 112 titled "Rental Units" is hereby deleted in its entirety and
replaced by “INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK.” [Amended 3-27-2018
by Ord. No. 579]
N. Section 113 titled "Certificate of Use and Occupancy" is hereby deleted
in its entirety and replaced by “INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK.”
[Amended 3-27-2018 by Ord. No. 579]
O. Section 201.3 is amended to read as follows:
201.3 Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined
in this Code and are defined in the International Building Code,
International Fire Code, East Norriton Township Zoning Ordinance,73
International Plumbing Code, International Fuel Gas Code,
International Mechanical Code, International Existing Building Code,
International Electric Code, or NFPA 70, such terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them as stated in those codes.
P. Section 202 is amended to add the following additional definitions:
ABANDONED VEHICLES —
A vehicle (other than pedal cycle):
That is inoperable and is left unattended on public property for
more than 48 hours;
(a)
(1)
73.Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Zoning.
§ 152-3 EAST NORRITON CODE § 152-3
144:200
ALTERATION — Any partial change or variation of a building or
structure or dwelling unit.
BOARDINGHOUSE — An owner-occupied building used for lodging
without or without meals for compensation and not to be inhabited by
more than three unrelated boarders. Zoning approval is required for
this use.
JUNK VEHICLE — Any vehicle which is without a currently valid license
plate or plates and is in such a condition as determined by the Public
Officer that it constitutes a health hazard or public nuisance and
warrants removal.
ONE-FAMILY DWELLING — A building containing one dwelling unit
with not more than three lodgers or boarders.
PUBLIC OFFICER — Building Inspector, Fire Marshal, Health Officer,
Zoning Officer, and Plumbing Inspector, or other duly pointed code
enforcement official.
RENOVATION — The renewal or restoration of a building, structure, or
dwelling unit.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — A building containing two dwelling units
with no more than three lodgers or boarders per family.
That has remained illegally on public property for a period of
more than 48 hours;
(b)
Without a valid registration plate or certificate of inspection or
title left unattended on or along a highway; or
(c)
That has remained on private property with or without the
consent of the owner or the person in control of the property
for more than 48 hours.
(d)
Exception: Vehicles and equipment used or to be used in
construction or in the operation or maintenance of public utility
facilities, which are left in a manner which does not interfere with
the normal movement of traffic, shall not be considered to be
abandoned.
(2)
Q. Section 302.3 is amended as follows: [Added 3-27-2018 by Ord. No.
57974]
Section 302.3 Sidewalks and driveways. Sidewalks, walkways,
curbs, stairs, driveways, driveway aprons, parking spaces and similar
areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair, and maintained free
from hazardous conditions.
74.Editor's Note: Pursuant to this ordinance, former Subsections Q through II were
redesignated as Subsections R through JJ, respectively.
§ 152-3 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 152-3
144:201
R. Section 302.4 is amended to insert "eight inches, with the exception of
meadow grasses and other such plant life that is approved by the
Township as part of a subdivision and land development plan."
S. Section 302.5.1 is added as follows:
302.5.1 Storage. No material that may provide for rodent harborage
or infestation on a property or in a building shall be stored against
the side of the building. In dwelling units, no materials shall be stored
within 18 inches of the dwelling unit and all stored materials shall be
stored at least 18 inches above ground level.
R.1. Section 302.7 is amended to read as follows: [Added
11-18-2014 by Ord. No. 558]
Section 302.7 Accessory structures. All accessory structures,
including detached garages, fences, walls, sheds and signs, shall be
maintained structurally sound and in good repair.
T. Section 303.2 is amended to read as follows:
303.2 Enclosures. Private swimming pool, hot tub, and spa
enclosures shall be maintained in accordance with Pennsylvania Code
Title 35, Part 14, Uniform Construction Code.
U. Section 304.3.1 is added as follows:
304.3.1 Business identification. In addition to the requirements of
Section 304.3, in every building in which more than one occupant
exits to the exterior, each exit door, except the main entrance, shall
be labeled with both the occupant name and address. Numbers and
letters shall be a minimum of four inches (102mm) high with a
minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch (12.7mm), and shall be constructed
of a durable material.
V. Section 304.10 is amended to add the following as the last sentence:
"Every stair, porch, and fire escape shall be maintained free of
hazardous conditions such as snow, ice, mud and other debris."
W. Section 304.11 is amended to add the following as the last sentence:
"When a fixed supplemental source of heating is supplied to a dwelling,
it shall be the owner's responsibility provide certification warranting
the proper installation of the heating source according to the
International Fire Code."
X. Section 304.13.3 is added as follows:
304.13.3 Insulated glazing. Insulated glass doors and windows shall
be free of fogged glass (condensation on the interior sections of the
pane) that would indicate the insulation seals are damaged or broken.
Y. Section 304.14 is amended to read as follows:
§ 152-3 EAST NORRITON CODE § 152-3
144:202
304.14 Insect screens. Every door, window, and other outside
opening required for ventilation of habitable spaces, food preparation,
food service, or other area where products to be included or utilized in
food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged,
or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not
less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm), and every screen
door used for insect control shall open in the direction of egress and
shall be equipped with a self-closing device in good working condition.
Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved
means, such as air curtains or insect repellant fans, are utilized.
Z. Section 305.3.1 is added as follows:
305.3.1 Bathroom and kitchen floors. Every toilet, bathroom, and
kitchen floor surface shall be constructed and maintained and
impervious to water, so as to permit such floor to be kept in a clean
and sanitary condition.
AA. Section 305.6.1 is added as follows:
305.6.1 Garage doors. Doors that open from a garage or carport into
a dwelling shall comply with the International Residential Code.
BB. Section 307.2 is added as follows:
307.2 Ramps. Handrails shall be provided on at least one side of all
ramps exceeding a slope of one unit vertical to 12 units horizontal
(8.33% slope).
CC. Section 307.3 is added as follows:
307.3 Construction. Handrails and guards shall be constructed and
installed in accordance with the International Building Code or
International Residential Code.
DD. Section 308.2 is amended to read as follows:
308.2 Disposal of rubbish. Every occupant of a structure or part
thereof shall dispose of all rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by
placing it in rubbish containers equipped with tight-fitting covers.
EE. Section 308.3.3 through 308.5 shall be added as follows:
308.3.3 Storage. Garbage or refuse shall not be allowed to
accumulate or be stored in public halls, stairways, or on the roofs.
308.3.4 Disposal container. It shall be the judgment of the Code
Official to require a stationary disposal container in any multiplefamily
dwelling where a continual problem with trash preparation and
storage is present.
§ 152-3 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 152-3
144:203
308.4 Unlawful dumping. It shall be unlawful to throw, deposit or
dump paper, trash, rubbish, ashes, junk, waste, or discarded materials
of any kind including, but not limited to, refrigerators, electrical or
gas ranges, worn-out tires, plumbing or electrical fixtures, building
supplies, tree limbs, grass or other vegetation, in or on any private
or public property, vacant or occupied, within the Township of East
Norriton, or to maintain any accumulations of such materials in or
on any public or private property, vacant or occupied, within said
Township of East Norriton, that creates a condition which endangers
the safety, health or comfort of the citizens of the Township of East
Norriton.
308.4.1 Vehicle. It shall be unlawful to store, or deposit any
abandoned or junk vehicle or part thereof, in, or on any highway or
public or private property, vacant or occupied, with the Township of
East Norriton.
308.4.2 Violation. A violation of this section shall be deemed to
be and constitute a nuisance. Whenever it is found that any person
maintains such nuisance or nuisances with the Township of East
Norriton, a Code Official shall serve notice upon the person
maintaining such nuisance. The notice shall sufficiently describe the
condition complained of and shall require the nuisance to be made
safe, corrected or to be removed within 10 days of the mailing of the
notice. Should such person in violation fail, neglect, or refuse to make
such conditions safe, or to correct or remove to the satisfaction of the
Code Official, then the Code Official may abate or cause to be abated
said nuisance and the expense of such abatement shall be paid by the
responsible person.
308.5 Owner's responsibility. Every owner must provide to all
tenants a copy of the current rules and regulations for the disposal of
trash. Owner shall also provide a specific enclosed area where trash
and garbage is to be stored until the assigned collection day. This area
must be kept clean of any accumulation of trash and garbage.
1. Owners of premises shall be responsible for compliance with the
provisions of this code and shall remain responsible therefore
regardless of the fact that this code may also place certain
responsibilities on operators and occupants and regardless of any
agreements between owners and operators or occupants as to
which party shall assume such responsibility.
2. Owners of multiple dwellings shall be responsible for proper
maintenance, condition and operation of service facilities, and for
furnishing adequate heat and hot water supply where they have
contracted to do so.
§ 152-3 EAST NORRITON CODE § 152-3
144:204
3. Whenever any person or persons shall be in actual possession of, or
have charge, care, or control of any property within the Township
as executor, administrator, trustee, guardian, or agent, such person
shall be deemed and taken to be the owner or owners of said
property within the true intent and meaning of the Code and shall
be bound to comply with the provisions of this Code to the same
extent as the record owner; and notice to any such person or any
order or decision of the Public Officer shall be deemed and taken
to be good and sufficient notice, as if such person or persons were
actually the record owner or owners of such property.
FF. Section 309.2 is amended to read as follows:
309.2 Owner. The owner of any structure shall be responsible for
extermination within the structure prior to renting, leasing, selling, or
transferring the structure.
GG. Section 310 is added as follows:
Section 310: Other Health and Safety Requirements.
310.1 Anti-tip device. All free-standing ranges, regardless of fuel,
shall have an approved anti-tip device installed to prevent the range
from tipping over.
310.2 Floor service. All toilet and bathroom floor surfaces shall be of
a smooth, hard, nonabsorbent surface to permit such floor to be easily
kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
310.3 Kitchen floors. Every kitchen floor surface shall be
constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to water
and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary
condition.
310.4 Minimum kitchen standards. Every dwelling shall contain
a kitchen with the following equipment and shall be maintained in a
clean, safe, and sanitary condition:
1. A sink.
2. Cabinets or shelves.
3. Stove or similar cooking device.
4. Refrigerator capable of temperatures between 44° F. and 33° F.
HH. Section 311 is added as follows:
Section 311: Responsibility of Rooming House Operators and
Apartment Operators.
311.1 Responsibility. All operators shall be responsible for
compliance with the provisions of this Code in regard to the following:
1. Limiting occupancy to the maximum permitted by this Code.
2. Maintenance of safe and sanitary conditions in all parts of the
premises.
§ 152-3 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 152-3
144:205
3. Maintenance and operation of all required service facilities.
4. Maintenance of all plumbing, cooking and refrigeration fixtures
and appliances with this control as well as to the building
equipment and facilities, in operative, clean and sanitary
conditions.
5. Sanitary maintenance of walls, floors and ceilings.
6. Keeping exits clear and unencumbered.
7. Disposal of building garbage and refuse in a clean and sanitary
manner in accordance with the provisions of the Township Codes.
8. Where bedding, bed linen or towels are supplied, the owner or
operator shall maintain the bedding in a clean and sanitary
manner, and he or she shall furnish the clean bed linen and towels
at least one each week and prior to the letting of any room to any
occupant.
9. Exterminations of insects, rodents or other pests on the premises.
10. Maintaining of yards, lawns and courts in a clean, sanitary and
safe condition and free form infestation.
11. Hanging and removing required screens.
II. Section 402.1.1 is hereby deleted in its entirety and restated to read as
follows: [Amended 3-27-2018 by Ord. No. 579]
Section 402.1.1 Below-grade rooms. Rooms partially or completely
below grade shall only be used as habitable space in accordance with
the UCC.
JJ. Section 402.2 is amended to read as follows:
402.2 Common halls and stairways. Every common hall and
stairway in every building, other than one- and two-family dwellings,
shall be adequately lighted at all times with an illumination of at least
75 watt standard incandescent light bulb or equivalent for each 200
square feet of floor area, provided that the spacing between lights
shall not be greater than 30 feet. Every exterior stairway shall be
illuminated with a minimum of one-foot candle at floors, landings and
treads.
KK. Section 152-403.6 shall be added as follows: [Added 3-27-2018 by
Ord. No. 57975]
Section 152-403.6 Carbon monoxide detection system. Carbon
monoxide detectors shall be installed in accordance with the standards
set forth in NFPA 720.
LL. Sections 404.2.1 and 404.2.2 are added as follows:
75.Editor's Note: Pursuant to this ordinance, former Subsections JJ through QQ were
redesignated as Subsections LL through SS, respectively.
§ 152-3 EAST NORRITON CODE § 152-3
144:206
404.2.1 Space requirement for dwelling unit. Every apartment or
dwelling unit of any type shall have a minimum of 900 square feet of
habitable living space.
404.2.2 Space requirement for rooming unit. Every rooming unit
shall have a minimum of 150 square feet of habitable living space.
MM.Section 502.2 shall read as follows:
502.2 Rooming houses. At least one water closet, lavatory basin and
bathtub or shower properly connected to an approved water and sewer
system and in good working condition shall be supplied for each four
persons within a rooming house, wherever said facilities are shared.
Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot
and cold water at all times.
NN. Section 502.3 is amended to add the following as the last sentence:
"Each lavatory, bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot and cold
water at all times."
OO. Section 505.4 is amended to add the following as the last two
sentences: "A drip leg is required on all gas-fired hot water heaters and
a blow-down pipe is required off of all pressure relief valves on all types
of hot water heaters. There shall be a minimum of 30 gallons of hot
water provided for each dwelling unit."
PP. Section 602.2.1 is added as follows:
602.2.1 Heat supply. Every owner of any structure who rents, leases,
or lets one or more dwelling units or guest-rooms on terms, either
express or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall
supply sufficient heat during the period from October 1 to May 15 to
maintain a room temperature of not less than 68° F. in all habitable
spaces, bathrooms, and toilet rooms. The temperature shall be
measured at a point three feet (914 mm) above the floor and three feet
(914 mm) from the exterior walls.
QQ. Sections 602.3 and 602.4 are amended by inserting November 1 to
March 31 where applicable.
RR. Section 604.2 is amended to read as follows:
604.2 Service. When the electrical system requires modification to
correct inadequate service as defined in Section 604.3, the service
shall be a minimum of 100 amp drop service for each building up
to and including four separate unites. Each additional four units or
fraction thereof will require a 100 amp drop service additional. Each
unit must be supplied with a 100 amp panel box located in the unit or
easily accessible to the unit. For all renovations, a receptacle must be
installed on each wall in every habitable room.
SS. Sections 605.1 and 605.2 are amended to read as follows:
§ 152-3 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 152-3
144:207
605.1 Installation. All electrical equipment, wiring, and appliances
shall be installed and maintained in a safe manner in accordance with
all applicable laws. All electrical equipment shall be of an approved
type and must display an approval sticker from an electrical inspector.
605.2 Receptacles. Where there is electric service available to a
structure, every habitable room of a dwelling unit, and every guest
room, shall contain at least three separate and remote outlets, one of
which may be a ceiling or wall fixture controlled by a wall switch in
close proximity to the entrance door of specific room. In a kitchen, four
separate and remote outlets or three such convenience outlets and one
ceiling-type electrical light fixture controlled by a wall switch shall be
provided. Each public hall, bathroom, laundry room or furnace room
shall contain at least one electric light fixture. Each bathroom, halfbath,
powder room and laundry room shall contain one receptacle and
it shall be ground fault receptacle.
TT. Section 705 is added as follows: [Added 3-27-2018 by Ord. No.
57976]
Section 705: Carbon Monoxide Detection and Warning
Equipment.
Carbon monoxide detectors shall be installed in accordance with the
standards set forth in NFPA 720.
UU. Appendix A is adopted in whole as published by ICC.
VV. Section A101.2 is added as follows:
A101.2 Boarding required. Any residential property that shall sit
vacant for more than 365 days or shall remain vacant for more than
30 days as a result of a fire or natural disaster shall be boarded up in
accordance with the following procedures set forth in this Appendix.
WW. Section A101.3 is added as follows:
A101.3 Other requirements. Any dwelling that is boarded up shall
have all utilities disconnected prior to the property being boarded up.
76.Editor's Note: Pursuant to this ordinance, former Subsections RR through TT were
redesignated as Subsections UU through WW, respectively.
§ 152-3 EAST NORRITON CODE § 152-3
144:208
Chapter 156
(RESERVED)
Chapter 158
REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 72.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 95.
Grading and excavations — See Ch. 114.
Plumbing — See Ch. 150.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 168.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
175.
Zoning — See Ch. 205.
§ 158-1. Users required to pay costs and expenses.
All contractors and other users, except for certificated public utilities, for
whom East Norriton Township, through its Building Inspector, Plumbing
Inspector, other employees or through outside sources, provides inspection,
location and/or placement services concerning the location or placement
of water, electric, gas, communication and other similar utilities or
improvements of any nature whatsoever, or who receive other inspection,
location and/or placement services, shall, to the extent permitted by law,
pay to East Norriton Township its costs and expenses incurred in connection
with such services, within 30 days of issuance by East Norriton Township of
an invoice therefor.
§ 158-2. Billing of users for services.
The costs and expenses of East Norriton Township shall be billed to the
contractors and users at the cost thereof to the Township, as either invoiced
to East Norriton Township by outside sources or, in the event such charges
result from employees' services, at their hourly rate, as determined from
time to time by the Board of Supervisors.
Chapter 159
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY LICENSING AND
REGISTRATION
§ 159-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as "Residential Rental Property Licensing and
Registration."
§ 152-3 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 159-2
158:209
§ 159-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the licensing and registration of
residential rental units in East Norriton Township.
§ 159-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APARTMENT — A permanent dwelling unit within a building containing
three or more dwelling units (also known as "apartment house"), each
for a single family living independent of one another, and being vertically
arranged, sharing outside access, and having one or more walls as well as a
ceiling or floor in common with another dwelling unit.
DWELLING — A building designed for and occupied exclusively for
residential purposes, excluding hotels, rooming houses, tourist homes,
motels and the like, but including the following:
DWELLING UNIT — A building, or portion thereof, providing complete
housekeeping facilities for one family, including living, sleeping, cooking,
eating, and sanitary facilities.
PERSON(S) — A natural person, heir, executor, administrator or assign, and
includes a firm, partnership or corporation, or limited liability corporation,
its successors or assigns, or the agent of any of the aforesaid.
PROPERTY MANAGER — A natural person, partnership, corporation,
unincorporated association, limited partnership, or any other entity,
appointed by a landlord or property owner to maintain a residential rental
unit or units, and whose duty it is to ensure that a residential unit or
units complies with all statutes and ordinances of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and East Norriton Township.
PROPERTY OWNER — Any person who, either alone, or jointly or severally
with others, has legal title to any residential rental unit, with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof, or who has charge, care, or
control of any residential rental unit as an owner or agent of the owner, or
as executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee, or guardian of
the estate of the property owner. Any such person thus representing the
actual property owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A building designed for and occupied
exclusively as a dwelling for one family, including a mobile home.
A.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — A building designed for and occupied
exclusively as a dwelling for two families (also known as a "duplex").
B.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — A building designed for and occupied
exclusively for dwelling purposes by three or more families living
independently of one another; not a townhouse, but customarily called
an "apartment house."
C.
§ 159-2 EAST NORRITON CODE § 159-3
158:210
chapter, and to the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the
same extent as if he/she were the property owner.
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT — A room or group of rooms for one or more
persons with independent living facilities, providing for living, sleeping,
cooking and sanitary facilities that are not occupied by the property owner,
including but not limited to single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings,
multifamily dwellings, apartments, boardinghouses, and tourist homes.
TOWNSHIP — East Norriton Township, Pennsylvania.
§ 159-4. Residential rental unit licensing.
§ 159-5. Registration.
A. Licensing required. No person shall occupy, allow to be occupied, or
lease to another person for occupancy, any residential rental unit,
within the Township, unless that person holds a current operating
license, issued by the Township, for the specific rental unit.
B. Licensing effective. An operating license for a residential rental unit
shall be valid for the calendar year of issuance or the remainder
thereof, unless revoked, and such license shall be renewable for
successive calendar years. Licenses shall not be transferable.
C. Notice required. Every person holding such operating license shall give
notice in writing to the Township's Code Enforcement Department
within seven days after having sold, transferred, given away, or
otherwise disposed of ownership, or interest in, or control of, any
residential rental unit. This section does not relieve owners from their
responsibilities to comply with the notice requirements of Chapter 190.
D. Annual license fee. Each applicant for a license to operate a residential
rental unit shall, at the time of application and each year thereafter, pay
an annual fee of $50 per unit, except that a fee will not be paid for an
owner-occupied dwelling. Any owner of a residential rental unit who
fails to pay the required license fee within 30 days from the date of
application will be charged an additional $10 per unit per month, as a
penalty. The Board of Supervisors may adjust these fees from time to
time.
E. License revocation. The Township may withhold, revoke, suspend or fail
to renew a rental license if an owner is convicted by a court of
competent jurisdiction of violations of the Township's Code of
Ordinances, or if authorized by laws of the Commonwealth.
A. Registration required. Every property owner shall, on or before October
1 of each year, register all residential rental units on forms provided by
the Township's Code Enforcement Department.
B. Emergency contact information and response. Every property owner
shall provide such contact information to the Township that will allow
§ 159-3 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 159-5
158:211
§ 159-6. Violations and penalties.
Any property owner who fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon summary conviction therefor before a District Justice within
the magisterial district within which the Township is located, be fined not
more than $1,000 plus costs of prosecution and reasonable attorney's fees,
after a summary proceeding brought in the name of the Township before
said District Justice. A new and separate offense shall be deemed to be
committed for each day that such violation exists. In default of the payment
of any fine imposed and the costs, the person or persons that are charged
may be sentenced to be committed to the county jail for a period not
exceeding 30 days.
§ 159-7. Compliance with other chapters.
Every owner of a residential rental unit shall also comply with the relevant
provisions contained in Chapter 152, Chapter 190, and all other relevant
chapters of the Code of East Norriton Township.
Chapter 160
RESPONSIBLE CONTRACTOR REQUIREMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Contractor registration — See Ch. 73.
the Township, in the event of an emergency, to contact the property
owner or a designated property manager, 24 hours per day, seven
days per week, 365 days per year. It shall be the property owner's
or designated property manager's absolute duty to update the contact
information to reflect any changes. In the event the Township or a
representative of the Township alerts the property owner or property
manager of an emergency, the property owner or property manager
shall be present at the residential rental unit in question to address the
emergency.
C. Certificates of use and occupancy shall be required for all residential
rental units, upon their advertisement or offering for rent, in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 190.
D. List of occupants. Upon registering a residential rental unit on or before
October of each year, it shall be the duty of the property owner to
submit to the Township Manager a list of occupants, consisting of the
names of all persons 18 years of age and older residing in said
residential rental unit. Said list shall be submitted within 60 days of the
effective date of this chapter, and shall be updated each year upon
registration, or upon a change in tenants. All applicants for rental
licenses shall comply with the general laws of East Norriton Township,
and the International Property Maintenance Code, as amended.
§ 159-5 EAST NORRITON CODE § 159-7
158:212
§ 160-1. Purpose.
§ 160-2. Responsible contractor requirements.
A. The Township of East Norriton (hereinafter "Township") recognizes that
there is a need to ensure that all work on public construction and
maintenance contracts is performed by responsible, qualified firms that
maintain the capacity, expertise, personnel and other qualifications and
resources necessary to successfully perform public contracts in a
timely, reliable and cost-effective manner.
B. To effectuate the purpose of selecting responsible contractors for public
contracts and to protect Township investments in such contracts,
prospective contractors and subcontractors should be required to meet
preestablished, clearly defined, minimum standards relating to
contractor responsibility, including requirements and criteria
concerning technical qualifications, competency, experience, adequacy
of resources, including equipment, financial and personnel, and
satisfactory records regarding past project performance, safety, law
compliance and business integrity.
C. Further, due to the critical impact that skilled construction craft labor
has on public works projects, and due to the limited availability of
skilled construction craft labor and imminent craft labor skill shortages,
it is necessary to require contractors and subcontractors to participate
in established, formal apprenticeship training programs as a condition
of bidding, for the purpose of both promoting successful project
delivery and ensuring future workforce development. The Township
also recognizes that it is beneficial to the local community to ensure
that firms receiving public contracts provide adequate wages and
benefits to their employees and utilize fair business, employment and
training practices that have a positive impact on local communities
affected by such contracts.
D. Therefore, Township shall require compliance with the provisions of
this chapter by business entities seeking to provide services to the
Township as specified herein. The requirements of this chapter are
intended to supplement, not replace, existing contractor qualification
and performance standards or criteria currently required by law, public
policy or contracting documents. However, in the event that any of the
provisions of this chapter conflict with any law, public policy or
contracting documents of the Township, this chapter shall prevail.
A. All contractors and subcontractors of any tier that perform work valued
at over $100,000 on any public facility or public works project,
including construction, alteration, renovation, repair, service
(excluding trash hauling) or maintenance work, shall meet the
requirements of this chapter. [Amended 11-18-2014 by Ord. No.
558]
§ 159-7 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 160-2
158:213
§ 160-3. Contractor responsibility certifications.
B. All firms engaged in contracts covered by this chapter shall be
qualified, responsible contractors or subcontractors that have sufficient
capabilities in all respects to successfully perform contracts on which
they are engaged, including the necessary experience, equipment,
technical skills and qualifications and organizational, financial and
personnel resources. Firms bidding on public contracts shall also be
required to have a satisfactory past performance record and a
satisfactory record of law compliance, integrity and business ethics.
C. If, after three attempts by the Township to award a contract to a
responsible bidder, as defined in this chapter, no bidder is determined
to meet the requirements of this chapter, this chapter shall not apply to
subsequent attempts to bid the project.
A. As a condition of performing work on a public works contract subject to
this chapter, a general contractor, construction manager or other lead
or prime contractor seeking award of a contract shall submit a
contractor responsibility certification at the time it submits its bid for a
contract.
B. The contractor responsibility certification shall be completed on a form
provided by Township and shall reference the project for which a bid is
being submitted by name and contract or project number.
C. In the contractor responsibility certification, the construction manager,
general contractor or other lead or prime contractor (hereafter the
"firm") shall confirm the following facts regarding its past performance
and work history and its current qualifications and performance
capabilities:
(1) The firm has all valid, effective licenses, registrations or
certificates required by federal, state, county, or local law,
including, but not limited to, licenses, registrations or certificates
required to: (a) do business in the designated locale; and (b)
perform the contract work it seeks to perform. These shall include,
but not be limited to, licenses, registrations or certificates for any
type of trade work or specialty work which the firm proposes to
self-perform.
(2) The firm meets the bonding requirements for the contract, as
required by applicable law or contract specifications, and any
insurance requirements, as required by applicable law or contract
specifications, including general liability insurance, workers'
compensation insurance and unemployment insurance
requirements.
(3) The firm has not been debarred by any federal, state or local
government agency or authority in the past three years.
(4) The firm has not defaulted on any project in the past three years.
§ 160-2 EAST NORRITON CODE § 160-3
158:214
(5) The firm has not had any type of business, contracting or trade
license, registration, or other certification suspended or revoked in
the past three years.
(6) The firm has not been cited for a willful violation of federal or state
safety laws in the past three years.
(7) The firm and its owners have not been convicted of any crime
relating to the contracting business by a final decision of a court or
government agency in the past 10 years.
(8) The firm has not, within the past three years, been found in
violation of any law applicable to its contracting business,
including, but not limited to, licensing laws, tax laws, prompt
payment laws, wage and hour laws, prevailing wage laws,
environmental laws or others, where the result of such violation
was the payment of a fine, back pay damages or any other type of
penalty in the amount of $1,000 or more.
(9) The firm will pay all craft employees that it employs on the project
the current wage rates and benefits as required under applicable
federal, state or local wage laws.
(10) The firm participates in a Class A apprenticeship program for each
separate trade or classification in which it employs craft employees
and shall continue to participate in such program or programs for
the duration of the project.
(a) For purposes of this chapter, a Class A apprenticeship program
is an apprenticeship program that is currently registered with
and approved by the United States Department of Labor or a
state apprenticeship agency and has graduated apprentices to
journey person status for at least three of the past five years.
(b) If a firm is identified as the lowest responsible bidder or
otherwise selected as the prospective awardee or as a
subcontractor of an awardee, it shall provide appropriate
documentation, as determined by the Township, to verify it
meets the requirements of this chapter for each trade or
classification of craft workers it will employ on the project. This
verification shall be provided prior to performance of work by
the firm.
(11) The firm has all other technical qualifications and resources,
including equipment, personnel and financial resources, to perform
the referenced contract, or will obtain same through the use of
qualified, responsible subcontractors.
(12) The firm will maintain all qualifications, resources and capabilities
referenced in this certification throughout the duration of the
project.
§ 160-3 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 160-3
158:215
§ 160-4. Notice of intent to award contract.
(13) The firm shall notify the Township within seven days of any
material changes to all matters attested to in this certification.
(14) The firm understands that the contractor responsibility
certification required by this chapter shall be executed by a person
who has sufficient knowledge to address all matters in the
certification and shall include an attestation stating, under the
penalty of perjury, that the information submitted is true, complete
and accurate.
D. Execution of the contractor responsibility certification required by this
chapter shall not establish a presumption of contractor responsibility,
and the Township may require any additional information it deems
necessary to evaluate a firm's status as a responsible contractor,
including technical qualifications, financial capacity or other resources
and performance capabilities. The Township may require that such
information be included in a separate statement of qualifications and
experience or as an attachment to the contractor responsibility
certification.
E. The submitting firm shall stipulate in the contractor responsibility
certification that, if it receives a notice of intent to award contract, it
will provide a subcontractor list and required subcontractor
information as specified in § 160-5 of this chapter.
F. If the submitting firm has ever operated under another name, or
controls, or is controlled by, another company or business entity or in
the past five years controlled or was controlled by another company or
business entity, whether as a parent company, subsidiary or in any other
business relation, it shall attach a separate statement to its contractor
responsibility certification that explains in detail the nature of any such
relationship. Additional information may be required from such an
entity if the relationship in question could potentially impact contract
performance.
G. If a firm fails to provide a contractor responsibility certification
required by this chapter, it shall be disqualified from bidding. No action
of any nature shall lie against the Township because of its refusal to
accept a bid for failing to provide information required by this chapter.
A. After it has received bids for a project, the Township shall issue a notice
of intent to award contract to the firm offering the lowest responsive
bid.
B. Such notice shall be issued immediately or as soon as practicable after
bids are submitted and shall stipulate that the contract award will be
conditioned on the issuance of a written contractor responsibility
determination, as required by § 160-6 of this chapter, and any other
conditions determined appropriate by the Township.
§ 160-3 EAST NORRITON CODE § 160-5
158:216
§ 160-5. Subcontractor lists; subcontractor responsibility
certifications.
§ 160-6. Contractor responsibility review and determination.
A. Within seven days from the date of notice of intent to award contract, a
prospective awardee shall submit to Township a subcontractor list
containing the names of subcontractors that will be used for the
referenced project, their addresses and a description of the work each
listed subcontractor will perform on the project.
B. At the time a prospective awardee submits the subcontractor list, it
shall also submit subcontractor responsibility certifications for all listed
subcontractors to the Township. Subcontractor responsibility
certifications shall be executed by the respective subcontractors on
forms prepared by the Township and shall contain the same information
and representations required in contractor responsibility certifications,
including verification of apprenticeship qualifications as required by
§ 160-3C(10) of this chapter for each trade or classification of craft
workers it will employ on the project.
C. Subcontractor responsibility certifications shall be executed by persons
having sufficient knowledge to address all matters in the certification
and shall include an attestation stating, under the penalty of perjury,
that all information submitted is true, complete and accurate.
A. After a notice of intent to award contract has been issued, the Township
shall undertake a review process for a period of at least 30 days to
determine whether the prospective awardee is a qualified, responsible
contractor in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and
other applicable laws and regulations and has the resources and
capabilities to successfully perform the contract.
B. As part of this review process, the Township shall ensure that the
contractor responsibility certification, the subcontractor list and the
subcontractor responsibility certifications, as required by this chapter,
have been submitted and properly executed.
C. The township may conduct any additional inquiries to verify that the
prospective awardee and its subcontractors have the technical
qualifications and performance capabilities necessary to successfully
perform the contract and that the firms have a sufficient record of law
compliance and business integrity to justify the award of a public
contract. In conducting such inquiries, the Township may seek relevant
information from the firm, its prior clients or customers, its
subcontractors or any other relevant source.
D. If, at the conclusion of its internal review, the Township determines that
all responsibility certifications have been properly competed and
executed and if it concludes that the qualifications, background and
responsibility of the prospective awardee and the firms on its
§ 160-5 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 160-6
158:217
§ 160-7. Subcontractor responsibility review requirements.
§ 160-8. Public review process.
subcontractor list are satisfactory, it shall issue a written contractor
responsibility determination verifying that the prospective awardee is
a qualified, responsible contractor. In the event a firm is determined
to be nonresponsible, the Township shall advise the firm of its finding
in writing and proceed to conduct a responsibility review of the nextlowest
responsive bidder or, if necessary, rebid the project. Prior to the
awarding of a contract, the Township must follow the procedures as set
forth in Section 3102 of the Second Class Township Code.77
E. The Township shall not issue a written contractor responsibility
determination until at least 10 days after it determines that the
contractor is a qualified responsible contractor in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter. A written contractor responsibility
determination may be revoked or revised in any manner at any time if
the Township obtains relevant information warranting such action.
A. A construction manager, general contractor or other lead or prime
contractor shall not be permitted to use a subcontractor on any work
performed for the Township unless it has identified the subcontractor
on its subcontractor list and provided a subcontractor responsibility
certification in accordance with the requirements of § 160-5 of this
chapter.
B. A subcontractor listed on a firm's subcontractor list shall not be
substituted unless written authorization is obtained from the Township
and a subcontractor responsibility certification is provided for the
substitute subcontractor.
C. In the event that the Township determines that a prospective
subcontractor listed by the apparent low bidder does not meet the
responsibility standards of this chapter, it may, after informing the
prospective awardee, exercise one of the following options:
(1) Permit the awardee to substitute a qualified, responsible
subcontractor in accordance with the requirements of this chapter;
(2) Require the awardee to self-perform the work in question if the firm
has the required experience, licenses and other qualifications to
perform the work in question; or
(3) Disqualify the prospective awardee.
D. In the event that a subcontractor is disqualified under this chapter, the
general contractor, construction manager or other lead or prime
contractor shall not be permitted to make any type of contractual claim
against the Township on the basis of a subcontractor disqualification.
77.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 68102.
§ 160-6 EAST NORRITON CODE § 160-8
158:218
§ 160-9. Emergencies.
Should the Board of Supervisors determine, in accordance with the
provisions of Section 3102(h)(1) of the Second Class Township Code, that
emergency circumstances exist that render the requirements and
procedures set forth in this chapter unduly burdensome, then in that event
the Township may award a procurement contract without application of the
terms of this chapter.
A. The contractor responsibility certification for a firm identified in a
notice of intent to award contract, subcontractor lists and
subcontractor responsibility certifications shall be made immediately
available to the public for inspection through a publicly accessible
website or other comparable means.
B. During the public review period, any person or organization may
protest a contractor or subcontractor for failing to meet applicable
requirements of this chapter or on any other relevant grounds by
submitting a letter with supporting evidence to the Township.
C. If the Township determines that a contractor or subcontractor
responsibility certification contains false or misleading material
information that was provided knowingly or with reckless disregard for
the truth or omits material information knowingly or with reckless
disregard of the truth, the firm for which the certification was
submitted shall be prohibited from performing work for the Township
for a period of three years and shall be subject to any other penalties
and sanctions, including contract termination, available to the
Township under law. A contract terminated under these circumstances
shall further entitle the Township to withhold payment of any monies
due to the firm as damages.
D. A procurement contract subject to this chapter shall not be executed
until all requirements of this chapter have been fulfilled and until
contractor and subcontractor responsibility certifications and
subcontractor lists have been made available for public inspection for
at least 10 days following submission of such information.
§ 160-8 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 160-9
158:219
Chapter 162
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal authorities — See Ch. 18.
Stormwater Maintenance Fund — See Ch. 43.
Uniform Construction Code — See Ch. 74.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 105.
Grading and excavations — See Ch. 114.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 166.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 168.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
175.
Use and occupancy permits — See Ch. 190.
Zoning — See Ch. 205.
§ 160-9 EAST NORRITON CODE § 160-9
158:220
ARTICLE I
Sewer District No. 1
[Adopted 10-5-1959 by Ord. No. 28]
§ 162-1. District created.
There is hereby created in East Norriton Township a Sewer District to be
known as "East Norriton Sewer District No. 1," to be bounded according
to a plan dated August 1959, prepared by Albright & Friel, Consulting
Engineers, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, copies of which plan are on file and
may be examined at the Township Municipal Building, 2828 Swede Road,
Norristown, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
§ 162-2. Area designated. [Amended 4-20-1981 by Ord. No. 158;
6-8-1982 by Ord. No. 172; 11-18-2014 by Ord. No. 558]
The entire Township of East Norriton is hereby designated as a service area
except for those areas where East Norriton Township has or will fund or
construct a sanitary sewer system or where the Township has or will obtain
by agreement or deed of dedication a sanitary sewer system. The Township
hereby reserves the right to provide sanitary sewer service to any portions
of Sewer District No. 1.
§ 162-3. (Reserved)78
§ 162-4. Authorization to enter into agreements. [Added 4-20-1981
by Ord. No. 158]
The appropriate officials of East Norriton Township are hereby authorized
to enter into such agreements as are necessary to effectuate the intent of
this article.
78.Editor's Note: Former § 162-3, Grant of authority, amended 4-20-1981 by Ord. No. 158,
was repealed 11-18-2014 by Ord. No. 558.
§ 162-1 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 162-4
158:221

ARTICLE II
Sewer Connection Charges
[Adopted 3-14-1960 by Ord. No. 31]
§ 162-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
79INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or
waterborne wastes or form of energy rejected or escaping from any
industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process or from the
development, recovery or processing of natural resources, as distinct from
domestic sewage.
OCCUPIED BUILDING — Each single dwelling unit, household unit, flat or
apartment unit, store, shop, office, business or industrial unit or family unit
contained within any structure erected within 150 feet of the sewer system
and intended for continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by
human beings or animals and from which structure sanitary sewage is or
may be discharged.[Added 6-8-1982 by Ord. No. 172]
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation
or group.[Amended 6-8-1982 by Ord. No. 172]
PROPERTY ACCESSIBLE TO THE SEWER SYSTEM — The improved
property which adjoins, abuts on or is adjacent to the sewer system or as
may be further defined or modified under rules and regulations adopted
pursuant to § 162-10A.[Added 6-8-1982 by Ord. No. 172]
SANITARY SEWAGE — The normal water-carried household and toilet
wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial
establishments.[Amended 6-8-1982 by Ord. No. 172]
SEWER DISTRICT — The East Norriton Sewer District No. 1 as designated
and created pursuant to Township Ordinance No. 28, as amended by
Ordinance No. 158 and Ordinance No. 172.80[Added 6-8-1982 by Ord. No.
172]
SEWER SYSTEM — Refers to the public sanitary sewer collection system,
together with appurtenant facilities now or later constructed for the Sewer
District and any improvements, additions or extensions that hereafter may
be made thereto by the Authority or the Township or to any part or parts or
any or all thereof.[Amended 6-8-1982 by Ord. No. 172]
SUPERVISORS — The group of elected officials acting as the governing
body of the Township.[Amended 6-8-1982 by Ord. No. 172]
79.Editor's Note: The definition of "Authority," which immediately preceded this definition,
added 6-8-1982 by Ord. No. 172, was repealed 11-18-2014 by Ord. No. 558.
80.Editor's Note: See §§ 162-1 and 162-2 of Art. I of this chapter.
§ 162-5 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 162-5
158:223
TOWNSHIP — The Township of East Norriton, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania, or the duly constituted and elected Municipal Authorities
thereof.[Amended 6-8-1982 by Ord. No. 172]
§ 162-6. Notice of completion. [Added 6-8-1982 by Ord. No. 172]
Whenever any portions of the sewer system are ready for public use, it
shall be the duty of the Township to cause notice of the fact to be given
by advertisement published once in one newspaper of general circulation
in the Township, and such advertisement shall state that the sewer system
may be used by all persons owning occupied buildings on property
accessible to the sewer system, subject to the payment of any connection
charges and of annual sewer rentals in amounts as may from time to time
be fixed by the Township.
§ 162-7. Connection required. [Added 6-8-1982 by Ord. No. 172]
§ 162-8. Receptacles prohibited; exception. [Added 6-8-1982 by
Ord. No. 172]
A. All persons owning any occupied building now erected upon property
accessible to the sewer system shall, at their own expense, connect
such building with the sewer system within 90 days after the date of
publication specified in § 162-6.
B. All persons owning any property accessible to the sewer system upon
which an occupied building is hereafter erected shall, at the time of the
erection of such building and at their own expense, connect the same
with the sewer system.
C. All persons owning any occupied building upon property which
hereafter becomes accessible to the sewer system shall, at their own
expense, connect such building with the sewer system within 90 days
after notice to do so from the Township.
D. Where more than one occupied building, as hereinbefore defined, is
contained in a separate structure, a single common connection to the
lateral of the sewer system shall be permitted for accommodating all
units contained in such structure, except that separate connections
shall be required for each semidetached or row-type house or structure.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person owning any property accessible to
the sewer system to erect, construct or use or maintain or cause to be
erected, constructed, used or maintained any privy, cesspool, sinkhole,
septic tank or other receptacle on such premises or otherwise for
receiving sanitary sewage after the expiration of the particular period
specified in § 162-7 hereof or otherwise at any time to erect, construct,
use or maintain any pipe, conduit, drain or other facility for the
discharge of sanitary sewage into the gutters of the Township, the
storm sewers of the Township or upon public or private property or
otherwise, except into the sewer system.
§ 162-5 EAST NORRITON CODE § 162-8
158:224
§ 162-9. Nuisance declared; abatement. [Added 6-8-1982 by Ord.
No. 172]
Any person who erects, constructs, uses or maintains a privy, cesspool,
sinkhole or septic tank on any property accessible to the sewer system or
otherwise erects, constructs, uses or maintains any pipe, conduit, drain or
other facility for the discharge of sanitary sewage in violation of this article
shall be deemed and shall be declared to be erecting, constructing and
maintaining a nuisance, which nuisance the Township is hereby authorized
and directed to abate in the manner provided by law.
§ 162-10. Compliance. [Added 6-8-1982 by Ord. No. 172]
§ 162-11. Evidence of competency. [Added 6-8-1982 by Ord. No.
172]
B. The foregoing notwithstanding, any owner of an occupied building
accessible to the sewer system who maintains facilities to discharge
sanitary sewage below the first floor of an occupied building shall be
permitted to maintain a cesspool or septic tank of the type approved by
the Montgomery County Health Department or Township Sewage
Enforcement Officer so long as said system functions properly in the
sole discretion of the Montgomery County Health Department or
Sewage Enforcement Officer. In the event of a malfunction and in all
cases involving the immediately preceding section of this article, all
cesspools or septic tanks shall be disconnected from the occupied
building and shall be properly backfilled under the direction of the
Montgomery County Health Department or Township Sewage
Enforcement Officer. [Amended 11-18-2014 by Ord. No. 558]
A. No connection shall be made to the sewer system except in compliance
with the Standard Specifications for Construction of Sanitary Sewer
Systems for East Norriton Township, which may be adopted or
amended by ordinance or resolution of the Board of Supervisors from
time to time. [Amended 11-18-2014 by Ord. No. 558]
B. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any owner of any
occupied building on property accessible to the sewer system to fail to
connect such property with the sewer system within 90 days after
having received notice to do so from the Township.
A. Persons, firms and corporations desiring to do plumbing intended to be
connected to the sewer system shall exhibit evidence of competency to
perform the connection to the Township and shall obtain a permit for
the connection from the Township, as is more specifically provided in
Township Ordinance No. 35 of January 9, 1961,81 all amendments
thereto and all resolutions or regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
81.Editor's Note: See Art. III of this chapter.
§ 162-8 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 162-11
158:225
§ 162-12. Each building to constitute separate unit. [Added
6-8-1982 by Ord. No. 172]
Each occupied building, as hereinbefore defined, whether or not the owners
thereof shall be permitted to connect two or more occupied buildings or
units by a single connection to a lateral of the sewer system or shall be
required to make separate connections for each occupied building or unit,
shall constitute a separate and distinct unit under the provisions of this
article, and the persons owning occupied buildings consisting of multiple
units contained in the same structure who violate any of the provisions of
this article shall be subject to the aforesaid fine for each and every one of
such occupied buildings or units which is in violation of the provisions of
this article.
§ 162-13. Statement of costs. [Added 6-8-1982 by Ord. No. 172]
Concurrently with the filing of the engineer's certificate of completion of
the Whitehall Road Sewer Project, F.X. Ball Associates, Inc., Township's
Engineer, shall submit its statement of costs of said project which are
eligible for assessment. The entire amount of costs deemed assessable shall
be assessed against the owners of all properties benefited, improved or
accommodated by the sanitary sewers according to the front-foot rule as
interpreted by the courts of this commonwealth. The amount of assessment
shall be determined by dividing the assessable costs of the project by the
number of assessable front feet.
§ 162-14. Assessment of corner properties. [Added 6-8-1982 by Ord.
No. 172]
The foregoing notwithstanding, owners of corner properties which are
serviced on two sides by sanitary sewers shall be assessed only on that side
of the property having the longest portion of the sanitary sewer line serving
it.
§ 162-15. Assessment bills; delinquency. [Added 6-8-1982 by Ord.
No. 172]
After determining the proper assessment charge for each property
benefited, improved or accommodated by the sanitary sewer system, the
Township shall forward assessment bills by certified mail. All assessments
shall be due and payable within 90 days from the date of mailing by
the Township. All delinquent assessment bills shall be subject to the
administrative charge specified herein, interest at 10% until paid, and shall
be a lien on the property served and shall be entered as a lien against such
B. Any plumber or other person who shall neglect or refuse to take out a
permit or comply with the provisions of this article shall not be deemed
competent to perform any work intended to be connected with the
sewers, and no work performed by such plumbers or other persons
shall be connected with any sewers.
§ 162-11 EAST NORRITON CODE § 162-15
158:226
property in the office of the Prothonotary of Montgomery County and shall
be collected in the manner provided by law for the filing and collection of
such liens or in such other manner as may be provided by law.
§ 162-16. Administrative fees; delinquency. [Added 6-8-1982 by Ord.
No. 172]
§ 162-17. Additional charges. [Added 6-8-1982 by Ord. No. 172]
In order to more rapidly respond to the need to revise, amend, increase or
decrease sewer rentals and all other charges, except assessments, relating
to the sanitary sewer system, said changes may be accomplished by
subsequent resolution or ordinance adopted by the Board of Supervisors of
East Norriton Township.
§ 162-18. Violations and penalties. [Added 6-8-1982 by Ord. No.
172; amended 12-19-1988 by Ord. No. 274]
Any person, corporation or other entity who shall violate any of the
provisions of this article or who should fail to comply with any notice
of violation herein, upon conviction before a District Justice within the
magisterial district within which the Township of East Norriton is a part,
shall be fined not more than $600 plus costs of prosecution after a summary
proceeding brought in the name of the Township before said District Justice.
A new and separate offense shall be deemed to be committed for each day
that such violation exists. In default of the payment of any fine imposed and
the costs, the person or persons that are charged may be sentenced to be
committed to the county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 162-19. Exclusive rights. [Added 6-8-1982 by Ord. No. 172]
The rights of the Township to act pursuant to the terms of the Article shall
not be deemed exclusive but shall be in addition to the rights provided to
the Township in any other ordinances, regulations, statutes or laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the United States of America.
A. The Township hereby establishes an administrative fee to be imposed
upon all persons against whom liens or other legal process must be filed
in order to collect sewer rentals, assessments, connection fees, permit
fees and other charges relating to the sanitary sewer system. Said
administrative fee shall be equal to the actual filing and legal expenses
incurred by the Township excluding other court costs incidental to the
collection of said liens or other charges. [Amended 11-18-2014 by
Ord. No. 558]
B. All delinquent sewer rental, connection fees, permit fees and other
charges relating to the sewer system shall bear interest at the highest
rate of interest permissible by law from the date said debt was due until
the date of payment.
§ 162-15 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 162-20
158:227
§ 162-20. Tapping fee. [Added 8-5-1963 by resolution; amended
3-17-1986 by Ord. No. 230; 2-23-1987 by Ord. No. 245; 7-29-1991 by
Ord. No. 302]
There is hereby imposed on each owner of property connecting to the sewer
system a tapping fee of $3,260. This charge shall be due based upon the
number of equivalent dwelling units to be served, regardless of the number
of actual connections to the sewer system. Hereinafter, the amount of the
tapping fee may be changed by resolution of the Board of Supervisors of the
Township as it may duly authorize and enact from time to time.
§ 162-21. Imposition of sewer rent.
There is hereby imposed upon each property within the limits of Sewer
District No. 1 in the Township served by the sewer system and having
the use thereof a quarterly sewer rent or charge, payable as hereinafter
provided, for the use, whether direct or indirect, of the sewer system, based
on the schedules of classifications and rates or charges herein after set
forth.
§ 162-22. Rates; rebates. [Amended 10-20-1986 by Ord. No. 237]
A. East Norriton Township adopts the sewer rate schedule for metered
water users attached hereto and made a part hereof as Exhibit A.82The
rates will start to be applied to all consumption calculated based on
water meter readings starting on June 1, 2007. [Last amended
4-17-2007 by Ord. No. 49583]
B. All domestic users owning property connecting to the sewer system and
served with water service, all of which water service is unmetered, shall
pay a quarterly flat rate rental of sanitary sewage charge of $100.52.
The rate will start to be applied starting on June 1, 2007. [Last
amended 4-17-2007 by Ord. No. 49584]
C. Multiple use. In case of a combination of two or more dwellings, units,
households, flats, apartments, stores, shops, offices or business units or
two or more families using separate cooking and/or bathroom facilities
in one dwelling having use of the sewer system through one sewer
lateral, each and every such dwelling unit, household, flat, apartment,
store, shop, office or business unit or such family shall be charged the
foregoing minimum sewer rents or charges, the same as if each such
unit or family had a direct and separate connection to the sewer system.
Sewer rents or charges in excess of such minimum shall, in the case of
metered water users, be determined by dividing the total of water
consumed, as shown by the meter readings, by the number of units or
82.Editor’s Note: Exhibit A is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
83.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that subsequent amendments to § 162-22,
Rates; rebates, may be accomplished by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
84.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that East Norriton Township reserves the right
to enter into separate contracts for the collection and treatment of sanitary sewage from
unmetered commercial, public and industrial users.
§ 162-20 EAST NORRITON CODE § 162-22
158:228
§ 162-23. Additional sewer rent for industrial wastes.
families using such single sewer connection and applying the above
rate schedule to the quantity so determined.
D. (Reserved)85
E. Rebates. No rebate will be allowed due to unoccupancy or vacancy for a
period of less than six months. [Amended 11-18-2014 by Ord. No.
558]
A. The sewer rentals and charges for collection and treatment of industrial
wastes discharged into the sewer system shall be made in accordance
with § 162-22 above. In addition thereto, further charges shall be made
for all sewage discharged into the sewer system having suspended
solids and biochemical oxygen demand in excess of the following
concentrations:
(1) Suspended solids: 350 parts per million.
(2) BOD: 300 parts per million.
B. The additional charge for sewage having concentration in excess of the
foregoing shall be based on the strength factor determined according to
the following formula:
*NOTE: Where these figures are less than 300 parts per million in
BOD or 350 parts per million in suspended solids, the value in the
parenthesis shall be equal to one.
C. In cases where the suspended solids, in the opinion of the Township, do
not represent the true characteristics of the solids loading, the
Township reserves the right to use total solids instead of suspended
solids.
D. No industrial user shall begin or continue to discharge any industrial
waste into the sewer system until he has first submitted a written
application to the Township for permission to do so, accompanied by a
detailed report prepared by a sanitary engineer registered in
Pennsylvania and satisfactory to the Township, setting forth such
information relating to such industrial waste as the Township may
require and until the Township shall have consented to such discharge.
85.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, Garbage grinders, was repealed 11-18-2014 by Ord.
No. 558.
§ 162-22 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 162-24
158:229
§ 162-24. Measuring volume of sanitary sewage.
A. Methods of measuring volume.
(1) Whenever a person purchasing all water used from the water
supplier discharges sanitary sewage into the sewer system, the
volume of water consumed, as determined from meter readings of
the water supplier, shall be used in computing the sewer rental.
(2) In cases where dwellings and establishments have sources of water
supply in addition to or other than that of the water supplier, those
dwellings and establishments shall provide a meter on such
additional or other source of supply. The total amount of water
consumed, as shown by these meter readings, will be used in
computing the sewer rental.
(3) In cases where establishments use water from the water supplier
and/or from an independent supply for industrial or recreational
purposes, such that the water so used is not discharged into the
sewer system, the quantity of water used to determine the sewer
rental shall be computed by one of the following methods:
(a) Method No. 1: by placing a meter or measuring device on the
sewer connection. The readings from this meter or measuring
device shall be used in computing the sewer rental.
(b) Method No. 2: by placing a meter or measuring device on the
effluent not discharging into the sewer system. The readings
from this meter or measuring device will then be deducted
from the total water meter readings, and the remainder will be
used in computing the sewer rental.
B. When, in the opinion of the Township, it is not practical to install meters
or measuring devices to determine the sewer rental under either
Subsection A(2) or (3) of this section, the Township may determine, in
such manner and by such method as it may prescribe, the total amount
of sanitary sewage discharged into the sewer system, and the quantity
so determined to be discharged shall be used to determine the sewer
rental. Any dispute as to the estimated quantity shall be submitted to
the Supervisors after notice of the estimate to the property owner. The
decision of the Supervisors on the matter shall be final for the current
year.
C. Measuring devices. All meters or other measuring devices not provided
by the water supplier but required to be used under the provisions of
this article shall be furnished and installed by the property owner and
shall be under the control of the Supervisors and may be tested,
inspected or repaired by Township employees whenever the
Supervisors deem necessary. The owner of the property upon which
such measuring device is installed shall be responsible for its
maintenance and safekeeping, and all repairs thereto shall be made at
the property owner's expense, whether such repairs are made
§ 162-24 EAST NORRITON CODE § 162-24
158:230
§ 162-25. Payment of charges.
§ 162-26. Delinquent charges; lien.
§ 162-27. Segregation of funds.
The funds received by the Township from the collection of the connection
charges and from sewer rentals and all penalties thereon as herein provided
necessary by ordinary wear and tear or other causes. Bills for such
repairs, if made by the Township, shall be due and payable at the
same time and collected in the same manner as are the bills for sewer
services; such bills from and after their due date shall constitute a lien
upon the property upon which such measuring device is installed.
D. Meter reading. The Township shall have the right to read all meters or
measuring devices, and they shall be available to Township employees
for meter reading at any reasonable time.
A. The above connection charge shall be payable upon application for
permit to make such connection. Sewer rentals or charges shall be paid
quarterly, and quarterly billings for sewer rentals and charges shall be
made by bills dated on the first day of January, April, July and October of
each year, beginning on such quarterly date immediately following the
quarterly calendar period on which connection is made to the sewer
system, for the quarterly calendar period or portion thereof
immediately preceding the date of the bill.
B. Payments mailed, as evidenced by the United States Post Office mark,
on or previous to the end of the period during which the bills are
payable at face will be deemed to be a payment within such period.
C. All persons connected to the sewer system must give the Township their
correct address. Failure to receive bills will not be considered an excuse
for nonpayment nor permit an extension of the period during which bills
are payable at face.
A. Quarterly charges for sewer service shall be subject to a penalty of 10%
if not paid within 30 days after the date of the bill, and the Township
shall have the right to cut off sewer service from the property where
payment has not been made and not to restore the same until all unpaid
bills against the property and the costs of cutting off and restoring
service shall have been paid.
B. All sewer rentals, together with all penalties thereon, not paid on or
before the end of six months from the date of each bill shall be deemed
to be delinquent. All delinquent sewer rentals and all penalties thereon
shall be a lien on the property served and shall be entered as a lien
against such property in the office of the Prothonotary of Montgomery
County and shall be collected in the manner provided by law for the
filing and collection of such liens.
§ 162-24 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 162-27
158:231
for and any fines collected by the Township in connection with the sewer
system shall be segregated and kept separate and apart from all other funds
of the Township and shall be used only for the purpose of defraying the
expenses of the Township in the operation, maintenance, repair, alteration,
inspection, depreciation or other expenses in relation to such sewer system,
including periodic payments due under an agreement with the East
Norriton-Plymouth Joint Sewer Authority for the treatment and disposal of
sewage and for such payments as the Township may be required to make
under any lease it may enter into for and of or in connection with said sewer
system with the East Norriton Township Municipal Authority, in accordance
with the provisions of the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended.86
§ 162-28. Amendments.
The Township reserves the right to and may from time to time adopt, revise,
amend and readopt such rules and regulations as it deems necessary and
proper for the use and operation of the sewer system, and all such rules
and regulations shall be and become a part of this article. In respect to
sewage treatment service, the Township hereby adopts the current rules
and regulations of the East Norriton-Plymouth Joint Sewer Authority, copies
of which rules and regulations are on file and may be examined at the
Township Building, 2828 Swede Road, Norristown, Pennsylvania.
§ 162-29. On-site sewer fees. [Added 11-7-1983 by Res. No. 1017]
A. On-site sanitary sewer permit fees are as follows:
(1) Standard on-site system: $100 per permit issued.
(2) Alternate on-site system: $175 per permit issued.
(3) Holding tank system: initially, reimbursement of cost of Sewage
Enforcement Officer (SEO) processing time to date of issuance of
permit, per permit issued.
B. Additional holding tank system fee. In addition to the above initial
permit fee for a holding tank system, the applicant will be required to
reimburse the Township for the cost of SEO review and inspection
during the installation of the system before hookup of user(s) is
permitted.
C. Application fee. At the time of application for any of the systems
described in Subsection A above, a nonrefundable fee of $30 will be
paid by the applicant to the SEO. If a permit is issued, this fee of $30
will be applied toward the appropriate fee set in Subsection A above.
However, if the issuance of a permit is not approved, the application fee
of $30 will not be refunded to the applicant. In the event that a
reapplication is made by an applicant for a different type of on-site
86.Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. §5601 et seq.
§ 162-27 EAST NORRITON CODE § 162-29
158:232
sanitary sewer system after a prior disapproval of another system, a
new application fee must be paid.
§ 162-29 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 162-29
158:233

ARTICLE III
Sewer Connection Regulations
[Adopted 1-9-1961 by Ord. No. 35]
§ 162-30. Compliance.
No person required to connect to the East Norriton Township sewer system
shall make or provide for such connection except in compliance with the
terms of this article.
§ 162-30.1. Inspection of sewer laterals. [Added 2-20-2007 by Ord.
No. 490]
The Township may, upon five days' notice, inspect and/or televise the sewer
lateral on any property within the Township to determine the condition of
the sewer lateral. Any such inspection and/or televising shall take place
only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday,
and the owner of the property shall make all areas to be inspected and/or
televised available to the Township upon request. If, in its sole discretion,
the Township determines that the sewer lateral is in an unacceptable
condition, the sewer lateral shall be repaired or replaced by the owner
of the property, at the owner's expense, within 90 days of the date that
the Township notifies the property owner that the sewer lateral is in an
unacceptable condition. The Township shall confirm by inspection that the
sewer lateral has been satisfactorily repaired or replaced. If the owner of
the property fails to repair or replace the sewer lateral, as appropriate,
within 90 days, the Township shall be permitted to make such repair or
replacement and assess the property owner the cost thereof.
§ 162-31. Services of registered plumber required.
A. All persons required to connect to the East Norriton Township sewer
system shall obtain the services of a registered plumber as set forth
under Ordinance No. 29 of said Township or its amendments.87
B. All registered plumbers qualifying under Ordinance No. 29 aforesaid
shall make sewer connection installations in strict compliance with the
terms of this article as follows:
(1) Permits; inspections; fees. Registered plumbers shall obtain a
permit from said Township for each property required to connect to
the sewer system, and a permit fee and inspection fees shall
accompany each application therefor. The amount of the permit fee
and inspection fees shall be determined and fixed by resolution of
the Township Supervisors as from time to time may be reasonable
and necessary.
(2) Plans and specifications. Plans and specifications prepared by a
registered engineer may be required in duplicate with the
87.Editor's Note: Said Ord. No. 29 was repealed 4-20-1981 by Ord. No. 172.
§ 162-30 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 162-31
158:235
§ 162-32. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1988 by Ord.
No. 274]
Any person, corporation or other entity who shall violate any of the
provisions of this article or who should fail to comply with any notice
of violation herein, upon conviction before a District Justice within the
magisterial district within which the Township of East Norriton is a part,
shall be fined not more than $600 plus costs of prosecution after a summary
preceding brought in the name of the Township before said District Justice.
A new and separate offense shall be deemed to be committed for each day
that such violation exists. In default of the payment of any fine imposed and
application for a permit for sewer construction on commercial
and industrial properties or when required for special conditions
by either the Township or the East Norriton Township Municipal
Authority.
(3) Inspection and approval. The plumber shall notify the inspector
appointed by the Township prior to the starting of any work and
prior to backfilling. The plumber shall have approval of the
installations by the inspector before putting the sewer in use.
(4) Materials and installation. [Amended 7-11-1972 by Ord. No. 83;
12-15-1997 by Ord. No. 380; 7-14-1998 by Ord. No. 39388]
(a) Installation, maintenance and repair of sanitary sewer mains,
manholes and laterals from the main to the edge of the right-ofway,
property line or four feet inside the curb, whichever is
greater, shall be constructed in compliance with the document
known as the "Standard Specifications for Construction of
Sanitary Sewer Systems for East Norriton Township."
[Amended 11-18-2014 by Ord. No. 558]
(b) Installation, maintenance and repair of sanitary sewer laterals
on private property which are not required to comply with
subsection B(4)(a) above shall comply with the Pennsylvania
Uniform Construction Code. An additional cleanout with a
tight-fitting plug shall be installed at the connection of the
private sewer lateral to the sewer system, but shall be located
outside of the ultimate legal right-of-way and shall not be in a
walkway or driveway. Exceptions to location requirements for
repairs to existing installations may be made at the discretion
of the Township. [Amended 11-18-2014 by Ord. No. 558]
(c) Manholes shall be provided at the connection of any private
building sewer of eight inches or larger nominal size to the
public sewer. Manhole construction shall comply with
Subsection B(4)(a) above.
88.Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Subsection B(5), Installation, which
immediately followed this subsection.
§ 162-31 EAST NORRITON CODE § 162-32
158:236
the costs, the person or persons that are charged may be sentenced to be
committed to the county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 162-33. Sewer inspection fees. [Added 8-5-1963 by resolution]
The sewer inspection charges are herewith fixed as follows:
A. New single-family homes or additions thereto:
(1) Initial inspection charge: $10.
(2) Inspection charge per trap: $3.
(3) Inspection charge per disposal unit: $5.
(4) Sewer pump charge per unit: $5.
B. All structures other than single-family dwellings as set forth above,
including but not limited to commercial, industrial or apartment
structures, are fixed as follows:
(1) Initial inspection fee: $10.
(2) Initial inspection fee if structure contains more than one unit, per
unit, including five traps: $10.
(3) Sewer pump charge per unit: $5.
(4) Inspection charge per disposal unit: $5.
C. In addition to the above charges, the Township retains the right to
change such additional inspection charges, or reinspection charges in
accordance with the above schedule, on any and all structures when the
same becomes appropriate or necessary to ensure adequate and proper
installation pursuant to East Norriton sewer installation requirements
as made and provided.
§ 162-32 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 162-33
158:237

ARTICLE IV
Holding Tanks
[Adopted 5-4-1976 by Ord. No. 124]
§ 162-34. Intent. [Amended 2-8-1977 by Ord. No. 132]
The intent of this article is to establish procedures for the use and
maintenance of holding tanks designed to receive and retain sewage from
certain residential, commercial or industrial uses, and it is hereby declared
that the enactment of this article is necessary for the protection, benefit
and preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of
this Township during the time that a connection ban imposed by the
Environmental Protection Agency is in effect.
§ 162-35. Definitions.
A. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the singular
include the plural, words in the plural include the singular, and words
used in the present tense include the future. The word "shall" is always
mandatory.
B. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors of East Norriton Township,
Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, or its authorized representative.
HOLDING TANK — A watertight receptacle which receives and retains
sewage and is designed and constructed to facilitate ultimate disposal
of the sewage at another site. "Holding tank" includes but is not limited
to the following:
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within the Township upon
which there is erected a residential, commercial or industrial structure
intended for continuous or periodic occupancy or use by human beings
or animals and from which structure sewage shall or may be
discharged.[Amended 2-8-1977 by Ord. No. 132; 11-18-2014 by
Ord. No. 558]
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole
or partial, of any property located in the Township.
CHEMICAL TOILET — A toilet using chemicals that discharge to a
holding tank.
(1)
RETENTION TANK — A holding tank where sewage is conveyed to
it by a water-carrying system.
(2)
VAULT PIT PRIVY — A holding tank designed to receive sewage
where water under pressure is not available.
(3)
§ 162-34 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 162-35
158:239
§ 162-36. Authorization of Board to control.
§ 162-37. Conformity.
All such rules and regulations adopted by the Board shall be in conformity
with the provisions herein, all other ordinances of the Township, all
applicable laws and applicable rules and regulations of administrative
agencies of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, particularly the
Department of Environmental Resources, and, in particular, the regulations
set forth in Chapter 71, Sections 71.51 and 71.52, and Chapter 73, Sections
73.81 and 73.82.89
§ 162-38. Maintenance required. [Amended 11-18-2014 by Ord. No.
558]
All applications for holding tank systems shall include a contract for
maintenance by a disposal agency approved by the Board. Such contract
shall include but not be limited to the name of the contractor, method
of maintenance, method of disposal, frequency of inspection and ultimate
place of disposal of all waste. Such contract shall be required to remain in
force for the entire period of operation of the system. Failure by the owner
to renew such contract or submit proof of another approved contract shall
constitute a violation of this article. The system must be inspected by the
approved disposal agency a minimum of three times per year. Further, prior
to the issuance of any building permits for any residential dwelling that
will utilize a holding tank, financial security in a form acceptable to the
Township must be posted with the Township in an amount equal to three
PERSON or PERSONS — Any person or persons, male or female,
corporation, partnership, association, company, individual, owner,
occupant, lessee, tenant or any organization.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products
or excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or
animals and any noxious or deleterious substance being harmful or
inimical to the public health or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of
water for domestic water supply or for recreation.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of East Norriton, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania.
A. Rights and privileges granted. The Board is hereby authorized and
empowered to undertake within the Township the control and methods
of holding tank sewage disposal and the collection and transportation
thereof.
B. Rules and regulations. The Board is hereby authorized and empowered
to adopt by resolution such rules and regulations concerning sewage
which it may deem necessary from time to time to effect the purposes
herein.
89.Editor's Note: See 71 P.S. § 510-1 et seq.
§ 162-35 EAST NORRITON CODE § 162-38
158:240
years' contract price for sewage removal and for the cost of removal of the
holding tank as estimated by the Township Engineer, which shall run for
the entire period that the holding tank is to be in use. This guarantee shall
be conditioned upon the landowner or, in the case of a development, the
developer maintaining the holding tank system in accordance with the rules
and regulations of this article.
§ 162-39. Authorization to set fees and charges.
The Board shall, by resolution, have the power to fix, alter, charge and
collect such fees or costs as may be necessary to properly enforce this
article.
§ 162-40. Use and occupancy permits.
By obtaining permission to use a holding tank under this article, the owner
of the subject property shall agree that any failure to make timely removal
of the contents of the holding tank or any other violation of this article or
sanitary requirements will subject the owner to an automatic revocation of
the use and occupancy permits issued for the subject properties.90
§ 162-41. Collection, transportation and disposal of sewage.
[Amended 11-18-2014 by Ord. No. 558]
The collection and transportation of all sewage from any improved property
using a holding tank shall be done solely by or under the direction of the
Board, and the disposal thereof shall be made only at such site or sites
as may be approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
§ 162-42. Duties of owner of improved property.
The owner of an improved property that utilizes a holding tank, or a
developer in the case of a development, shall:
A. Maintain the holding tank in conformance with this article or any
ordinance of this Township, the provisions of any applicable law and the
rules and regulations of the Board and any administrative agency of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. Permit only an approved agency acting in accordance with the
regulations of the Board to collect, transport and dispose of the
contents therein.
C. Install prior to the approval of any holding tank an approved public
sewage system serving the lot to be connected to the holding tank to
ensure future connection with the public sewer system.
D. Connect within 30 days after notice from the Township to the public
sewer system. [Amended 11-18-2014 by Ord. No. 558]
90.Editor's Note: See Ch. 190, Use and occupancy permits.
§ 162-38 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 162-42
158:241
§ 162-43. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1988 by Ord.
No. 274]
Any person, corporation or other entity who shall violate any of the
provisions of this article or who should fail to comply with any notice
of violation herein, upon conviction before a District Justice within the
magisterial district within which the Township of East Norriton is a part,
shall be fined not more than $600 plus costs of prosecution after a summary
proceeding brought in the name of the Township before said District Justice.
A new and separate offense shall be deemed to be committed for each day
that such violation exists. In default of the payment of any fine imposed and
the costs, the person or persons that are charged may be sentenced to be
committed to the county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 162-44. Abatement of nuisance.
In addition to any other remedies provided in this article, any violation of
this article may be deemed to constitute a nuisance and may be abated
by the Board by either seeking appropriate equitable or legal relief from a
court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 162-45. Amendment of Official Plan.
The appropriate officials of the Township are directed to take such action as
may be necessary to amend the Official Plan of East Norriton Township to
implement the purposes of this article.
§ 162-45.1. Standards; fee. [Added 4-16-1990 by Ord. No. 286]
E. Remove the holding tank system within 30 days after connection to the
public sewer system.
F. Within 24 hours of the execution of an agreement of sale for the sale of
any lot to be connected to a holding tank, submit to the Township an
executed statement in form to be designed by the Township Zoning
Officer in which the purchaser acknowledges that the purchaser has
been advised of the terms of this article and understands the
procedures, penalties and fines for noncompliance with this article.
A. Capacity.
(1) The minimum capacity of a holding tank shall be 1,000 gallons or a
volume equal to the quantity of wastes generated in three days,
whichever is larger.
(2) In calculating sewage flow for a single-family dwelling unit, a
minimum daily flow of 230 gallons per day shall be used to
determine holding tank capacity. This figure shall be increased by
100 gallons for each additional bedroom over three. The daily flow
indicated provides for use of garbage grinders, automatic washing
§ 162-42 EAST NORRITON CODE § 162-45.1
158:242
machines or dishwashers and water softeners. [Amended
11-18-2014 by Ord. No. 558]
(3) Holding tanks may be connected in series to attain required
capacity.
(4) Tanks connected together in series cannot exceed four in number
and must comply with Subsection B(4) of this section.
(5) Industrial/commercial applications will follow daily flow
calculations outlined in Chapter 73, § 73.17, of Title 25 of the
Pennsylvania Code, entitled "Sewage Flows," or such other
regulations as the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection may enact from time to time. [Amended 11-18-2014
by Ord. No. 558]
B. Construction.
(1) Holding tanks shall be watertight and constructed of sound and
durable material not subject to excessive corrosion or decay.
(a) Precast concrete tanks shall have a minimum wall thickness of
three inches, a minimum lid thickness of four inches, a
minimum concrete strength of 3,500 pounds per square inch at
28 days and shall be adequately reinforced. The wall and lid
thickness shall be evaluated on a case-by-case basis and shall
be a function of the capacity required for the individual use.
(b) Holding tanks having a liquid capacity of 5,000 gallons or less
shall be precast concrete construction. Holding tanks above
5,000 gallons shall be evaluated on a case-by-case basis.
(2) Holding tanks shall be placed on an approved base listed below:
(a) If soil is found to be devoid of moisture, a bed of crushed stone
(a minimum of 12 inches in thickness) may be used.
(b) If the area of placement of holding tanks shows indication of
moisture, a concrete base pad will be required to prevent
flotation of the holding tank. In the instance where high
moisture content (groundwater) is evident, the Sewage
Enforcement Officer or Engineer of East Norriton Township
may direct additional requirements at his or her discretion.
(3) Holding tanks shall have access as specified below:
(a) Access to each tank shall be provided by a manhole of at least
21 inches square or in diameter, with a removable cover. The
top of the tank containing the manhole or the top of a manhole
extension shall not be more than 12 inches below grade level.
If access is extended to grade, the access cover shall be sealed
with a synthetic resin sealant or equivalent. Grade level or
above grade level access covers shall be secured by bolts or
§ 162-45.1 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 162-45.1
158:243
locking mechanisms or have sufficient weight to prevent
access by children.
(b) The ground shall slope away from any access extended to
grade or above.
(4) Installation of sanitary sewer lines from the building to the tank
shall conform to all Township plumbing regulations in effect at the
time of installation. If more than one tank is used at a location to
obtain desired capacity, equalization lines must be placed at the
upper and lower sections of the tanks where they join together.
(5) Each holding tank is required to have one vent. This vent shall be
constructed to a maximum diameter of four inches PVC plastic pipe
with the top of pipe extended a minimum of 12 inches above grade.
The top of this pipe shall be capped with a U vent which shall be
opened toward the ground surface.
(6) An alarm system is required for each holding tank installation.
(a) The alarm system shall consist of a warning device to indicate
when the tank is filled within 75% of its capacity.
(b) The warning device shall create an audible and visual signal at
a location frequented by the homeowner or responsible
individual.
C. Protection.
(1) The area where holding tanks are to be located shall be protected
in a manner that vehicles cannot drive over the tanks from the
access area. If this situation can not be avoided, then the holding
tanks must be designed to withstand Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation H-20 Loading, or latest revisions. This shall be
reviewed on a case-by-case basis by the Township Engineer.
(2) All horizontal isolation distances, as outlined in Chapter 73,
§ 73.13, of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code, concerning treatment
tanks, or in such other regulations as may be enacted by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection from time to
time, shall be maintained with respect to holding tanks. [Amended
11-18-2014 by Ord. No. 558]
D. State regulations.
(1) The installation of holding tanks is regulated by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection, which has established a
permitting procedure. This procedure requires submission of a
planning module postcard, a complete application, on-site
examination/testing and permitting of installation and a hauling
agreement with the hauler. The owner shall comply with the
permitting procedure of the Pennsylvania Department of
§ 162-45.1 EAST NORRITON CODE § 162-45.1
158:244
Environmental Protection. [Amended 11-18-2014 by Ord. No.
558]
(2) When any holding tank is no longer in active use it shall be
removed, collapsed or filled with a suitable material, approved by
the Sewage Enforcement Officer or Engineer of East Norriton
Township.
E. Fees. A fee will be charged for each holding tank installed in the
Township. This fee shall be set from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors and will cover planning module submission,
application fee, site examination/testing and the permitting procedure.
§ 162-45.1 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 162-45.1
158:245

ARTICLE V
Wastewater Collection System
[Adopted 10-26-2010 by Ord. No. 53091]
§ 162-46. Purpose; objectives.
A. This article sets uniform requirements for direct and indirect
contributors from East Norriton Township ("Township") into the
wastewater collection system of the East Norriton-Plymouth-Whitpain
Joint Sewer Authority ("Joint Sewer Authority") and enables the Joint
Sewer Authority to comply with all applicable state and federal laws
required by the Clean Water Act of 1977 (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) and
the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR Part 403, as amended).
B. The objectives of this article are:
(1) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Joint Sewer
Authority's wastewater collection system ("POTW") which will
interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the
resulting sludge at the POTW servicing the Township.
(2) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which will
pass-through the system inadequately treated into receiving waters
or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system.
(3) To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and
sludges from the system.
(4) To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of operating the
wastewater collection system.
(5) To protect the general public and treatment works personnel who
may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their
employment.
(6) To enable the Joint Sewer Authority to comply with its National
Pollution Discharge Elimination System ("NPDES") permit
conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other
federal or state laws to which the POTW is subject; and to empower
the POTW to enforce penalties against violators as required by its
Enforcement Response Guide and by federal and state law.
C. This article provides for the regulations of direct and indirect
contributors to the POTW through the issuance of permits to certain
nondomestic users, and through enforcement of general requirements
for the other users; authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities;
requires user reporting; assumes that existing customer's capacity will
not be preempted; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable
distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein.
91.Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. V, Wastewater Collection
System, adopted 7-22-2008 by Ord. No. 508.
§ 162-46 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 162-47
158:247
§ 162-47. Applicability; administrative officer.
This article shall apply to the persons in the Township and to persons
outside the Township who are users or significant users of the Township's
collection systems and the POTW. Except as otherwise provided herein, the
Joint Sewer Authority, with notification to the Township, shall administer,
implement, and enforce the provisions of this article.
§ 162-48. Definitions; abbreviations.
A. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms
and phrases as used in this article shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated:
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the "Clean Water Act," as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The Regional Administrator of EPA, Region
III.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL, COMMERCIAL,
INSTITUTIONAL, OR SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER —
If the user is a corporation:
The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any
other person who performs similar policy or decision-making
functions for the corporation; or
(a)
The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or
operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to
make management decisions that govern the operation of the
regulated facility, including having the explicit or implicit duty
of making major capital investment recommendations, and
initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure
long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws
and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are
established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate
information for individual wastewater discharge requirements;
and where authority to sign documents has been assigned
or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate
procedures.
(b)
(1)
If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner
or proprietor, respectively.
(2)
If the user is a federal, state, or local facility: a director or highest
official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and
performance of the activities of the government facility, or their
designee.
(3)
§ 162-47 EAST NORRITON CODE § 162-48
158:248
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS) — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in
§ 162-49A and B. BMPs include treatment requirements, operating
procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks,
sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. BMPs
also include alternative means (i.e., management plans) of complying
with, or in place of certain established categorical pretreatment
standards and effluent limits.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure, five days at 20° C., expressed in terms of weight
and concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/L)).
BUILDING SEWER — A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises
of a user to the POTW.
CATEGORICAL STANDARDS or CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT
STANDARDS — Any regulation, heretofore or hereafter adopted by the
United States Environmental Protection Agency, containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with Section 307(b)
and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) that apply to a specific category
of users and that appear in 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts
405-471.
CONVENTIONAL POLLUTANT — A water pollutant that is amenable to
treatment by a municipal wastewater treatment plant. These pollutants
consist of, but are not limited to, biochemical oxygen demand (BOD),
total suspended solids (TSS), oil and grease, pH, ammonia and
phosphorous.
COOLING WATER — The water discharged from any use, such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant
added is heat.
DAILY MAXIMUM — The arithmetic average of all effluent samples for
a pollutant collected during a calendar day or twenty-four-hour period.
DAILY MAXIMUM LIMIT — The maximum allowable discharge limit of
a pollutant during a calendar day or twenty-four-hour period. Where
daily maximum limits are expressed in units of mass, the daily
discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of the day.
Where daily maximum limits are expressed in terms of a concentration,
the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the
pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day.
The individuals described in Subsection A(1) through (3), above,
may designate another authorized representative if the
authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the
individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the
facility from which the discharge originates or having overall
responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the
written authorization is submitted to the Joint Sewer Authority.
(4)
§ 162-48 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 162-48
158:249
DIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge of treated or untreated
wastewater directly to the waters of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA) — The United States
Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate, the term may
also be used as a designation for the Administrator or other duly
authorized official of said agency.
EXISTING SOURCE — Any source of discharge that is not a new source.
GRAB SAMPLE — A grab sample is an individual sample which is taken
from a waste stream on a one-time basis without regard to the flow in
the waste stream. These samples must be collected over a period of
time not exceeding 15 minutes. A grab sample shows the waste stream
characteristics at the time the sample is taken.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE — The discharge or the
introduction of pollutants into the collection system from any
nondomestic source.
INDUSTRIAL, COMMERCIAL OR INSTITUTIONAL USER — An
industrial, commercial or institutional source of indirect discharge.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Shall have the meaning ascribed to it in the
Act of June 22, 1937 (P.L. 1987, No. 394) known as the "Clean Stream
Law"92 and the regulations adopted thereunder.
INSTANTANEOUS LIMIT — The maximum concentration of a pollutant
allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis
of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the
industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the
POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes,
use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the POTW's
NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal
in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions
or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local
regulations: Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act,
including Title II, commonly referred to as the "Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act" (RCRA)93; any state regulations contained in any
state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the
Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act;94 the Toxic Substances
Control Act,95 and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries
Act.96
92.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
93.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.
94.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 7401 et seq.
95.Editor's Note: See 15 U.S.C. § 2601 et seq.
96.Editor's Note: See 40 CFR § 403.03(i).
§ 162-48 EAST NORRITON CODE § 162-48
158:250
LOCAL LIMIT — Specific discharge limits developed and enforced by
the Joint Sewer Authority upon industrial or commercial facilities to
implement the general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in 40
CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b) or § 162-49A and B of this article.
MEDICAL WASTE — Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood
and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts,
contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated
laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.
MONTHLY AVERAGE — The sum of all daily discharges measured
during a calendar month divided by the number of daily discharges
measured during that month.
MONTHLY AVERAGE LIMIT — The highest allowable average of daily
discharges over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all daily
discharges measured during a calendar month divided by the number
of daily discharges measured during that month.
NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM or
NPDES PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act
(33 U.S.C. § 1342).
NATIONAL PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS — Any regulation
developed under the authority of 307(b) of the Act and contained in 40
CFR Section 403.5(a) and (b).
NEW SOURCE —
Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is
(or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment
standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable
to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in
accordance with that section, provided that:
The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at
a site at which no other source is located; or
(a)
The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces
the process or production equipment that causes the discharge
of pollutants at an existing source; or
(b)
The production or wastewater-generating process of the
building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In
determining whether these are substantially independent,
factors such as the extent to which the new facility is
integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the
new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as
the existing source, should be considered.
(c)
(1)
Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results
in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does
(2)
§ 162-48 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 162-48
158:251
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used for cooling which
does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate
product, waste product, or finished product.
PASS-THROUGH — A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of
the United States in quantities or concentrations which alone, or in
conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a
cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit,
including an increase in the magnitude or duration of violation.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity, any other legal entity or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include
the feminine, and the singular shall include the plural where indicated
by the context.
pH — A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in
standard units.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes,
biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural, and
industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g.,
temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).
not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting
the criteria of Subsection A(1)(b) or (c) above but otherwise alters,
replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment.
Construction of new source as defined under this paragraph has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site
construction program:
Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
[1]
Significant site preparation work, including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or
facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly,
or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
[2]
(a)
Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in
its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase
or contracts which can be terminated or modified without
substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and
design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under
this definition.
(b)
(3)
§ 162-48 EAST NORRITON CODE § 162-48
158:252
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such
pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained
by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or
by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants
unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a
pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or STANDARDS — Pretreatment
standards shall mean prohibited discharge standards, categorical
pretreatment standards, and local limits.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED
DISCHARGES — Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain
substances; these prohibitions appear in § 162-49 of this article.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) — A treatment
works, as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292) which is
owned by the Joint Sewer Authority. This definition includes any devices
or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and
reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any
conveyances which convey wastewater to the treatment plant.
SEPTIC TANK WASTE — Any sewage from holding tanks such as
vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.
SEWAGE — Human excrement and gray water (household showers,
dishwashing operations, etc.).
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER —
Except as provided in Subsection A(2) and (3) of this definition:
All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards; or
(a)
Any other industrial user that discharges an average of 25,000
gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the POTW
(excluding sanitary, noncontract cooling and boiler blow-down
wastewater); contributes a process waste stream which makes
up 5% or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic
capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or is designated as
such by the Joint Sewer Authority on the basis that it has
a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement [in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6)].
(b)
(1)
The Joint Sewer Authority may determine that an industrial user
subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.6
and 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N is a nonsignificant categorical
(2)
§ 162-48 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 162-48
158:253
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE — An industrial user is in significant
noncompliance if its violation meets one or more of the specific criteria
set forth in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(viii). For purposes of this definition, an
industrial user is in significant noncompliance if its violation meets one
or more of the following criteria:
industrial user rather than a significant industrial user on a finding
that the industrial user never discharged more than 100 gallons
per day (gpd) of total categorical wastewater (excluding sanitary,
noncontact cooling and boiler blow-down wastewater, unless
specifically included in the pretreatment standard) and the
following conditions are met:
The industrial user, prior to the Joint Sewer Authority's finding,
has consistently complied with all applicable categorical
pretreatment standards and requirements;
(a)
The industrial user annually submits the certification
statement required in 40 CFR 403.12(q) together with any
additional information necessary to support the certification
statement; and
(b)
The industrial user never discharges any untreated
concentrated wastewater.
(c)
Upon a finding that an industrial user meeting the criteria in
Subsection A(1)(b) above has no reasonable potential for adversely
affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment
standards or requirement, the Joint Sewer Authority may at any
time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received
from an industrial user or POTW, and in accordance with 40 CFR
403.8(f)(6), determine that such industrial user is not a significant
industrial user.
(3)
Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken
for the same pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period
exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or
requirement, including instantaneous limits as defined in § 162-48;
(1)
Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each
pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds
the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement,
including instantaneous limits, as defined by § 162-48, multiplied
by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease,
and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
(2)
Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement
as defined by § 162-48 (daily maximum, long-term average,
instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the Joint Sewer
Authority determines has caused, alone or in combination with
(3)
§ 162-48 EAST NORRITON CODE § 162-48
158:254
SLUG LOAD or SLUG DISCHARGE — Any discharge at a flow rate or
concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge
standards in § 162-49 of this article. A slug discharge is any discharge
of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an
accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge, which has a
reasonable potential to cause interference or pass-through, or in any
other way violate the Joint Sewer Authority's and/or POTW's
regulations, local limits or permit conditions.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification
pursuant to the standard industrial Classification Manual issued by the
United States Office of Management and Budget.
STATE — Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including
snowmelt.
SUPERINTENDENT — The person designated by the POTW to
supervise the operation of the POTW, and who is charged with certain
duties and responsibilities by this article, or a duly authorized
representative.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS or SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total
suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in,
water, wastewater, or other liquids, and which is removable by
laboratory filtering.
other discharges, interference or pass-through, including
endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public;
Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to the public or to the environment or has resulted
in the Joint Sewer Authority's exercise of its emergency authority
under this article to halt or prevent such a discharge;
(4)
Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in this article, a
wastewater discharge permit or in an enforcement order.
(5)
Failure to provide, within 45 days after the due date, required
reports such as baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance
with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic selfmonitoring
reports, and reports on compliance with compliance
schedules;
(6)
(7) Failure to accurately report noncompliance;
Any other violation or group of violations that may include a
violation of BMPs, which the Joint Sewer Authority determines
will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local
pretreatment program.
(8)
§ 162-48 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 162-48
158:255
§ 162-49. Prohibited discharge standards.
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed
as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the EPA
under the provision of CWA 307(a) or other acts.
USER OR INDUSTRIAL USER — A source of indirect discharge.
WASTEWATER — Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and
sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial
and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, together with any
groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present,
whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to
enter the POTW.
B. Abbreviations. The following abbreviations shall have the designated
meanings:
BMP Best management practice
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
COD Chemical oxygen demand
EPA Environmental Protection Agency
L Liter
mg Milligrams
mg/L Milligrams per liter
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
POTW Publicly owned treatment works
SIC Standard Industrial Classification
SWDA Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. 6901 et seq.
USC United States Code
TSS Total suspended solids
A. General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced
into the POTW any pollutants or wastewater which causes pass-through
or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the
POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment
standards or any other national, state or local pretreatment standards
or requirements.
B. Specific prohibitions. No person shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or
wastewater:
(1) Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup
§ 162-48 EAST NORRITON CODE § 162-49
158:256
flashpoint of less than 140° F. (60° C.) using the test methods
specified in 40 CFR 261.21;
(2) Wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 or more than 9.0, or
otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or
equipment;
(3) Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause
obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference, but in
no case solids greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension, animal guts
or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails,
whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or
marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags,
spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, petroleum products
(including plastics, gasoline, tar, asphalt residues, residues from
refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil), mud, glass
grinding, or polishing wastes;
(4) Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant
concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other
pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW;
(5) Wastewater having a temperature greater than 120° F. (49° C.), or
which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting
in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the
temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed
104° F. (40° C.);
(6) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through;
(7) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems;
(8) Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the Superintendent in accordance with § 162-50D of
this article;
(9) Noxious or malodorous liquids (including automobile antifreeze),
gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public
nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for
maintenance or repair;
(10)Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to
the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the POTW's
NPDES permit;
§ 162-49 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 162-49
158:257
§ 162-49.1. Categorical pretreatment standards.
The categorical pretreatment standards now found or hereafter found at 40
CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N Parts 405-471, are hereby incorporated in
this article by reference as though set forth in full and shall apply to users,
including categorical industrial users, pursuant to the definitions set forth
in this article and as set forth in the Ordinance.
(11)Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations and the
requirements of the Joint Sewer Authority;
(12) Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate,
deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted
wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the Joint Sewer
Authority;
(13) Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes;
(14) Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the POTW in a
wastewater discharge permit;
(15)Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources,
the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test or causing
noncompliance with sludge disposal requirements;
(16) Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may
cause excessive foaming in the POTW;
(17) Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in
concentrations greater than 100 mg/l;
(18)Wastewater causing two readings on an explosion hazard meter at
the point of discharge into the POTW, or at any point in the POTW,
of more than 5% or any single reading over 10%;
(19) Any toxic or hazardous waste that if otherwise disposed of would be
considered hazardous or toxic waste as defined in the Act or in
RCRA.
C. Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall
not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be
discharged to the POTW.
A. Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms
of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the
Joint Sewer Authority may impose equivalent concentration or mass
limits in accordance with § 162-49.1E and F.
B. When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are expressed
only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the
§ 162-49 EAST NORRITON CODE § 162-49.1
158:258
Superintendent may convert the limits to equivalent limitations
expressed either as mass of pollutant discharged per day or effluent
concentration for purposes of calculating effluent limitations applicable
to individual industrial users.
C. When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is
mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the Joint
Sewer Authority shall impose an alternate limit using the combined
waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
D. A user may obtain a net/gross adjustment to a categorical pretreatment
standard in accordance with the following subsections of this section:
(1) Categorical pretreatment standards may be adjusted to reflect the
presence of pollutants in the industrial user's intake water in
accordance with this section. Any industrial user wishing to obtain
credit for intake pollutants must make application to the Joint
Sewer Authority. Upon request of the industrial user, the applicable
standard will be calculated on a "net" basis (i.e., adjusted to reflect
credit for pollutants in the intake water) if the requirements of
Subsection D(2) of this section are met.
(2) Criteria.
(a) Either the applicable categorical pretreatment standards
contained in 40 CFR Subchapter N specifically provide that
they shall be applied on a net basis; or the industrial user
demonstrates that the control system it proposes or uses to
meet applicable categorical pretreatment standards would, if
properly installed and operated, meet the standards in the
absence of pollutants in the intake waters.
(b) Credit for generic pollutants such as biochemical oxygen
demand (BOD), total suspended solids (TSS), and oil and
grease should not be granted unless the industrial user
demonstrates that the constituents of the general measure in
the user's effluent are substantially similar to the constituents
of the generic measure in the intake water or unless
appropriate additional limits are placed on process water
pollutants either at the outfall or elsewhere.
(c) Credit shall be granted only to the extent necessary to meet
the applicable categorical pretreatment standard(s), up to a
maximum value equal to the influent value. Additional
monitoring may be necessary to determine eligibility for
credits and compliance with standard(s) adjusted under this
section.
(d) Credit shall be granted only if the user demonstrates that the
intake water is drawn from the same body of water as that into
which the POTW discharges. The Joint Sewer Authority may
§ 162-49.1 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 162-49.1
158:259
waive this requirement if it finds that no environmental
degradation will result.
E. When a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of
pollutant concentrations, an industrial user may request that the Joint
Sewer Authority convert the limits to equivalent mass limits with the
exception of categorical concentration-based limits for pollutants such
as pH, temperature, radiation, or any other pollutants for which mass
limits are not appropriate. The determination to convert concentration
limits to mass limits is within the discretion of the Joint Sewer Authority.
The Joint Sewer Authority may establish equivalent mass limits only if
the industrial user meets all the conditions set forth in § 162-49.1
E(1)(a) through (e) below.
(1) To be eligible for equivalent mass limits, the industrial user must:
(a) Employ, or demonstrate that it will employ, water conservation
methods and technologies that substantially reduce water use
during the term of its individual wastewater discharge permit;
(b) Currently use control and treatment technologies adequate to
achieve compliance with the applicable categorical
pretreatment standard, and not have used dilution as a
substitute for treatment;
(c) Provide sufficient information to establish the facility's actual
average daily flow rate for all waste streams, based on data
from a continuous effluent flow monitoring device, as well as
the facility's long-term average production rate. Both the
actual average daily flow rate and the long-term average
production rate must be representative of current operating
conditions;
(d) Not have daily flow rates, production levels, or pollutant levels
that vary so significantly that equivalent mass limits are not
appropriate to control the discharge; and
(e) Have consistently complied with all applicable categorical
pretreatment standards during the period prior to the
industrial user's request for equivalent mass limits.
(2) An industrial user subject to equivalent mass limits must:
(a) Maintain and effectively operate control and treatment
technologies adequate to achieve compliance with the
equivalent mass limits.
(b) Continue to record the facility's flow rates through the use of a
continuous effluent flow monitoring device;
(c) Continue to record the facility's production rates and notify the
Joint Sewer Authority whenever production rates are expected
to vary by more than 20% from its baseline production rates
§ 162-49.1 EAST NORRITON CODE § 162-49.1
158:260
determined in Subsection E(1)(c) of this section. Upon
notification of a revised production rate, the Joint Sewer
Authority will reassess the equivalent mass limit and revise the
limit as necessary to reflect changed conditions at the facility;
and
(d) Continue to employ the same or comparable water
conservation methods and technologies as those implemented
pursuant to Subsection E(1)(c) of this section so long as it
discharges under an equivalent mass limit.
(3) When developing equivalent mass limits, the Joint Sewer Authority:
(a) Will calculate the equivalent mass limit by multiplying the
actual average daily flow rate of the regulated process(es) of
the industrial user by the concentration-based daily maximum
and monthly average standard for the applicable categorical
pretreatment standard and the appropriate unit conversion
factor;
(b) Upon notification of a revised production rate, will reassess the
equivalent mass limit and recalculate the limit as necessary to
reflect changed conditions at the facility; and
(c) May retain the same equivalent mass limit in subsequent
wastewater discharger permit terms if the industrial user's
actual average daily flow rate was reduced solely as a result of
the implementation of water conservation methods and
technologies, and the actual average daily flow rates used in
the original calculation of the equivalent mass limit were not
based on the use of dilution as a substitute for treatment
pursuant to § 162-49.5. The industrial user must also be in
compliance with § 162-59C regarding the prohibition of
bypass.
F. The Joint Sewer Authority may convert the mass limits of the
categorical pretreatment standards of 40 CFR Parts 414, 419, and 455
to concentration limits of the categorical pretreatment standards for
purposes of calculating limitations applicable to individual industrial
users. The conversion is at the discretion of the Joint Sewer Authority.
The Authority shall not convert such limits to concentration limits
unless it first documents that dilution is not being substituted for
treatment as prohibited by § 162-49.5.
G. Once included in its permit, the industrial user must comply with the
equivalent limitations developed in accordance with § 162-49.1 in lieu
of the promulgated categorical standards from which the equivalent
limitations were derived.
H. Many categorical pretreatment standards specify one limit for
calculating maximum daily discharge limitations and a second limit for
calculating maximum monthly average, or four-day average,
§ 162-49.1 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 162-49.1
158:261
§ 162-49.2. State pretreatment standards.
State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case
where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations,
or those in this article.
§ 162-49.3. Local limits.
limitations. Where such standards are being applied, the same
production or flow figure shall be used in calculating both the average
and the maximum equivalent limitation.
I. Any industrial user operating under a permit incorporating equivalent
mass or concentration limits calculated from a production-based
standard shall notify the Joint Sewer Authority within two business days
after the user has a reasonable basis to know that the production level
will significantly change within the next calendar month. Any user not
notifying the Joint Sewer Authority of such anticipated change will be
required to meet the mass or concentration limits in its permit that
were based on the original estimate of the long-term average
production rate.
J. A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard
from EPA if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and
substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its
discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by
EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard.
A. The Joint Sewer Authority is authorized to establish local limits
pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5(c). The following pollutant limits are
established to protect against pass-through and interference. No
person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following
daily maximum limit:
Toxic Pollutants mg/L
Arsenic 1.165
Cadmium 0.107
Chromium (total) 0.260
Copper 5.558
Cyanide 2.328
Lead 0.969
Mercury 0.008
Molybdenum 0.418
Nickel 2.046
Selenium 11.699
Silver 7.098
Zinc 2.800
§ 162-49.1 EAST NORRITON CODE § 162-49.3
158:262
§ 162-49.4. Township's right of revision.
The Township reserves the right to establish, by ordinance, more stringent
standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW.
§ 162-49.5. Dilution.
No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt
to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless
expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or
requirement. The Joint Sewer Authority may impose mass limitations on
users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is
appropriate.
§ 162-49.6. Accidental discharges.
Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited
materials or other substances regulated by this article. Facilities to prevent
accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and
maintained at the owner or user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans
showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall
be submitted to the Joint Sewer Authority for review, and shall be approved
by the Joint Sewer Authority before construction of the facility. No user
shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental
B. The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged
to the POTW, which for purposes of this article includes all points within
and throughout the distribution system. All concentrations for metallic
substances are for total metal unless indicated otherwise. The Joint
Sewer Authority may impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place
of, the concentration-based limitations above.
C. The Joint Sewer Authority reserves the right to establish alternate local
limits in industrial user discharge permits, but only in accordance with
regulatory requirements. At no time will the summation of the loadings
allocated to the industrial users through the discharge permits be
greater than the allowable industrial headworks loading as determined
in the most recent local limits evaluation approved by the approval
authority.
D. The Joint Sewer Authority may develop Best Management Practices
(BMPs), by ordinance, resolution or in wastewater discharge permits to
implement local limits and the requirements of § 162.49. If a BMP is
used in place of an approved local limit or prohibition (rather than in
addition to an approved limit or prohibition), the BMP would need to be
approved by EPA prior to implementation. Authorizing use of a BMP for
compliance with one or more of the prohibitions included in 40 CFR
403.5 does not relieve the user of the responsibility of complying with
the prohibition(s).
§ 162-49.3 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 162-49.6
158:263
discharge procedures have been approved by the Joint Sewer Authority.
Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not
relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user's
facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this article. In the case of
an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately
notify the Joint Sewer Authority of the incident. The notification shall
include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and
corrective actions.
§ 162-49.7. Written notice.
Within 24 hours following an accidental discharge, the user shall notify
the Joint Sewer Authority, and within five days following an accidental
discharge, the user shall submit to the Joint Sewer Authority a detailed
written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be
taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification
shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability
which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any
other damage to person or property, nor shall such notification relieve the
user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by
this article or other applicable law.
§ 162-49.8. Notice to employees.
A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other
prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of an
accidental discharge. Employers shall insure that all employees who may
cause or suffer such an accidental discharge to occur are advised of the
emergency notification procedures.
§ 162-50. Pretreatment of wastewater.
A. Pretreatment facilities. Users shall provide wastewater treatment as
necessary to comply with this article and shall comply with all
categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions
set out in § 162-49 of this article within the time limitations specified by
EPA, the state, or the Joint Sewer Authority, whichever is more
stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided,
operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans
describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted
to the Joint Sewer Authority for review, and shall be acceptable to the
Joint Sewer Authority before such facilities are constructed. The review
of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user
from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to
produce a discharge acceptable to the Joint Sewer Authority under the
provisions of this article.
B. Additional pretreatment measures.
(1) Whenever deemed necessary, the Joint Sewer Authority may
require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods,
§ 162-49.6 EAST NORRITON CODE § 162-50
158:264
designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific
sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate
sewage waste streams from industrial waste streams, and such
other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and
determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this
article.
(2) The Joint Sewer Authority may require any person discharging into
the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their
expense, a suitable storage and flow control facility to ensure
equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued
solely for flow equalization.
(3) Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Joint Sewer Authority, they are necessary for the
proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of
grease and oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be
required for residential users unless a residential user who is
contributing excessive amounts of grease, oil, or sand has first
been given the opportunity to reduce the discharge by other
means. All interception units shall be of type and capacity approved
by the Joint Sewer Authority and shall be so located to be easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be
inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user
at its expense, in accordance with any procedure for the
installation and maintenance of grease traps as may be established
from time to time by the Joint Sewer Authority.
(4) Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas
detection meter.
C. Accidental discharge/slug control plans. At least once every two years,
the Joint Sewer Authority shall evaluate whether each significant
industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The
Joint Sewer Authority may require any user to develop, submit for
approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the Joint Sewer
Authority may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental
discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:
(1) Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges;
(2) Description of stored chemicals;
(3) Procedures for immediately notifying the Joint Sewer Authority of
any accidental or slug discharge, as required by § 162-53F of this
article; and
(4) Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to,
inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer
§ 162-50 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 162-50
158:265
§ 162-51. Wastewater discharge permit application.
of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant
site runoff (i.e., a spill prevention plan), worker training, building
of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing
toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and
equipment for emergency response.
D. Hauled wastewater.
(1) Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at
locations designated by the Joint Sewer Authority and at such times
as are established by the Joint Sewer Authority. Such waste shall
not violate § 162-49 of this article or any other requirements
established by the Joint Sewer Authority. The Joint Sewer Authority
may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater
discharge permits.
(2) The Joint Sewer Authority shall require haulers of industrial waste
to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The Joint Sewer Authority
may require generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain
wastewater discharge permits. The Joint Sewer Authority also may
prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge of
hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of this
article.
(3) Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations
designated by the Joint Sewer Authority. No load may be
discharged without prior consent of the Joint Sewer Authority. The
Joint Sewer Authority may collect samples of each hauled load to
ensure compliance with applicable standards. The Joint Sewer
Authority may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a
waste analysis of any load prior to discharge.
(4) Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for
every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and
address of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck
identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and
volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the
type of industry, known or suspected waste constituents, and
whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes.
A. Wastewater analysis. When requested by the Joint Sewer Authority, a
user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its
wastewater within five days of the request. The Joint Sewer Authority is
authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically
require users to update this information.
B. Wastewater discharge permit requirement.
(1) No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the
POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from
§ 162-50 EAST NORRITON CODE § 162-51
158:266
the Joint Sewer Authority, except that a significant industrial user
that has filed a timely application pursuant to § 162-51C of this
article may continue to discharge for the time period specified
therein.
(2) The Joint Sewer Authority may require other users to obtain
wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the
purposes of this article.
(3) Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge
permit shall be deemed a violation of this article and subjects the
wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out elsewhere
in this article. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not
relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and
state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other
requirements of federal, state, and local law.
C. Wastewater discharge permitting: existing connections. Any user
required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging
wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this article and
who wishes to continue such discharges in the future shall, within 60
days after said date, apply to the Joint Sewer Authority for an individual
wastewater discharge permit in accordance with § 162-51D of this
article and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue
after 100 days of the effective date of this article except in accordance
with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the Joint Sewer
Authority.
D. Wastewater discharge permitting: new connections. Any user required
to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or
recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior
to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for
this wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with § 162-51C of this
article, must be filed at least 60 days prior to the date upon which any
discharge will begin or recommence.
E. Wastewater discharge permit application contents.
(1) All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must
submit a permit application. The Joint Sewer Authority may require
users to submit all or some of the following information as part of a
permit application:
(a) Identifying Information.
[1] The name and address of the facility, including the name of
the operator and owner.
[2] Contact information, description of activities, facilities,
and plant production processes on the premises;
§ 162-51 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 162-51
158:267
(b) Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control
permits held by or for the facility.
(c) Description of operations.
[1] A brief description of the nature, average rate of
production (including each product produced by type,
amount, processes, and rate of production), and standard
industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by
such user. This description shall include a schematic
process diagram, which indicates points of discharge to
the POTW from the regulated processes.
[2] Types of wastes generated, and a list of all raw materials
and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or
could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the
POTW;
[3] Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and
proposed or actual hours of operation;
[4] Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day);
[5] Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans,
and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and
appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all
points of discharge;
(d) Time and duration of discharges;
(e) The location for monitoring all wastes covered by the permit;
(f) Flow measurement. Information showing the measured
average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to
the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams,
as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream
formula set out in § 162-50C of this article [50 CFR 403.6(e)].
(g) Measurement of pollutants.
[1] The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each
regulated process and any new categorically regulated
processes for existing sources.
[2] The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature
and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the
standard or by the Joint Sewer Authority, of regulated
pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process.
[3] Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average
concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be
reported.
§ 162-51 EAST NORRITON CODE § 162-51
158:268
§ 162-52. Wastewater discharge permit issuance process.
[4] The sample shall be representative of daily operations and
shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in
§ 162-53J of this article. Where the standard requires
compliance with a BMP or pollution prevention
alternative, the user shall submit documentation as
required by the Joint Sewer Authority or the applicable
standards to determine compliance with the standard.
[5] Sampling must be performed in accordance with
procedures set out in § 162-53K of this article.
(h) Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the
Joint Sewer Authority to evaluate the permit application.
(2) Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and
will be retuned to the user for revision.
F. Application signatories and certification.
(1) All wastewater discharge permit applications. User reports and
certification statements must be signed by an authorized
representative of the user and contain the certification statement
in § 162-53N.
(2) If the designation of an authorized representative is no longer
accurate because a different individual or position has
responsibility for the overall operation of the facility or overall
responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new
written authorization satisfying the requirements of this section
must be submitted to the Joint Sewer Authority prior to or together
with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative.
(3) A facility determined to be a nonsignificant categorical industrial
user by the Joint Sewer Authority must annually submit the signed
certification statement in § 162-53N.
G. Wastewater discharge permit decisions. The Joint Sewer Authority will
evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional
information. Within 30 days of receipt of a complete wastewater
discharge permit application, the Joint Sewer Authority will determine
whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The Joint Sewer
Authority may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit.
A. Wastewater discharge permit duration. A wastewater discharge permit
shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years from
the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be
issued for a period less than five years, at the discretion of the Joint
Sewer Authority. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a
specific date upon which it will expire.
§ 162-51 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 162-52
158:269
B. Wastewater discharge permit contents. A wastewater discharge permit
shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by
the Joint Sewer Authority to prevent pass-through or interference,
protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's
effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge
management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW.
(1) Wastewater discharge permits must contain:
(a) A statement that indicates the wastewater discharge permit
issuance date, expiration date and effective date;
(b) A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is
nontransferable without prior notification to the Joint Sewer
Authority in accordance with § 162-52E of this article, and
provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a
copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit;
(c) Effluent limits, including BMPs, based on applicable
pretreatment standards;
(d) Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and
recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include
an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling
location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on
federal, state, and local law;
(e) A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for
violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any
applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not
extend the time for compliance beyond that required by
applicable federal, state, or local law.
(f) A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for
violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any
applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not
extend the time for compliance beyond that required by
applicable federal, state, or local law.
(g) Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the
Joint Sewer Authority to be necessary.
(2) Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited
to, the following conditions:
(a) Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time
of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and
equalization;
(b) Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment
devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the
introduction of pollutants into the treatment works;
§ 162-52 EAST NORRITON CODE § 162-52
158:270
(c) Requirements for the development and implementation of spill
control plans or other special conditions, including
management practices necessary to adequately prevent
accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges;
(d) Development and implementation of waste minimization plans
to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
(e) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;
(f) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection
and sampling facilities and equipment;
(g) A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge
permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for
compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment
standards, including those which become effective during the
term of the wastewater discharge permit; and
(h) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Joint Sewer
Authority to ensure compliance with this article and state and
federal laws, rules, and regulations.
C. Wastewater discharge permit process.
(1) Public notification. The Joint Sewer Authority will publish in an
official government publication and/or newspaper(s) of general
circulation that provides meaningful public notice with the
jurisdiction(s) served by the POTW, a notice to issue a pretreatment
permit, at least 30 days prior to issuance. The notice will indicate a
location where the draft permit may be reviewed and an address
where written comments may be submitted.
(2) The Joint Sewer Authority shall provide public notice of the
issuance of a wastewater discharge permit. Any person, including
the user, may petition the Joint Sewer Authority to reconsider the
terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days of its
issuance.
(a) Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed
to be a waiver of the administrative appeal.
(b) In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the
wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the
reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any,
it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit.
(c) The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not
be stayed pending the appeal.
(d) If the Joint Sewer Authority fails to act within 30 days, a
request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied.
§ 162-52 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 162-52
158:271
Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit,
not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify
a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final
administrative actions for purposes of judicial review.
(3) Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative
wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a
complaint with the Court of Common Pleas of Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania, within the period proscribed by Pennsylvania's local
Agency Law, 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 105 et. seq.
D. Wastewater discharge permit modification. The Joint Sewer Authority
may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including,
but not limited to, the following reasons:
(1) To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local
pretreatment standards or requirements;
(2) To address significant alterations or additions to the user's
operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the
time of wastewater discharge permit issuance;
(3) A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or
permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
(4) Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat
to the POTW, Joint Sewer Authority's personnel, or the receiving
waters;
(5) Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge
permit;
(6) Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required
reporting;
(7) Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
(8) To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater
discharge permit; or
(9) To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new
owner or operator.
E. Wastewater discharge permit transfer.
(1) Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner
or operator only if the permittee gives at least 60 days' advance
notice to the Joint Sewer Authority and the Joint Sewer Authority
approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to
the Joint Sewer Authority must include a written certification by
the new owner or operator which:
§ 162-52 EAST NORRITON CODE § 162-52
158:272
(a) States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate
intent to change the facility's operations and processes;
(b) Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur;
and
(c) Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the
existing wastewater discharge permit.
(2) Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the
wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer.
F. Wastewater discharge permit revocation.
(1) The Joint Sewer Authority may revoke a wastewater discharge
permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following
reasons:
(a) Failure to notify the Joint Sewer Authority of significant
changes to the wastewater discharge prior to the changed
discharge;
(b) Failure to provide prior notification to the Joint Sewer
Authority of changed conditions pursuant to § 162-53E of this
article;
(c) Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the wastewater discharge permit application;
(d) Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
(e) Tampering with monitoring equipment;
(f) Refusing to allow the Joint Sewer Authority timely access to
the facility premises and records;
(g) Failure to meet effluent limitations;
(h) Failure to pay fines;
(i) Failure to pay sewer charges;
(j) Failure to meet compliance schedules;
(k) Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater
discharge permit application;
(l) Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business
ownership of a permitted facility; or
(m) Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any
terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this article.
(n) Failure to obtain required sewer capacity.
§ 162-52 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 162-52
158:273
(2) Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of
operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater
discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the
issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user.
G. Wastewater discharge permit reissuance. A user with an expiring
wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge
permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in
accordance with § 162-51 of this article, a minimum of 180 days prior to
the expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit.
H. Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions.
(1) If another municipality, or user located within another municipality,
contributes wastewater to the POTW, the Joint Sewer Authority
shall enter into an intermunicipal agreement with the contributing
municipality.
(2) Prior to entering into an agreement required by Subsection H(1),
above, the Joint Sewer Authority shall request the following
information from the contributing municipality:
(a) A description of the quality and volume of wastewater
discharged to the POTW by the contributing municipality;
(b) An inventory of all users located within the contributing
municipality that are discharging to the POTW: and
(c) Such other information as the Joint Sewer Authority may deem
necessary.
(3) An intermunicipal agreement, as required by Subsection H(1),
above, shall contain the following conditions:
(a) A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a
sewer use ordinance which is at least as stringent as the Joint
Sewer Authority's most recent sewer use resolution and local
limits, including required baseline monitoring reports (BMRs)
which are at least as stringent as those set out in the Joint
Sewer Authority's most recent sewer use resolution. The
requirement shall specify that such ordinance and limits must
be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to any
municipal Joint Sewer Authority's ordinance or the POTW's
local limits;
(b) A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a
revised user inventory on at least an annual basis;
(c) A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation
activities, including wastewater discharge permit issuance,
inspection and sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted
by the contributing municipality; which of these activities will
§ 162-52 EAST NORRITON CODE § 162-52
158:274
§ 162-53. Reporting requirements.
be conducted jointly by the contributing municipality and the
Joint Sewer Authority;
(d) A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the
Joint Sewer Authority with access to all information that the
contributing municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment
activities;
(e) Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing
municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to
the POTW;
(f) Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's
discharge;
(g) A provision ensuring the Joint Sewer Authority access to the
facilities of users located within the contributing municipality's
jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection
sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary by the Joint
Sewer Authority; and
(h) A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the
terms of the intermunicipal agreement.
(4) Pursuant to the Pennsylvania Publicly Owned Treatment Works
Penalty Law (Act 9 of 1992),97 the Joint Sewer Authority reserves
the right to regulate waste entering the treatment plant regardless
of its point of origin.
(5) Each municipality which participates in the operation of the POTW
shall, in accordance with various interjurisdictional agreements
signed by them, enforce their respective sewer use ordinances with
respect to the discharges within each of their jurisdictions.
Whenever possible, the enforcement, in cooperation with the Joint
Sewer Authority, of a particular municipality's sewer use ordinance
shall be a joint and cooperative effort between the subject
municipality and staff from the Joint Sewer Authority, which has
primary responsibility for plant operations. In the event that any
municipality fails or refuses to enforce its sewer use ordinance
after the Joint Sewer Authority made a determination that such
enforcement is necessary, then the Joint Sewer Authority reserves
all rights which it may have to either undertake enforcement
pursuant to the Pennsylvania Publicly Owned Treatment Works
Penalty Law, and/or to seek enforcement of any interjurisdictional
agreement which may require the cooperation of the municipality
which fails or refuses to act.
A. Baseline monitoring reports.
97.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 752.1 et seq.
§ 162-52 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 162-53
158:275
(1) Within either 180 days after the date of a categorical pretreatment
standard, or the final administrative decision on a category
determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later,
existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to
discharge to the POTW shall submit to the Joint Sewer Authority a
report which contains the information listed in Subsection B, below.
At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new
sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to
the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall
submit to the Joint Sewer Authority a report which contains the
information listed in Subsection B, below. A new source shall report
the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable
categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its
anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged.
(2) Users described above shall submit the information set forth below.
(a) All information required in § 162-51D of this article.
(b) Measurement of pollutants.
[1] The user shall provide the information required in
§ 162-53;
[2] The user shall take a minimum of one representative
sample to compile that data necessary to comply with the
requirements of this subsection;
[3] Samples should be taken immediately downstream from
pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately
downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment
exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated
wastewater prior to pretreatment, the user shall measure
the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the
combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.5(e) to
evaluate compliance with the pretreatment standards.
Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been
calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e), this
adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be
submitted to the Joint Sewer Authority;
[4] Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance
with § 162-53J;
[5] The Joint Sewer Authority may allow the submission of a
baseline report which utilizes only historical data so long
as the data provides information sufficient to determine
the need for industrial pretreatment measures;
[6] The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place
of sampling and methods of analysis, and shall certify that
such sampling and analysis is representative of normal
§ 162-53 EAST NORRITON CODE § 162-53
158:276
work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the
POTW.
(c) Compliance certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's
authorized representative, as defined in § 162-48A of this
article, and certified by a qualified professional, indicating
whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent
basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and
maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is
required to meet the pretreatment standards and
requirements.
(d) Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M
will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the
shortest schedule by which the user will provide such
additional pretreatment and/or O&M must be provided. The
completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the
compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment
standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must
meet the requirements set out in § 162-53B of this article.
(e) Signature and report certification. All baseline monitoring
reports must be certified in accordance with § 162-51E of this
article and signed by an authorized representative, as defined
in § 162-48A of this article.
B. Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions shall
apply to the compliance schedule required by § 162-53A(2)(d) of this
article:
(1) The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates
for the commencement and completion of major events leading to
the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required
for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such
events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer,
completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for
major components, commencing and completing construction, and
beginning and conducting routine operation);
(2) No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months;
(3) The user shall submit a progress report to the Joint Sewer
Authority no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule
and the final date of compliance, including, at a minimum, whether
or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for
any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to
return to the established schedule; and
(4) In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such
progress reports to the Joint Sewer Authority.
§ 162-53 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 162-53
158:277
C. Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard
deadline. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with
applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new
source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into
the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and
requirements shall submit to the Joint Sewer Authority a report
containing the information described in §§ 162-51(E)(1)(f) and
162-53(A)(2)(b) of this article. For users subject to equivalent mass or
concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in
§ 162-50, this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's
long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant
discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this
report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate
sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with § 162-51E of this article. All sampling will be done in
conformance with § 162-53.
D. Periodic compliance reports.
(1) All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by
the Joint Sewer Authority but in no case less than twice per year (in
June and December unless otherwise specified in the user's
permit), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of
pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment
standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum
daily flows for the reporting period. In cases where the
pretreatment standard requires compliance with a BMP or
pollution prevention alternative, the user, must submit
documentation required by the Joint Sewer Authority or the
pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance
status of the user.
(2) All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with § 162-51 of this article. In the event that the
months for submission of the reports are altered by the Joint Sewer
Authority, factors such as local high or low flow rates, holiday,
budget cycles, etc., shall be taken into consideration.
(3) All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's
discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities
shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good
working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its
monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for
the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its
discharge.
(4) If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the Joint
Sewer Authority, using the procedures prescribed in § 162-53 of
§ 162-53 EAST NORRITON CODE § 162-53
158:278
this article, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the
report.
(5) Reduced reporting.
(a) The Joint Sewer Authority may reduce the requirement for
periodic compliance reports for an industrial user subject to
Categorical pretreatment standards to a requirement to report
no less frequently than once a year, unless required more
frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the EPA or state,
where the industrial user's total categorical wastewater flow
does not exceed any of the following:
[1] A value equal to 0.01% of the POTW's design dry-weather
hydraulic capacity, or 5,000 gallons per day, whichever is
smaller, as measured by a continuous effluent flow
monitoring device unless the industrial user discharges in
batches;
[2] A value equal to 0.01% of the design dry-weather organic
treatment capacity of the POTW; and
[3] A value equal to 0.01% of the maximum allowable
headworks loading for any pollutant regulated by the
applicable categorical pretreatment standard for which
approved local limits were developed in accordance with
§ 162-49.3 of this article. (By way of example, if the
POTW's maximum allowable headworks loading for copper
is five pounds, then 0.01% would be 0.0005 pounds; the
POTW would need to do this calculation for each pollutant
for which it has approved local limits.)
(b) Reduced reporting is not available to industrial users that have
in the last two years been in significant noncompliance, as
defined in § 162-56 of this article. In addition, reduced
reporting is not available to an industrial user with daily flow
rates, production levels, or pollutant levels that vary so
significantly that, in the opinion of the Joint Sewer Authority,
decreasing the reporting requirement for this industrial user
would result in data that are not representative of conditions
occurring during the reporting period.
(6) The industrial user must notify the Joint Sewer Authority
immediately of any changes at its facility causing it to no longer
meet conditions of Subsection D(5)(a) through (c) of this section.
Upon notification, the industrial user must immediately begin
monitoring and reporting at least twice per year in accordance with
Subsection D(1) above.
(7) All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with § 162-53 of this article.
§ 162-53 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 162-53
158:279
(8) All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's
discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities
shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good
working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its
monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for
the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its
discharge.
(9) If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section or a
user subject to the certification requirement in § 162-53N(2) of this
article monitors any regulated pollutant at the appropriate
sampling location more frequently than required by the Joint Sewer
Authority, using the procedures prescribed in § 162-53 of this
article, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the
report.
E. Reports of changed conditions. Each user must notify the Joint Sewer
Authority of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or
system which has the potential to alter the nature, quality, or volume of
its wastewater creating a possible slug load discharge condition at least
60 days before the change.
(1) The Joint Sewer Authority may require the user to submit such
information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed
condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge
permit application under § 162-51 of this article.
(2) The Joint Sewer Authority may issue a wastewater discharge
permit under § 162-51 of this article or modify an existing
wastewater discharge permit under § 162-52 of this article in
response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions.
(3) For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but
are not limited to, flow increases of 20% or greater, and the
discharge of any previously unreported pollutants.
F. Reports of potential problems.
(1) In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to,
accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature,
a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause
potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately
telephone and notify the Joint Sewer Authority of the incident. This
notification, shall include the location of the discharge, type of
waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions
taken by the user, along with the identity of the person or persons
believed to be responsible for the discharge.
(2) Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless
waived by the Joint Sewer Authority, submit a detailed written
report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to
be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such
§ 162-53 EAST NORRITON CODE § 162-53
158:280
notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage,
or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to
the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or
property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines,
penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this
article.
(3) A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or
other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the
event of a discharge described in Subsection F(1) above. Employers
shall ensure that all employees who may cause such a discharge to
occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure.
G. Reports of unpermitted users. All users not required to obtain a
wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the
Joint Sewer Authority as the Joint Sewer Authority may require.
H. Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. If sampling
performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the Joint
Sewer Authority within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation.
The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the
results of the repeat analysis to the Joint Sewer Authority within 30
days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to
resample if the Joint Sewer Authority monitors at the user's facility at
least once a month, or if the Joint Sewer Authority samples between the
user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this
sampling.
I. Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste.
(1) Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall
notify the Joint Sewer Authority, the EPA Regional Waste
Management Division Director, and state hazardous waste
authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the Joint Sewer
Authority of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a
hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must
include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part
261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge
(continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than 100
kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the Joint Sewer
Authority, the notification also shall contain the following
information to the extent such information is known and readily
available to the user: an identification of the hazardous
constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and
concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharged
during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of
constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during
the following 12 months. All notifications must take place no later
than 180 days after the discharge commences. Any notification
under this Subsection I(1) need be submitted only once for each
hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed
§ 162-53 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 162-53
158:281
conditions must be submitted under § 162-53 of this article. The
notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants
already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards under the self-monitoring requirements of § 162-53 of
this article.
(2) Discharges are exempt from the requirements of Subsection I(1),
above, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more
than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute
hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e).
Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes
in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes
as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time
notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges
more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require
additional notification.
(3) In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 identifying additional
characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional
substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the Joint
Sewer Authority, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste
Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the
discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of
such regulations.
(4) In the case of any notification made under this section, the user
shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and
toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has
determined to be economically practical.
(5) This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance
not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this article, a permit
issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law.
J. Analytical requirements. All pollutant analyses, including sampling
techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit
application or report shall be performed in accordance with the
techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, and amendments thereto,
unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment
standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical
techniques for the pollutant in question, or where EPA determines that
the Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for
the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed by
using validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling
and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the Joint
Sewer Authority or other parties approved by EPA.
K. Sample collection.
(1) Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements must be based
on data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis
§ 162-53 EAST NORRITON CODE § 162-53
158:282
performed during the period covered by the report, based on data
that is representative of conditions occurring during the reporting
period.
(2) Except as indicated in Subsection K(3) and (4) below, the user must
collect wastewater samples using twenty-four-hour flowproportional
composite sampling techniques, unless timeproportional
composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by
the Joint Sewer Authority. Where time-proportional composite
sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the Joint Sewer
Authority, the samples must be representative of the discharge.
Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in
40 CFR Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab
samples collected during a twenty-four-hour period may be
composited prior to the analysis as follows: for cyanide, total
phenols, and sulfides, the samples may be composited in the
laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil and grease,
the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite
samples for other parameters unaffected by the compositing
procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be
authorized by the Joint Sewer Authority, as appropriate. In
addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with
instantaneous limits.
(3) Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total
phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained
using grab collection techniques.
(4) For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and
ninety-day compliance reports required in § 162-53, a minimum of
four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil
and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for facilities for
which historical sampling data do not exist; for facilities for which
historical sampling data are available, the Joint Sewer Authority
may authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by
§ 162-53D of this article, the industrial user is required to collect
the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure
compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements.
L. Date of receipt of reports. Written reports will be deemed to have been
submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed,
postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal
Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern.
M. Recordkeeping. Users subject to the reporting requirements of this
article shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all
records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities
required by this article and any additional records of information
obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user
independent of such requirements, including documentation associated
§ 162-53 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 162-53
158:283
with BMPs established under § 162-49.3. Records shall include the
date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the
person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who
performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used;
and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available
for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically
extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the
Joint Sewer Authority, or where the user has been specifically notified
of a longer retention period by the Joint Sewer Authority.
N. Certification statements.
(1) Certification of permit applications and user reports. The following
certification statement is required to be signed and submitted by
users submitting permit applications in accordance with § 162-51;
users submitting baseline monitoring reports under § 162-53; users
submitting reports on compliance with the categorical
pretreatment standard deadlines under § 162-51; and users
submitting periodic compliance reports required by § 162-53. The
following certification statement must be signed by an authorized
representative, as defined in § 162-48:
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all
attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision
in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified
personnel properly gather and evaluate the information
submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who
manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for
gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the
best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I
am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false
information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for
knowing violations.
(2) Annual certification for nonsignificant categorical industrial users.
A facility determined to be a nonsignificant categorical industrial
user by the Joint Sewer Authority pursuant to § 162-48 must
annually submit the following certification statement signed in
accordance with the signatory requirements in § 162-48. This
certification must accompany an alternative report required by the
Joint Sewer Authority:
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible
for managing compliance with the categorical pretreatment
standards under 40 CFR ___, I certify that, to the best of my
knowledge and belief that during the period from ___, ____ to ___,
___ [months, days, year]:
(a) The facility described as _____ [facility name] met the definition
of a nonsignificant categorical industrial user as described in
§ 162-48;
§ 162-53 EAST NORRITON CODE § 162-53
158:284
§ 162-54. Compliance monitoring.
(b) The facility complied with all applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements during this reporting period; and
(c) The facility never discharged more than 100 gallons of total
categorical wastewater on any given day during this reporting
period.
This compliance certification is based on the following
information.
A. Right of entry: inspection and sampling. The Joint Sewer Authority shall
have the right to enter the premises of any user, without notice, to
determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this
article and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder.
Users shall allow the Joint Sewer Authority ready access to all parts of
the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records
examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties.
User water use may be relied upon if discharge monitoring data is not
available.
(1) Where a user has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user
shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so
that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the Joint Sewer
Authority will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes
of performing specific responsibilities.
(2) The Joint Sewer Authority shall have the right to set up on the
user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are
necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's
operations.
(3) The Joint Sewer Authority may require the user to install
monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and
proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All
devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be
calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
(4) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the Joint
Sewer Authority and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing
such access shall be borne by the user.
(5) Unreasonable delays in allowing the Joint Sewer Authority access
to the user's premises shall be a violation of this article.
§ 162-53 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 162-54
158:285
§ 162-55. Confidential information.
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater
discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and
monitoring programs, and from the Joint Sewer Authority's inspection and
sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction,
unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Joint Sewer Authority, that the release of such
information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production
entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such
request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or
data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report
that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report
which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made
available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available
immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the
NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings
involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and
characteristics and other effluent data, as defined by 40 CFR 2.302, will not
be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public
without restriction.
§ 162-56. Publication of users in significant noncompliance.
The Joint Sewer Authority shall publish annually, in a daily newspaper
of general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the
jurisdiction served by the POTW, a list of the users which, at any time
during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term "significant
(6) When it would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user
to situate the monitoring facility on the user's premises, the
municipality may allow the facility to be constructed in the public
street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed
by landscaping or parked vehicles. There shall be ample room in or
near such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling
and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling, and
measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and
proper condition at the expense of the user.
B. Search warrants. If the Joint Sewer Authority has been refused access
to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof by a user, and is
able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a
violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample
as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the Joint Sewer
Authority designed to verify compliance with this article or any permit
or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety
and welfare of the community, then the Joint Sewer Authority may seek
issuance of a search warrant from the District Justice in whose
jurisdiction the property is situate.
§ 162-54 EAST NORRITON CODE § 162-56
158:286
noncompliance" shall be applicable to all significant industrial users (or any
other industrial user that violates Subsections C, D, H or I of this section)
and shall mean:
A. Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those
in which 66% or more of wastewater measurements taken during a sixmonth
period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment
standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits as defined in
§ 162-48;
B. Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each
pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the
product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement
including instantaneous limits, as defined by § 162-48, multiplied by the
applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for
all other pollutants except pH);
C. Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement, as
defined by § 162-48 (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous
limit, or narrative standard), that the Joint Sewer Authority determines
has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference
or pass-through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel
or the general public;
D. Any other discharge violation that the Joint Sewer Authority believes
has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference
or pass-through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel
or the general public;
E. Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to
the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the Joint Sewer
Authority's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a
discharge;
F. Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction,
or attaining final compliance;
G. Failure to provide within 45 days after the due date, any required
reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance
with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic selfmonitoring
reports, and reports on compliance with compliance
schedules;
H. Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
I. Any other violations, which may include a violation of BMPs, which the
Joint Sewer Authority determines will adversely affect the operation or
implementation of the local pretreatment program.
§ 162-56 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 162-57
158:287
§ 162-57. Enforcement remedies.
§ 162-57.1. Administrative remedies.
A. The Joint Sewer Authority, in conjunction with the Township, is fully
empowered to undertake all enforcement remedies set forth below in
order to assure user compliance with all state and federal laws and
regulations. The enforcement actions described herein will be
undertaken pursuant to the Joint Sewer Authority's duly adopted and
EPA-approved Enforcement Response Plan, a federally mandated
statement of policy which provides fair and even application of all
enforcement remedies to users in violation, such document being
available at all times for public inspection. In addition, the Joint Sewer
Authority retains each and every right and power granted pursuant to
the Pennsylvania Publicly Owned Treatment Works Penalty Law, also
known as "Act 9 of 1992,"98 in addition to any amendments thereto and
pursuant to the Civil Penalty Assessment Policy adopted by the Joint
Sewer Authority.
B. Surcharge in lieu of enforcement remedy, With respect to conventional
pollutants, the Joint Sewer Authority may, from time to time and at its
discretion, adopt a policy whereby certain specifically identified
conventional pollutants are permissibly discharged to the Joint Sewer
Authority for removal at the POTW, with the cost of such removal to be
borne by the discharger. The Joint Sewer Authority may expand or limit
the list of conventional pollutants to which this surcharge system
applies based upon the POTW's capacity/ability to effectively remove
particular conventional pollutants. In the event that a conventional
pollutant is within the scope of the surcharge system as it exists at the
time of discharge, then such conventional pollutant discharge shall not
be considered a violation of this article. However, any failure to pay the
surcharge cost for the POTW's removal of the pollutant shall itself be
considered a violation of this article and subject to enforcement action,
in addition to all generally held rights of collection.
A. Notification of violation. When the Joint Sewer Authority finds that a
user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the Joint Sewer Authority shall
serve upon that user a written notice of violation. The specific manner
in which such notice of violation shall be issued, and the terms and
conditions pursuant to which the user shall respond or correct the
violation complained of, shall be as set forth in the Enforcement
Response Plan. When the notice of violation includes a plan for
satisfactory correction and prevention of the violation, submission of
such plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations
occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in
this section shall limit the authority of the Joint Sewer Authority to take
98.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 752.1 et seq.
§ 162-57 EAST NORRITON CODE § 162-57.1
158:288
any action, including emergency action or any other enforcement
action, without first issuing a notice of violation.
B. Consent orders. The Joint Sewer Authority may enter into consent
orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents
establishing an agreement with any user responsible for
noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken
by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified
by the document. Such documents shall have the same effect as the
administrative orders authorized elsewhere in this section of the
ordinance and shall be judicially enforceable.
C. Show-cause hearing.
(1) The Joint Sewer Authority may order a user which has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the Joint
Sewer Authority and show cause why the proposed enforcement
action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user
specifying the time and place for the hearing, the proposed
enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that
the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should
not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally
or by registered mail at least 10 days prior to the hearing. Such
notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user.
A show-cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for,
taking any other action against the user.
(2) Any hearing conducted pursuant to this section shall be presided
over by the Joint Sewer Authority Board (hereinafter "Board") as to
why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. In the
event that any municipality fails to designate a hearing participant,
then the Joint Sewer Authority shall designate an individual to so
serve. The Board may itself conduct a hearing and take the
evidence or may designate any of its members or any officer or
employee of the Joint Sewer Authority to:
(a) Issue, in the name of the Board, notices of hearings requesting
the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production
of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings.
(b) Take the evidence.
(c) Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with
recommendations to the Board for action thereon.
(3) At any hearing held pursuant to this article, testimony taken must
be under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so
recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or any
party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereof.
§ 162-57.1 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 162-57.1
158:289
(4) After the Board has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order,
through the Joint Sewer Authority (who shall actually, issue the
order), to the user responsible for the discharge, directing that,
following a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued
unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related
appurtenances shall have been installed or existing treatment
facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are properly
operated. Further orders and directives, as are necessary and
appropriate, may be issued.
(5) Any user aggrieved by the enforcement of this article may take an
appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania, in accordance with the provisions of the local Agency
Law, 2 Pa. C.S.A. § 105 et seq. A failure to appeal in accordance
with the local Agency Law shall result in a waiver of all legal rights
to contest the action taken at the show-cause hearing.
D. Compliance order. When the Joint Sewer Authority finds that a user has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the Joint Sewer Authority may
issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that
the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does
not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may
be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other
related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance
orders also may contain other requirements to address the
noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management
practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to
the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for
compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement,
nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any
violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance
order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the user.
E. Cease-and-desist orders.
(1) When the Joint Sewer Authority finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past
violations are likely to recur, the Joint Sewer Authority may issue an
order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations
and directing the user to:
(a) Immediately comply with all requirements; and
(b) Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened
§ 162-57.1 EAST NORRITON CODE § 162-57.1
158:290
violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the
discharge.
(2) Issuance of a cease-and-desist order shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
F. Administrative fines.
(1) When the Joint Sewer Authority finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the Joint Sewer Authority
may fine such user in an amount not to exceed $25,000 or any
greater amount which might be permitted by the Publicly Operated
Treatment Works Penalty Law99 and the Joint Sewer Authority's
Civil Penalty Assessment Policy. Such fines shall be assessed on a
per-violation, per-day basis. In the case of monthly or other longterm
average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day
during the period of violation. The actual amount of the fine in a
particular case shall account for the factors set forth in the
Enforcement Response Plan.
(2) Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after 30 calendar days,
be assessed an additional penalty of 6% of the unpaid balance, and
interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of 6% per month. A
municipal lien against the user's property shall be filed for unpaid
charges, fines, and penalties.
(3) Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for
the Joint Sewer Authority to reconsider the fine along with full
payment of the fine amount within 20 days of being notified of the
fine. Where a request has merit, the Joint Sewer Authority may
convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the user's appeal is
successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing
thereto, shall be returned to the user. The Joint Sewer Authority
may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions,
such as notices and orders, to the fine.
(4) Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
G. Emergency suspensions.
(1) The Joint Sewer Authority may immediately suspend a user's
discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such
suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge
which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or
substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The
Joint Sewer Authority may also immediately suspend a user's
discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens
99.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 752.1 et seq.
§ 162-57.1 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 162-57.1
158:291
to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or
may present, an endangerment to the environment.
(a) Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall
immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a
user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the
suspension order, the Joint Sewer Authority may take such
steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of
the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the
POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any
individuals. The Joint Sewer Authority may allow the user to
recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to
the satisfaction of the Joint Sewer Authority that the period of
endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings
in § 162-57.1 of this article are initiated against the user.
(b) A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed
written statement, describing the causes of the harmful
contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future
occurrence, to the Joint Sewer Authority prior to the date of
any show-cause or termination hearing described elsewhere in
this section of the ordinance.
(2) Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing
prior to any emergency suspension under this section.
H. Termination of discharge.
(1) In addition to the provisions in § 162-52 of this article, any user
who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge
termination:
(a) Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
(b) Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
(c) Failure to report significant changes in operations or
wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to
discharge;
(d) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the
purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or
(e) Violation of the pretreatment standards in § 162-49.1 of this
article.
(2) Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its
discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under
§ 162-57.1 of this article why the proposed action should not be
taken. Exercise of this option by the Joint Sewer Authority shall not
§ 162-57.1 EAST NORRITON CODE § 162-57.1
158:292
§ 162-57.2. Judicial enforcement remedies.
be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against
the user.
A. Injunctive relief. When the Joint Sewer Authority finds that a user has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the Joint Sewer Authority may
petition the Court of Common Pleas of Montgomery County, through the
attorney for the Joint Sewer Authority, for the issuance of a temporary
or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the
specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or
other requirement imposed by this article on activities of the user. The
Joint Sewer Authority may also seek such other action as is appropriate
for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to
conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall
not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action
against a user.
B. Civil penalties.
(1) A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of
this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement
shall be liable to the Joint Sewer Authority for a maximum civil
penalty of $25,000 per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly
or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue
for each day during the period of the violation. Such penalty may be
assessed in accordance with § 162-59 of this article.
(2) The Joint Sewer Authority may recover reasonable attorneys' fees,
court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement
activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the
cost of any actual damages incurred by the Joint Sewer Authority.
(3) In determining the amount of civil liability, there shall be taken into
account all relevant circumstances, including but not limited to, the
extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration
of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's
violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of
the user, and any other factor as justice requires and as set forth in
the Enforcement Response Plan.
(4) Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.
C. Criminal prosecution. In the event that any discharge or other violation
of this article constitutes a violation of any criminal or penal statute,
then in addition to all enforcement remedies described elsewhere in
this article, the Joint Sewer Authority or the other participating
§ 162-57.1 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 162-57.2
158:293
§ 162-58. Supplemental enforcement action.
municipalities shall have the unfettered right to initiate and/or assist in
any state or federal criminal proceedings as a result of such violation.
Examples of criminal conduct in connection with a violation include, but
are not limited to, knowing or intentional introduction of any substance
into the Joint Sewer Authority's POTW which causes injury to persons
or property, otherwise undertaking any act or failing to undertake any
act which recklessly endangers the well-being of the community or
plant personnel, falsification of documents required to be filed pursuant
to this article, and tampering with or otherwise rendering inaccurate a
monitoring device or similar equipment.
D. Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this article are
not exclusive. The Joint Sewer Authority may take any, all, or any
combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement
of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the Joint
Sewer Authority's Enforcement Response Plan. However, the Joint
Sewer Authority may take other action against any user when the
circumstances warrant. Further, the Joint Sewer Authority is
empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any
noncompliant user.
A. Performance bonds. The Joint Sewer Authority may decline to issue or
reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to
comply with any provision of this article, a previous wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, unless such user first files a satisfactory bond,
payable to the Joint Sewer Authority, in a sum not to exceed a value
determined by the Joint Sewer Authority to be necessary to achieve
consistent compliance.
B. Liability insurance. The Joint Sewer Authority may decline to issue or
reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to
comply with any provision of this article, a previous wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, unless the user first submits proof that it has
obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to
the POTW caused by its discharge.
C. Water supply severance. Whenever a user has violated or continues to
violate any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, water service to the user may be severed. Service will
only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily
demonstrated its ability to comply.
D. Public nuisances. A violation of any provision of this article, a
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement may separately be declared as a
§ 162-57.2 EAST NORRITON CODE § 162-58
158:294
§ 162-59. Affirmative defenses to discharge violations.
public nuisance to the extent that it constitutes such nuisance as
defined by Pennsylvania law or municipal ordinance.
A. Upset.
(1) For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional
incident in which there is unintentional and temporary
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of
factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does
not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational
error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate
treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or
improper operation.
(2) An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action
brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment
standards if the requirements of Subsection C, below, are met.
(3) A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset
shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous
operating logs, or other relevant evidence that:
(a) An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the
upset;
(b) The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable
operation and maintenance procedures; and
(c) The user has submitted the following information to the Joint
Sewer Authority within 24 hours of becoming aware of the
upset (if this information is provided orally, a written
submission must be provided within five days):
[1] A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance;
[2] The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and
times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the
noncompliance is expected to continue; and
[3] Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate,
and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
(4) In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
(5) Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any
claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards.
§ 162-58 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 162-59
158:295
(6) Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment
standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility
until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is
provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among
other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility
is reduced, lost, or fails.
B. Prohibited discharge standards. A user shall have an affirmative
defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance
with the general prohibitions in § 162-49 of this article or the specific
prohibitions in § 162-49 of this article if it can prove that it did not know,
or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with
discharges from other sources, would cause pass-through or
interference and that either:
(1) A local limit designed to prevent pass-through and/or interference,
as the case may be, exists for each pollutant discharged and the
user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during,
the pass-through or interference; or
(2) No local limit designed to prevent pass-through and/or
interference, as the case may be, exists, but the discharge did not
change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior
discharge when the Joint Sewer Authority was regularly in
compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference,
was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal
requirements.
C. Bypass.
(1) For the purposes of this section:
(a) "Bypass" means the intentional diversion of waste streams
from any portion of a user's treatment facility.
(b) "Severe property damage" means substantial physical damage
to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes
them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss
of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to
occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does
not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
(2) A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause
pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if
it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation.
These bypasses are not subject to the provision of Subsections C
and D of this section.
(3) Notification.
§ 162-59 EAST NORRITON CODE § 162-59
158:296
(a) If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall
submit prior notice to the Joint Sewer Authority, at least 10
days before the date of the bypass, if possible.
(b) A user shall submit oral notice to the Joint Sewer Authority of
an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment
standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of
the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within
five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass.
The written submission shall contain a description of the
bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including
exact dates and times and, if the bypass has not been
corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and
steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent
reoccurrence of the bypass. The Joint Sewer Authority may
waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral
report has been received within 24 hours.
(4) Enforcement action; appeals.
(a) Bypass is prohibited, and the Joint Sewer Authority may
undertake an enforcement action against a user for a bypass,
unless:
[1] Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal
injury, or severe property damage;
[2] There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as
the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of
untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods
of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if
adequate backup equipment should have been installed in
the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to
prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of
equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
[3] The user submitted notices as required under Subsection
C of this section.
(b) The Joint Sewer Authority may approve an anticipated bypass,
after considering its adverse effects, if the Joint Sewer
Authority determines that it will meet the three conditions
listed in Subsection D(1) of this section.
(c) Appeal. An industrial user assessed with a civil penalty under
the terms of this section shall have the right to file an appeal to
contest either the amount of the penalty or the fact of the
violation, within 30 days of the assessment of the civil penalty,
pursuant to the local Agency Law, 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 105 et seq.
(relating to administrative law and procedure). Failure to
appeal within this period shall result in a waiver of all legal
rights to contest the violation or the amount of the penalty.
§ 162-59 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 162-59
158:297
D. Assessment of civil penalties.
(1) Pursuant to the provisions of the Pennsylvania Publicly Owned
Treatment Works Penalty Law, Act 9 of 1992,100 providing for
enhanced penalty authority for publicly owned treatment works
which are authorized to enforce industrial pretreatment standards
for industrial waste discharges, and in addition to proceeding
under any other remedy available at law or equity for violation of
pretreatment standards and/or requirements, the Joint Sewer
Authority, as the operator of the POTW, may assess a civil penalty
upon an industrial user for violation of any of the terms and
provisions of this article. The penalty may be assessed whether or
not the violation was willful or negligent. The civil penalty shall not
exceed $25,000 per day for each violation, regardless of
jurisdictional boundaries. Each violation for each separate day
shall constitute a separate and distinct defense under this section.
(2) As part of any notice of assessment of civil penalties issued by the
Joint Sewer Authority to an industrial user, there shall also be
included a description of the applicable appeals process to be
followed, including the name, address and telephone number of the
person responsible for accepting such appeal, on behalf of the Joint
Sewer Authority.
(3) For purposes of this section, a single operational upset which leads
to simultaneous violations of more than one pretreatment standard
or requirement shall be treated as a single violation as required by
the federal Water Pollution Control Act.101 The Joint Sewer
Authority may, however, recover its costs for reestablishing the
operation of the treatment works in addition to any civil penalty
imposed under this section.
(4) The Joint Sewer Authority shall publicly adopt a formal, written
civil penalty assessment policy and make it publicly available. Each
industrial discharger participating in the pretreatment program
shall be given written notice of the policy. The penalty assessment
policy shall consider:
(a) Damage to air, water, land or other natural resources of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and their uses;
(b) Costs of restoration and abatement;
(c) Savings resulting to the person in consequence of the violation;
(d) History of past violations;
(e) Deterrence of future violations;
100. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 752.1 et seq.
101. Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
§ 162-59 EAST NORRITON CODE § 162-59
158:298
§ 162-60. Building sewers and connections relating to industrial
users.
The provisions of any applicable Township Code or the provisions of this
section shall apply, whichever is more strict.
(f) Other relevant factors.
(5) Uses for penalties. All civil penalties collected pursuant to this
section shall be placed by the Joint Sewer Authority in a restricted
account and shall only be used by the Joint Sewer Authority and the
publicly owned treatment works for the following uses:
(a) The repair of damage and any additional maintenance needed
or any additional costs imposed as a result of the violation for
which the penalty was imposed;
(b) Pay any penalties imposed on the Joint Sewer Authority or the
POTW by the federal or state government for violation of
pretreatment standards;
(c) For the costs incurred by the Township or POTW to investigate
and take the enforcement action that resulted in a penalty
being imposed;
(d) For the monitoring of discharges in the pretreatment program
and for capital improvements to the treatment works,
including sewage collection lines, which may be required by
the pretreatment program; and
(e) Any remaining funds may be used for capital improvements to
the POTW, including collection lines.
A. No unauthorized persons (i.e., persons other than personnel of the Joint
Sewer Authority, the participating municipalities, or their agents) shall
uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or
disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first
obtaining a written permit from the Township.
B. Classes of building sewer permits.
(1) There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:
(a) For residential and commercial service, and;
(b) For service to industrial users.
(2) In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a
special form furnished by the Joint Sewer Authority and/or the
Township. The permit application shall be supplemented by any
plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in
the judgment of the Joint Sewer Authority and/or the Township. A
permit and inspection fee for a residential or commercial building
§ 162-59 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 162-60
158:299
sewer permit and for an industrial building sewer permit shall
be paid to the Joint Sewer Authority and/or the Township at the
time the application is filed. All building sewer permit applications
under Subsection B(1)(b), above, shall be reviewed and approved
in writing by the Joint Sewer Authority and/or the Township prior to
permit issuance. Permit and inspection fees for sewer permits shall
be in such amounts as may be established from time to time by the
Joint Sewer Authority and/or the Township.
C. All costs and expenses incidental to the installation, connection, and
maintenance of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner or user,
who shall indemnify the Joint Sewer Authority and/or the Township
from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be caused by the
installation of the building sewer.
D. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building or any part of any building as may be determined by the Joint
Sewer Authority and/or the Township.
E. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, upon examination and test by the Joint Sewer
Authority and/or the Township, to meet all requirements of this article.
F. The size, slope, alignment, materials or construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe,
jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench shall conform to the
requirements of the building and plumbing codes and/or other
applicable rules and regulations of the Joint Sewer Authority and/or the
Township. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification therefor
the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of
the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
G. In order to prevent grease, oil and sand from being discharged into the
public sewage system, all hospitals, nursing homes, hotels, restaurants,
and any other establishments engaged in the preparation, processing or
sale of food shall install and properly maintain one or more grease traps
of a type and capacity approved by the Joint Sewer Authority and/or the
Township, and same shall be located so as to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection. If any other user in the opinion
of the Joint Sewer Authority and/or the Township discharges a quantity,
oil or sand in its sewage so as to warrant the installation and
maintenance of one or more grease traps, same shall be installed and
maintained in accordance with these regulations at the direction of the
Joint Sewer Authority and/or the Township.
H. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by a
method approved by the Joint Sewer Authority and/or the Township and
discharged to the building sewer.
§ 162-60 EAST NORRITON CODE § 162-60
158:300
I. No person shall make connection of sump pumps, roof downspouts,
foundation drains, area way drains, or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is
connected directly or indirectly to a POTW unless such connection is
approved in writing by the Joint Sewer Authority and/or the Township
for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage.
J. The connection of the building sewer into the POTW (which for
purposes of this article includes the collection system) shall conform to
the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable
rules and regulations of the respective municipality set forth in
appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF Manual of
Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and
watertight, and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the
prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the Joint
Sewer Authority and/or the Township before installation.
K. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Manager
when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the
POTW. The connection to the public sewer and testing shall be made
under the supervision of the manager or his representative.
L. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights, so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property
disturbed in the course of work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the Joint Sewer Authority and/or the Township.
M. No excavation, construction, or connection work shall be commenced
within the Joint Sewer Authority and/or the Township right-of-way until
the owner, his agents and/or independent contractor shall have first
filed a bond in double the amount of the cost of the work to be
performed as determined by the Joint Sewer Authority and/or the
Township, agreeing to indemnify and save harmless the Joint Sewer
Authority and/or the Township against any and all loss, damages, costs,
and expenses which the Joint Sewer Authority and/or the Township may
thereafter suffer, incur, or pay by reason of the failure to complete
properly any of the aforesaid excavation, construction, or connection
work.
N. The term "owner" as used herein, shall be deemed to include the owner
or owners in fee simple, lessees of the premises, occupiers of the
premises, users, and all other parties having a use or interest in the
premises and occupying the same with or without the consent and
permission of the owner of the fee title.
O. Sanitary sewers installed with unused points of connection for building
sewers shall have said points of connection capped for watertight
integrity prior to connection of the building sewer. The method of
capping shall be one approved by the Manager and/or the Township.
§ 162-60 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 162-61
158:301
§ 162-61. Falsifying information.
Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation
or certification in any application, record, report plan or other document
filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, or wastewater
discharge permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders
inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article,
shall be prosecuted in accordance with the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Crimes Code pertaining to perjury and falsification in official matters
pursuant to 18 Pa.C.S.A. 4901 et seq.
§ 162-62. Fees.
§ 162-63. Severability; conflict with other legislation; when
effective.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the recovery of
costs from users of the Joint Sewer Authority's wastewater disposal
system for the implementation of the program established herein. The
applicable charges or fees shall be set forth in the Joint Sewer
Authority's Schedule of Charges and Fees.
B. Charges and fees.
(1) The Joint Sewer Authority may adopt by Ordinance charges and
fees which may include:
(a) Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating
the Joint Sewer Authority's pretreatment program;
(b) Fees for monitoring, inspections, and surveillance procedures;
(c) Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and
construction;
(d) Fees for permit applications;
(e) Fees for filing appeals;
(f) Fees for consistent removal (by the Joint Sewer Authority) of
pollutants otherwise subject to federal pretreatment
standards; and
(g) Other fees as the Joint Sewer Authority may deem necessary to
carry out the requirements contained herein.
(2) These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and
are separate from all other fees or sewer rentals chargeable by the
Joint Sewer Authority and Township.
A. Severability. If any provision of this article is invalidated by any court of
competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be affected
and shall continue in full force and effect.
§ 162-61 EAST NORRITON CODE § 162-63
158:302
§ 162-64. through § 162-83. (Reserved)
B. Conflict. All other ordinances and parts of other ordinances
inconsistent or conflicting with any part of this article are hereby
repealed to the extent of such inconsistency or conflict.
C. Effective date. This article shall be in full force and effect immediately
following its passage, approval, and publication, as provided by law.
§ 162-63 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 162-64
158:303

ARTICLE VI
Unauthorized Connections
[Adopted 3-20-2000 by Ord. No. 419]
§ 162-84. Purpose; objectives.
It is declared that the enactment of this article is necessary for the
protection, benefit and preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the
inhabitants of this Township. The objectives of this article are to prevent
the introduction of substances other than effluent into the sewer system in
the Township and to provide a means for the Township to inspect and locate
possible sources of inflow and infiltration into its sewer system and thereby
limit the addition of extraneous water into the Township's sewer system that
may cause the system's hydraulic capacity to be exceeded.
§ 162-85. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INFILTRATION — The water entering a sewer system and service
connections from the ground, through such means as, but not limited to,
defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or manhole walls. Infiltration does
not include, and is distinguished from, inflow.
INFLOW — The water discharged into a sewer system and service
connections from such sources as, but not limited to, roof leaders, cellar,
yard and area drains, foundation drains, cooling water discharges, drains
from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross-connections from
storm sewers and combined sewers, catch basins, stormwater, surface
runoff, street washes or drainage. Inflow does not include, and is
distinguished from, infiltration.
§ 162-86. Applicability; administrative officer.
This article shall apply to all users of the Township's sewer and sewer
collection system. Except as otherwise provided herein, the Sewage
Inspection Officer of the Township shall administer, implement and enforce
the provisions of this article.
§ 162-87. Construal of provisions.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the Township and any users
within or out of the Township whereby inflow and infiltration may be
accepted by the Township by special agreement, in writing, executed prior
to such acceptance, containing safeguards, limitations and conditions
acceptable to the Township.
§ 162-88. Unlawful discharge.
§ 162-84 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 162-88
158:305
§ 162-89. Sewage Inspection Officer.
The Board of Supervisors shall appoint a Sewage Inspection Officer
empowered to enforce the provisions of this article.
§ 162-90. Inspections.
The Sewage Inspection Officer shall perform free inspections at all
properties using the collection system, or all of those in a particular area,
in order to determine sources of inflow or infiltration into the sewer system.
Once a particular area is chosen, all owners located therein shall be
contacted and an inspection scheduled. The purpose of the inspection shall
be to determine whether or not prohibited substances described herein
are being contributed to the Township sewer system. The scope of the
inspection includes any and all areas in and around a structure on an
improved lot relating to the sewer system and possible video inspection
of the building sewer from the structure to the sewer main. The owner of
the property shall make all areas to be inspected available to the Sewer
Inspection Officer.
§ 162-90.1. Site-specific inspections. [Added 8-26-2003 by Ord. No.
456]
Whenever the Township or Sewage Inspection Officer has reason to believe
that any sewer pipes are cracked or otherwise defective on a property,
or that there is an unlawful discharge or unauthorized connection to the
sewer system on a property, such property shall be subject to test and
inspection. Unlawful discharges, unauthorized connections or defects found
upon such test and inspection, if any, shall be corrected as required and
within the time frame specified by the Sewage Inspection Officer at the cost
and expense of the property owner. The owner of the property shall make
all areas to be inspected available to the Sewage Inspection Officer.
A. No user shall contribute into the sewer system or cause to be
contributed, directly or indirectly, the following:
(1) Any stormwater, surface water, springwater, groundwater, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, building foundation drainage, cellar/
basement drainage and drainage from roof leader connections.
(2) Industrial waste.
(3) Automobile oil or other nondomestic oil.
(4) Toxic or hazardous substances or chemicals, including but not
limited to pesticides, disinfectants (excluding household cleaners),
acids, paints, paint thinners, herbicides, gasoline and other
solvents.
B. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the Township sewer
system, whether or not they are located within or outside the Township
boundaries.
§ 162-88 EAST NORRITON CODE § 162-90.2
158:306
§ 162-90.2. Untimely repairs surcharge. [Added 8-26-2003 by Ord.
No. 456]
If the property owner fails to timely repair any defect or cease unlawful
discharges or unauthorized connections, as required in writing by the
Sewage Inspection Officer, the property owner shall be subject to a
surcharge over and above the normal sewer rate equal to the ratio of wet
weather flow to dry weather flow.
§ 162-90.3. Access denial surcharge. [Added 8-26-2003 by Ord. No.
456]
If the property owner shall deny access to the property to the Sewage
Inspection Officer for either inspection of the sewer apparatus on the
property or detection of unauthorized connections or unlawful discharges,
then the property owner shall be subject to a surcharge over and above the
normal sewer rate equal to the ratio of wet weather flow to thy weather
flow.
§ 162-91. Notice.
The Sewage Inspection Officer shall contact each owner or person
responsible for the property relative to an inspection date and time.
§ 162-92. Violations and penalties.
Any person or entity alleged to have willfully or negligently failed to comply
with any provision of this article or the orders, rules and regulations issued
hereunder or directly from the Sewage Inspection Officer shall be
prosecuted before a District Justice and, upon conviction thereof, can be
subject to a fine of $1,000 per day for each violation. Each day on which a
violation shall occur or continue to occur shall be deemed to be a separate
and distinct offense.
§ 162-93. Civil penalties.
The Township Solicitor may commence an action for appropriate legal and/
or equitable relief in the Court of Common Pleas in Montgomery County
to recover civil damages, costs, reasonable attorney fees, court costs and
cost of court reporters' transcripts as well as other expenses of litigation
made necessary as a result of violations of this article or the orders, rules
and regulations issued hereunder or by the Sewage Inspection Officer to be
recovered in an action at law instituted by the Township against the person
alleged to have been responsible therefor.
§ 162-90.2 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 162-93
158:307

ARTICLE VII
Sewage Grinder Pumps
[Adopted 9-18-2012 by Ord. No. 544]
§ 162-94. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of terms used in this article shall be as follows:
ACT 537 PLAN — East Norriton Township's Official Plan as defined in
the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, Act of January 24, 1966, P.L. 1535
(1965), No. 537, as amended, 35 P.S. §§ 750.1 to 750.20a ("Sewage Facilities
Act" or "Act 537").
DEPARTMENT — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
GRINDER PUMP — Any electric motor-driven, submersible pump used
in the conveyance of sanitary sewage capable of macerating all material
found in normal domestic sanitary sewage, including reasonable amounts of
objects, such as plastics, sanitary napkins, disposable diapers, rubber and
the like, to a fine slurry, and pumping this material through a small diameter
discharge.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any parcel of real estate located within the
Township subject to the regulations of 25 Pa. Code 71.01 et seq, and upon
which there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic
habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which
structure sewage shall or may be discharged.
OFFICIAL PLAN REVISION — A change in the Township Act 537 Plan to
provide for additional or newly identified future or existing sewage facilities
needs, as defined fully in Section One of the Sewage Facilities Act, 35 P.S.
§ 750.1.
PROPERTY OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or
equitable, sole or partial, of any property located within the Township.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products or
excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals
UPDATE REVISION — A comprehensive revision to the Act 537 Plan
required when the Department or Township determines the Official
Plan or one or more of its parts is inadequate for the existing or future
sewage facilities needs of the Township, its residents or landowners.
A.
SPECIAL STUDY — A study, survey, investigation, inquiry, research
report or analysis which is directly related to an update revision. The
studies provide documentation or other support necessary to solve
specific problems identified in the update revision.
B.
REVISION FOR NEW LAND DEVELOPMENT — A revision to the Act
537 Plan resulting from a proposed subdivision as defined in the Act
537 Plan.
C.
§ 162-94 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 162-94
158:309
and any noxious or deleterious substance being harmful or inimical to
the public health, to the life of animals or aquatic life, and to the use of
water for domestic and/or recreational purposes, and any substance which
constitutes pollution under the Clean Streams Law, 35 P.S. §§ 691.1 to
691.1001, as amended.
TOWNSHIP — East Norriton Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania,
a second class township having an address of 2501 Stanbridge Street, East
Norriton, Pennsylvania 19401.
§ 162-95. Planning requirements.
The connection of proposed new land development or a proposed new
improved property to an existing or proposed sewage system through the
use of sewage grinder pumps, their associated force mains, or low-pressure
laterals, shall occur only after an Official Plan revision to the Act 537 Plan,
approved by both the Township and the Department, designates that the
proposed properties be served by such a connection. All existing improved
properties containing a grinder pump prior to the passage of this article are
exempt from the provisions contained herein.
§ 162-96. Duties and responsibilities of Township.
§ 162-97. Duties and responsibilities of property owners.
A. The Township shall exercise its powers and legal authority set forth
herein, and under all applicable statutes, ordinances, and other laws to
make effective the purposes of this article.
B. The Township shall require an agreement with each property owner
proposing to install a sewage grinder pump or low-pressure sewage
system to ensure the short- and long-term operation and maintenance,
use, service, repair or replacement of such systems.
C. The Township shall require that all grinder pumps and low-pressure
sewer systems (and the installation, use, operation, maintenance,
service, repair and replacement thereof) shall comply with the rules
and regulations of the Township.
D. The Township shall require that all grinder pumps and low-pressure
sewer systems be connected to the Township's sewage collection and
conveyance system in full compliance with the rules and regulations of
the Township.
E. The Township shall review the type of grinder pump used and ensure
that the property owner has provided documentation that full service
capacity is available locally, on short notice, in the event of malfunction.
F. The Township shall bear no responsibility for the purchase, installation,
use, operation, maintenance, service, repair, or replacement of the
grinder pump and/or its low-pressure force main or lateral, except as
otherwise set forth herein.
§ 162-94 EAST NORRITON CODE § 162-97
158:310
§ 162-98. Reimbursement of costs.
In the event the Township performs the property owner's obligations as
outlined in this article or any agreements resulting herefrom, the Township
shall charge the property owner the cost incurred by the Township to
perform the property owner's obligations, and the property owner shall
reimburse the Township for all such costs. The Township shall also collect
an administrative fee from the property owner in the amount of 10% of the
actual total costs.
A. Each property owner served by a grinder pump shall bear full
responsibility for providing, installing, using, operating, maintaining,
servicing, repairing and replacing his/her grinder pump and/or its lowpressure
force main or lateral, unless otherwise set forth herein.
B. If the low-pressure force main is shared between property owners, each
property owner shall submit to the Township a declaration of
easements, covenants and restrictions in recordable form, setting forth
the agreement of each benefited property owner with respect to the
installation, use, operation, maintenance, service, repair and
replacement of the low-pressure sewer system; said agreement shall
bind all future property owners. Following the approval of the lowpressure
system by all necessary parties, the Township will not issue a
permit for the system's installation until evidence is presented that the
agreement as defined in this subsection has been recorded in the office
of the Recorder of Deeds, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
C. Each property owner shall, at his/her own expense, contract with either
a plumber or a private, independent contractor who has specialized
training by the manufacturer of the original equipment to service the
grinder pump and all of its appurtenances. The property owner shall
annually renew and provide a copy of this maintenance contract to the
Township for the life of the grinder pump.
D. Each property owner shall ensure the contractor inspects the grinder
pump at least once every three years and that an inspection report is
generated from each inspection. The property owner shall provide the
Township with copies of the inspection report, signed by the contractor.
The inspection report shall certify that the grinder pump is operational,
indicate resolution of any deficiencies noted in the contractor's
inspection, as well as any service or alarm calls which occurred in the
period between inspections. Should the property owner wish to make a
revision or modification to the grinder pump, the property owner is
responsible for obtaining any required permits from the Township prior
to modification or revision as well as providing an amended and revised
drawing detailing the revision or modification to the Township. All costs
associated with inspections, modifications and amendments of and to
the grinder pump shall be borne solely by the property owner.
§ 162-97 REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES § 162-99
158:311
§ 162-99. Remedies of Township.
In the event of the property owner's failure to perform under or comply
with this article or any agreements resulting herefrom, the Township shall
have the right to pursue whatever legal or equitable remedy it deems
appropriate, including, but not limited to, an action for specific performance
against the property owner and filing a lien against the property.
§ 162-100. Abatement of nuisances.
In addition to any other remedies provided in this article, any violation of
§ 162-97 or § 162-98 contained herein shall constitute a nuisance and shall
be abated by the Township by seeking mitigation of the nuisance or other
appropriate equitable or legal relief from a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 162-101. Rules and regulations to be in accordance with
applicable law.
All such rules and regulations adopted by the Township to effectuate this
article shall be in conformity with the provisions herein, all other ordinances
of the Township, and all applicable laws, and applicable rules and
regulations of administrative agencies of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 162-99 EAST NORRITON CODE § 162-101
158:312
Chapter 163
SHOPPING CARTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 205.
§ 163-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Any person or persons, male or female, corporation,
partnership, association, company, individual, owner, occupant, lessee or
any agency, organization or other entity recognized by law as the subjects
of rights and duties.
§ 163-2. Location of carts on property.
It shall be unlawful, a nuisance and adverse to the public health, safety
and welfare for any business owner that provides shopping carts for its
customers to permit shopping carts anywhere on the property other than in
a designated enclosed area.
§ 163-3. Violations and penalties.
A. Violations. [Amended 9-26-2006 by Ord. No. 487]
(1) Any person that has on its property or elsewhere (not on its
property) five or more shopping carts not in the designated
enclosed area shall be in violation of this chapter.
(2) Any shopping cart that is found outside of a business's designated
area may be taken by the Township to a designated area at the
Township building, and any business owner may reclaim its
shopping carts from the Township for a fee of $25 per shopping
cart.
B. Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be
sentenced as follows:
(1) For the first offense, a written warning shall be issued by the Chief
of Police or the Fire Marshal.
(2) For the second offense, a written warning shall be issued by the
Chief of Police or the Fire Marshal.
(3) For the third offense and upon being judged guilty thereof in any
proceeding brought by virtue hereof before the District Justice, the
person shall be guilty of a summary offense, punishable by fine if
§ 162-101 SHOPPING CARTS § 163-3
163:313
Chapter 165
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dumps and dumping — See Ch. 92.
Hazardous wastes — See Ch. 118.
Nuisances — See Ch. 129.
not more than $1,000 per offense or by imprisonment not to exceed
30 days, or both. Each day a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
C. Offenses shall be accumulated on a moving twelve-month basis. Any
offense more than one year old shall not be considered in determining
whether an offense is a first or subsequent offense.
§ 163-3 EAST NORRITON CODE § 163-3
163:314
ARTICLE I
Solid Waste Management
[Adopted 10-28-2008 by Ord. No. 510102]
§ 165-1. Definitions and word usage.
A. The following terms shall have the following meanings in this article:
ACCEPTABLE WASTE — Municipal waste which is collected from the
general public or is otherwise consistent with Section 7701(e)(3)(B)
of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, which is not
unacceptable waste.
COMPANY — Dravo Energy Resources of Montgomery County, Inc.
CONTRACTOR — Dravo Operations of Montgomery County, Inc.
COUNTY — The County of Montgomery, Pennsylvania.
COUNTY ORDINANCE — An ordinance enacted by the county creating
the county system, providing for the licensure of various persons,
regulating waste flow and setting forth certain related provisions.
COUNTY SYSTEM or SYSTEM — The county solid waste management
and disposal system created by the county and every aspect thereof,
including but not limited to equipment, transfer and resource recovery
facilities, residue disposal sites, contractual arrangements or other
rights, owned, acquired, leased, placed under contract, constructed
or assumed, operated or to be owned, acquired, leased, placed under
contract, constructed, operated or assumed by the county or any agent,
designee or contractor in connection with the plan.
DATE OF COUNTY SYSTEM OPERATION — That date on which the
county system shall be declared by the county to be ready to commence
the disposal of acceptable waste on a sustained basis.
EXISTING CONTRACT — Any agreement or contract fully executed
prior to the effective date of this article for the collection, disposal or
transportation of municipal waste generated within this municipality.
EXTERIOR PROPERTY — The open space on the premises and on
adjoining property under the control of owners or operators of such
premises.
FACILITY — Any agreement or contract fully executed prior to the
effective date of this article for the collection, disposal or transportation
of municipal waste generated within this municipality.
FACILITY AGREEMENT — The amended and restated facility
agreement among the company, contractor and the Montgomery
County Industrial Development Authority, as such may be further
amended from time to time.
102. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Solid Waste Management,
adopted 5-8-1989 by Ord. No. 276.
§ 165-1 SHOPPING CARTS § 165-1
163:315
LICENSED HAULER — Any owner of a waste transportation vehicle
licensed under Pennsylvania Act 90.
MUNICIPAL COMMITMENT — The obligation of each participating
municipality to deliver, or cause to be delivered, to the county system
all of the residential component of its municipally generated acceptable
waste, and such other acceptable waste as the participating
municipality and the county may hereafter agree to include in such
municipal commitment.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of East Norriton (a Township of the
second class) located within the County of Montgomery,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or
office waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or
contained gaseous materials, resulting from operation of residential,
municipal, commercial, or institutional establishments and from
community activities and any sludge not meeting the definition of
residual waste or hazardous waste in Act 97 and Act 101103 from a
municipal, commercial or institutional water supply treatment plant,
wastewater treatment plant or air pollution control facility.
MUNICIPAL WASTE AUTHORITY — The Waste System Authority of
Montgomery County, created by the county for purposes relating to
municipal waste processing and disposal and/or the intermunicipal
agreement and the County Waste Flow Ordinance.
NONPROCESSIBLE WASTE — That portion of acceptable waste which
consists of:
OWNER — Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having
a legal or equitable interest in real estate in the Township of East
Norriton or otherwise having control of the property, including the
guardian of an estate of such person and the executor or administrator
of the estate of such person.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, trust, municipal authority, federal
institution or agency, state institution or agency, municipality, other
governmental agency or any other legal entity or any group of such
(1) White goods;
(2) Automobile tires in quantity; or
Noncombustible items, stumps, logs, brush and other waste which
either:
(a) Weighs in excess of 25 pounds; or
Exceeds one of the following dimensions: four feet in length,
four inches in diameter or four inches in thickness.
(b)
(3)
103. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq., respectively.
§ 165-1 EAST NORRITON CODE § 165-1
163:316
persons whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights
and duties. In any provisions of this article prescribing a fine, penalty,
imprisonment or denial or grant of any license, or any combination of
the foregoing, the term "person" shall include the officers and directors
of any corporation or other legal entity having officers and directors.
PLAN — The countywide municipal waste management plan developed
by the county and approved by the Department of Environmental
Resources, as such may hereafter be amended or modified in
compliance with law.
POINT OF ENTRY INTO THE COUNTY SYSTEM — Any delivery point
within the county system designated by the county for delivery of
municipal waste.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, including any structures
thereon.
PROCESSIBLE WASTE — That portion of acceptable waste which is not
nonprocessible waste.
RECYCLING or RECYCLED — The collection, separation, recovery and
sale or reuse of metals, glass, paper, leaf waste, plastics and other
materials which would otherwise be disposed or processed as municipal
waste or the mechanized separation and treatment of municipal waste
(other than through combustion) and creation and recovery of reusable
materials other than a fuel for the operation of energy.
RESIDENTIAL COMPONENT — All acceptable waste generated by
households within a participating municipality, exclusive of multiplefamily
dwellings which are not included in the calculation of the
residential component pursuant to regulations of the county.
SERVICE AGREEMENT — The amended and restated municipal waste
disposal service agreement by and between the county and Dravo
Operations of Montgomery County, Inc., or any successor thereto, as
such may be further amended from time to time.
SOURCE SEPARATION — The segregation and collection, prior to the
point of entry into the county system, for the purpose of recycling of
individual components of acceptable waste, such as (without limitation)
bottles, cans and other materials in accordance with Act 101.104
TENANT — A person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not
the legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a
unit.
UNACCEPTABLE WASTE —
Explosives, pathological and biological waste, residual waste and
hazardous waste, radioactive materials, sludges, cesspool or other
human waste, human and animal remains, motor vehicles, liquid
waste, contained gaseous materials which may pose a hazard to the
(1)
104. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 165-1 SHOPPING CARTS § 165-1
163:317
§ 165-2. Accumulation of rubbish or garbage.
WHITE GOODS — Refrigerators, washing machines, dryers, window air
conditioners, hot-water heaters and other major home appliances.
YARD — An open space on the same lot with a structure.
facility or the community, hazardous substances as defined in the
federal Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation
and Liability Act, as it may be amended from time to time hereafter,
and any analogous federal, state or local law, ordinance, rule or
regulation as may be applicable at the time of delivery of waste to
the facility, and commercial waste which is not permitted by law to
be treated and disposed of in the facility;
(2) Any item of waste either smoldering or on fire;
Construction and demolition debris, ashes, incinerator residue and
foundry sand;
(3)
Waste in quantities and concentrations which require special
handling in their collection and/or processing, including medical or
other "red bag waste"; and
(4)
All other items of waste which, at the time of delivery to the facility,
would be likely to pose a threat to health or safety or have been
prohibited by any valid and enforceable judicial decision, order or
governmental action from being accepted by the facility.
(5)
B. All other capitalized words and phrases shall have the same meanings
as set forth in Act 97 or Act 101105 as they may hereinafter be amended
or supplemented by legislation regarding municipal waste management
or planning, or as set forth in the intermunicipal agreement, facility
agreement or service agreement. To the extent that any definition
herein varies from the definition in the intermunicipal agreement, the
definition in the intermunicipal agreement shall control.
A. Prohibited. All exterior property and premises and the interior of every
structure shall be free from any accumulation of municipal waste.
B. Method of disposal. The occupants of a structure shall dispose of all
municipal waste in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such
municipal waste in approved containers.
C. Containers required. The owner of every dwelling shall supply
approved leakproof, covered, outside garbage containers of sufficient
number so that all garbage and refuse of all of the occupants of the
premises can dispose of their municipal waste in a garbage container
and so that no municipal waste is stored by any occupant of the
premises outside of a garbage container at any time.
105. .Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq., respectively.
§ 165-1 EAST NORRITON CODE § 165-2
163:318
§ 165-3. Operator's license required; compliance.
D. Storage of municipal waste. The owner of any premises shall provide at
all times approved leakproof containers with close-fitting covers for the
storage of municipal waste until such time as the municipal waste is
removed from the premises for disposal.
E. Removal by licensed haulers. Every owner in East Norriton Township
shall contract with an individual, entity or firm which is a licensed
hauler by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to have all the municipal
waste generated on the premises by any of the occupants of the
premises removed and deposited in a permitted landfill on a weekly
basis or more often.
F. Proof of contract required. Whenever requested by East Norriton
Township, the owner of any real estate within the Township shall
present proof adequate in the judgment of the Township designee that
the owner of said real estate has a current contract with a licensed
hauler to dispose of municipal waste generated on the premises on a
weekly basis or more often. The owner of the premises shall have 72
hours to provide proof to the Township designee that he has a current
contract with a licensed hauler to provide sufficient service to satisfy
the terms and conditions of this article.
G. Duties of haulers. Any hauler picking up municipal waste in East
Norriton Township shall be required to advise the Township in writing
within 72 hours after request from the Township as to whether an
owner has a current contract for municipal waste disposal from his
premises within the Township. Furthermore, all licensed haulers shall
cooperate with the Township designee in providing information in the
event that an action is instituted to enforce the terms and conditions of
this article.
H. Compost piles. Notwithstanding the terms of this article, compost piles
kept by occupants or tenants of a structure shall not violate the terms
and conditions of this article, provided that the materials in the compost
piles do not generate any offensive odors and provided further that said
compost piles are secure so that animals do not spread the materials
from the compost piles around the premises.
A. Licensing. No person who is not duly licensed or deemed to be licensed
by the county may collect or transport municipal waste located or
generated within the municipality. This waste collection or
transportation license shall be a county license issued by the county or
the municipal waste authority. The municipality shall administer such
license upon request of the county or the municipal waste authority.
B. Compliance with rules, regulations and ordinances. In carrying on
activities related to solid waste collection or transportation within this
municipality, all municipal waste collectors and all municipal waste
transporters shall comply with the county ordinance, this article and
§ 165-2 SHOPPING CARTS § 165-3
163:319
§ 165-4. Disposal; recycling.
§ 165-5. Additional rules and regulations.
the other municipal waste flow ordinances and all rules and regulations
pertaining to the collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste
as may be hereafter promulgated by the municipality, or by the
municipal waste authority or the county. Delivery by such collectors
or transporters to the county system of unacceptable waste,
nonprocessible waste (except for white goods) and waste from
unapproved sources is prohibited.
C. Administration. Licenses hereunder shall be issued and revoked by the
county or the municipal waste authority, and administered by them or,
at their request, by the municipality. Any collectors or transporters who
fail to comply with the provisions of this article shall be subject to any
applicable sanctions in addition to the revocation of their licenses.
A. Delivery to county system. Except as provided in Subsections B and C
below, all acceptable waste generated within this municipality shall be
delivered to the county system, and all acceptable waste collectors and
transporters shall deliver to and dispose of all acceptable waste
collected or generated within the municipality to solid waste facilities
designated in the plan at one or more points of entry into the county
system as designated from time to time by the county or the municipal
waste authority.
B. Disposal at other sites. Disposal of municipal waste collected or
generated within the municipality may occur at other sites only as
permitted by rule, regulation, ordinance or order duly issued by the
county or municipal waste authority or by the written agreement of the
county or municipal waste authority and the municipality.
C. Recycling. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit source
separation or recycling or to affect any sites at which source separation
or recycling may take place.
A. Compliance with county regulations. The collection, transportation and
disposal of municipal waste present or generated within the
municipality shall be subject to such further reasonable rules and
regulations as may from time to time be promulgated by the county,
including any amendments to the County Waste Flow Ordinance and to
such reasonable rules and regulations as may be adopted by the county
or the municipal waste authority including, without limitation,
regulations relating to the operation, management and administration
of the county system, applications and standards for licensing,
requirements for payment bonds or other payment security, including
but not limited to meeting liability insurance requirements, fees to be
charged for such licensing, the terms of licenses, procedures,
recordkeeping, transportation routes, payment for services, billing for
shortfalls, sanctions for nonpayment and other matters. To the extent
§ 165-3 EAST NORRITON CODE § 165-5
163:320
§ 165-6. Annual survey.
that a municipality is engaged in the administration of any licenses
pursuant to written agreement with the county as required in Section
303(d) of Act 101106 and as provided in the County Waste Flow
Ordinance, it shall do so in accordance with the foregoing rules and
regulations and, in any event, at the direction of the county.
B. Adoption of regulations. Rules and regulations adopted by the county or
municipal waste authority for the county system shall be deemed rules
and regulations adopted under this article. Each of the municipalities
shall abide by such rules and regulations and will not adopt any rules
and regulations to the contrary.
C. Consistency of regulations with ordinance and other laws. No rules or
regulations adopted by the municipality pursuant to this article shall be
in violation of, inconsistent with or less stringent than the provisions of
this article, the other municipal waste flow ordinances, the County
Waste Flow Ordinance, the plan, the provisions and purposes of Act 97,
Act 101107 or regulations adopted thereunder, or such other laws,
regulations or requirements as may be enacted by the United States of
America, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources or the Pennsylvania
Environmental Quality Board governing municipal waste planning,
collection, storage, transportation, processing or disposal.
D. Enforcement of waste flow control. Enforcement of waste flow control
and the terms of and any duties established pursuant to the County
Waste Flow Ordinance, the other municipal waste flow ordinances and
this article will be the responsibility of the county or the municipal
waste authority or the municipalities at the direction of the county or
the municipal waste authority.
A. An annual survey of all generators of municipal waste and of all
municipal waste collectors and municipal waste transporters, any
landfill operators, any transfer station operators or any other parties
involved in the collection, transportation, processing or disposal of
municipal waste of the municipality shall be conducted by an
engineering consultant designated by the county or the municipal
waste authority. Such engineering consultant shall estimate based on
such survey the amount of each type of municipal waste of the
municipality expected to be generated in the following year, after
recycling, in total and in each of the following categories:
(1) Municipally collected.
(2) Municipally contracted.
106. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.303(d).
107. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq., respectively.
§ 165-5 SHOPPING CARTS § 165-6
163:321
§ 165-7. Restrictions.
(3) Municipal waste disposal arranged for by residents.
(4) Municipal waste disposal arranged for by apartment houses,
condominium associations and other multiresident dwellings.
(5) Municipal waste disposal arranged for by commercial
establishments.
(6) Other.
B. All persons who are the subject of this survey are required to cooperate
in the taking and preparation of the survey.
C. In connection with the annual survey, pursuant to the intermunicipal
agreement, at the beginning of the first operating year and at least 150
days prior to the beginning of each subsequent operating year, the
county and the municipality shall jointly specify the size of the
projection of the municipality's municipal commitment for such
operating year, which projection shall be equal to the amount of the
municipality's residential component (as reasonably determined by an
engineer retained by the county or municipal waste authority for this
purpose, after taking into account any and all information provided by
the municipality) plus any other amounts agreed upon by the county
and the municipality. This projection will be the net of any waste
removed as a result of source separation. This projection shall be
further stated in 12 monthly projections, the sum of which shall be
equal to the operating year projection. This projection shall be adjusted
by the county from time to time following consultation with the
municipality, as and when the county determines that such projection
was incorrect, and from year to year in accordance with the experience
of the previous year and the volume anticipated in the coming year.
D. At the time that the county and municipality make the foregoing
projection, the municipality shall assist the county in projecting the
total amount of acceptable waste expected to be generated within the
municipality during the forthcoming operating year.
E. Based upon the foregoing projections, the county shall make
projections of total tonnage and projections of monthly tonnage as
required pursuant to any applicable disposal agreements, including the
service agreement with respect to the facility. The county shall use its
best efforts to maximize the tonnage delivered to the facility up to the
maximum capacity of the facility.
A. The municipality shall not construct, enlarge, operate or contract for or
renew any contract for any facility or hauling to any facility, other than
a facility designated by the county pursuant to the intermunicipal
agreement or regulations promulgated pursuant to the intermunicipal
agreement, for, or enter into or renew any contract for, the treatment,
processing and/or disposal of municipally generated acceptable waste,
§ 165-6 EAST NORRITON CODE § 165-7
163:322
§ 165-8. Creation of municipal waste authority.
The county will create a municipal waste authority to administer the terms
of the County Waste Flow Ordinance and to operate the county system. This
authority shall be recognized as having the power to act in place of the
county, to the extent determined by the county.
§ 165-9. Prohibited acts; public nuisance.
except as shall conform to the county ordinance and this article and
as the county may expressly agree to in writing. In addition, the
municipality shall take all such action as may be necessary to ensure
that all of its obligations will be met once the county system is
operational. The municipality shall agree to use its best efforts to
assign its rights under any contract concerning the use of any disposal
facilities or transfer stations to which it was a party to the county on
the effective date of the intermunicipal agreement. Any such assigned
contract shall become part of the county system; provided, however,
with respect to any such contracts for which assignment is not possible,
each participating municipality shall act at the direction of the county
with respect to such contract, and such contract shall be deemed to be
part of the county system.
B. No person shall enter into any contract or conduct any other activity
concerning the collection, transportation, processing or disposal of
municipal waste in the municipality in contravention of the terms of the
County Waste Flow Ordinance, this article or any rules and regulations
issued thereunder.
C. Recycling. Nothing contained in this article shall interfere with the
operation of any program for recycling.
D. This article shall be construed consistently with Act 97 and Act 101.108
A. Unlawful conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Violate, cause or assist in the violation of any provision of this
article, any rule, regulation or order promulgated hereunder or any
rule, regulation or order promulgated by the county or the
municipal waste authority consistent with this article.
(2) Transport, process, treat, transfer or dispose of or cause to be
processed, treated, transferred or disposed municipal waste
generated within the municipality, except as provided for in this
article.
(3) Collect or transport municipal waste present or generated within
the municipality without a valid license or collection or
transportation issued by the county or the municipal waste
authority.
108. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq., respectively
§ 165-7 SHOPPING CARTS § 165-9
163:323
§ 165-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person who engages in unlawful conduct as defined in this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, in a summary proceeding before a District Justice,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and not less than
$500 and, in default of payment thereof, may prescribe imprisonment to the
extent allowed by law for the punishment of summary offenses.
§ 165-11. Revocation of license.
Upon finding that any person has engaged in unlawful conduct as defined in
this article:
§ 165-12. Injunctions; concurrent remedies.
§ 165-13. Intermunicipal agreement.
(4) Hinder, obstruct, prevent or interfere with the municipality, the
municipal waste authority or the county or its personnel in the
performance of any duty under this article or in the enforcement of
this article.
(5) Act in a manner that is contrary to Act 97 or Act 101109 regulations
promulgated thereunder, the plan, this article, the county
ordinance, rules or regulations promulgated under this article, the
county ordinance or the terms of licenses issued thereunder.
B. Public nuisance. Any unlawful conduct set forth in § 165-9A hereof shall
constitute a public nuisance.
A. The municipal waste authority or the county may revoke any license
issued to that person in accordance with § 165-3 of this article.
B. The municipal waste authority or the county may deny any subsequent
application by that person for a license pursuant to § 165-3 hereof.
A. Restraining violations. In addition to any other remedy provided in this
article, the municipality or the county may institute a suit in equity
where unlawful conduct or public nuisance exists as defined in this
article for an injunction to restrain a violation of this article or rules,
regulations, orders or the terms of licenses promulgated or issued
pursuant to this article. In addition to an injunction, the court may
impose penalties as authorized by § 165-10 hereof.
B. Concurrent remedies. The penalties and remedies prescribed by this
article shall be deemed concurrent. The existence or exercise of any
remedy shall not prevent the municipality or the county from exercising
any other remedy provided by this article or otherwise provided at law
or equity.
109. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq., respectively.
§ 165-9 EAST NORRITON CODE § 165-13
163:324
A. Entry into intermunicipal agreement. In order to implement the intent
and terms of this article, the municipality, pursuant to the authority of
the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, Act of July 12, 1972, No. 180,
codified as 53 P.S. §§ 481 to 490 (Purdon 1974 and Purdon Supp. 1988),
and Article IX, Section 5, of the Constitution of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, has determined to enter into the intermunicipal
agreement between the municipality, the county and other
municipalities within Solid Waste District Nos. 1 and 2 of the county,
together with such changes consistent with this article, if any, as may
be approved by the officials or the parties executing the same, such
execution to be conclusive evidence of such approval.
B. Terms and implementation of intermunicipal agreement. As more fully
set forth in the intermunicipal agreement and this article:
(1) Conditions and terms of intermunicipal agreement. In the
intermunicipal agreement:
(a) The county or the municipal waste authority agrees to arrange
through the county system for the provision of municipal waste
disposal facilities for the economical and environmentally
sound disposal of acceptable waste generated within the
participating municipalities, and in the course thereof to
arrange for the construction of a privately owned onethousand-
two-hundred-ton-per-day facility for the processing
or other disposition of acceptable waste generated within the
several jurisdictions of the participating municipalities.
(b) The participating municipalities state that they have enacted a
municipal waste flow ordinance in a form substantially similar
to this article and assure that the residential component of
their acceptable waste will be delivered to the county system.
(c) The county or the municipal waste authority agrees to enact or
cause to be enacted rules and regulations and to enforce or
cause to be enforced this article and the County Waste Flow
Ordinance and the parallel municipal waste flow ordinances.
(d) The parties agree to cooperate in the joint enforcement of the
intermunicipal agreement and all ordinances enacted pursuant
to the intermunicipal agreement and the participating
municipalities thereby agree cooperatively to exercise, to
delegate to the county or the municipal waste authority, and to
allow delegation of such powers, duties and responsibilities as
set forth in the intermunicipal agreement.
(2) Duration of term of the intermunicipal agreement. The term of the
intermunicipal agreement shall commence on the closing date for
the financing of the facility and shall terminate on the earlier of the
30th anniversary of such date or at the end of the operating year in
which all bonds and any other indebtedness outstanding issued in
§ 165-13 SHOPPING CARTS § 165-13
163:325
connection with the bonds or owed to any assignee have been paid
in full.
(3) Purpose and objectives of intermunicipal agreement. The purpose
of the intermunicipal agreement is to provide a mechanism to
finance, to construct and to operate the county system to serve the
municipalities within the county and to provide continuing
municipal waste planning as more fully set forth in the recitals to
the intermunicipal agreement and this article.
(4) Manner and extent of financing the intermunicipal agreement.
During the term of the intermunicipal agreement, participating
municipalities and other persons using the county system shall pay
to the county on a monthly basis the then-current per-ton municipal
tipping fee, plus any other charges payable, as specified by the
county and then in effect, for all tonnage delivered or caused to be
delivered to the county system, in accordance with Article III of the
intermunicipal agreement.
C. Execution. Appropriate officers of this municipality are authorized and
directed to execute the intermunicipal agreement on behalf of this
municipality.
D. Findings under Intergovernmental Competition Act. As required by the
Intergovernmental Cooperation Act of July 12, 1972, P.L. 762, No.
180,110 as amended, the following matters are specifically found and
determined:
(1) The conditions of agreement as set forth in the intermunicipal
agreement.
(2) The duration of the term of the agreement is set forth in Section
901 of the intermunicipal agreement.
(3) The purpose of the intermunicipal agreement is to cooperate with
the county or municipal waste authority and other participating
municipalities in implementing the plan.
(4) The agreement will be financed through the budgeting and
appropriation of funds by the municipality as necessary to meet the
municipality's obligations.
(5) The organizational structure necessary to implement the
agreement is set forth in the intermunicipal agreement with which
the current officers of the municipality shall cooperate.
(6) The manner in which property, real or personal, shall be acquired,
managed, licensed or disposed of is by way of lease or other
contract otherwise as set forth in the intermunicipal agreement.
110. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 165-13 EAST NORRITON CODE § 165-13
163:326
§ 165-13.1. Construal.
The terms and provisions of this article are to be liberally construed, so as
best to achieve and to effectuate the goals and purposes hereof. This article
shall be construed in pari material with Act 97 and Act 101.111
(7) The agreement contemplates cooperation with the county or
municipal waste authority, which entities are empowered to enter
into contracts for policies of group insurance and employee
benefits, including social security, for its employees.
111. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq., respectively.
§ 165-13 SHOPPING CARTS § 165-13.1
163:327

ARTICLE II
Waste Collectors and Recyclables
[Adopted 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 282; amended in its entirety
12-18-2007 by Ord. No. 502]
§ 165-14. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "East Norriton Township
Municipal Waste Collection and Recycling Ordinance."
§ 165-15. Purpose.
The reduction of the amount of municipal waste and conservation of
recyclable materials is an important public concern by reason of the
growing problem of municipal waste disposal and its impact on the
environment. The collection of recyclables from residences and from
commercial and institutional establishments in East Norriton Township will
serve the general public interest by reducing the volume of municipal
waste which must be disposed of, thereby reducing storage, collection,
transportation and disposal costs of municipal waste and preserving
valuable natural resources, and will result in a financial benefit to the
residents and taxpayers of East Norriton Township by reason of costs
avoided in collecting, transporting and disposing of those materials which
are diverted from the municipal waste stream through recycling.
§ 165-16. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALUMINUM — Empty, all-aluminum beverage containers.
BIMETALLIC CONTAINERS — Empty food or beverage containers
consisting of steel and aluminum.
CLEAR GLASS — Bottles and jars made of clear, colorless glass. Expressly
excluded are noncontainer glass, plate glass, colored glass, porcelain and
ceramic products.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Those properties used primarily for
commercial or industrial purposes and multifamily dwelling units.
CORRUGATED PAPER — Structural paper material with an inner core
shaped in rigid parallel furrows and ridges.
FERROUS CONTAINERS — Empty steel or tin-coated steel food or beverage
containers.
GLASS CONTAINERS — Bottles and jars made of clear, green or brown
glass. Excluded are plate glass, automotive glass, blue glass and porcelain
and ceramic products.
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — All white paper, bond paper and computer
paper used in commercial, institutional and municipal establishments.
§ 165-14 SHOPPING CARTS § 165-16
163:329
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Those establishments or facilities
engaged in providing services or housing to groups of people, including but
not limited to hospitals, nursing homes, schools and day-care centers.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves, garden residues, shrubbery and tree trimmings,
and similar material, but not including grass clippings.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING UNITS — Properties upon which there is an
attached dwelling unit having horizontal and/or vertical party walls in
common with other dwelling units.
MULTIFAMILY ESTABLISHMENTS — Includes properties which have four
or more dwelling units.
MUNICIPAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Public facilities operated by a
municipality or other governmental or quasi-governmental authority.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous materials resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities
and any sludge not meeting the definition of residual waste or hazardous
waste in the Solid Waste Management Act from a municipal, commercial or
institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant or
air pollution control facility. The term municipal waste shall exclude sourceseparated
recyclables.
MUNICIPAL WASTE COLLECTOR — Any person registered, pursuant to
this article and the regulations established by a resolution adopted
hereunder and to any intermunicipal agreement subsequently executed by
East Norriton Township with Montgomery County or other municipalities,
to collect, remove, transport or haul municipal waste from any property in
East Norriton Township.
NEWSPAPERS — Paper of the type commonly referred to as "newsprint"
and distributed at fixed intervals, having printed thereon news and
opinions, advertisements and other matters of public interest.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, trust, municipal authority, federal
institution or agency, state institution or agency, municipality, other
governmental agency or any other legal entity or any group of such persons
whatsoever which is recognized by law as a subject of rights and duties. In
any provision of this article prescribing a fine, penalty or imprisonment, or
any combination of the foregoing, the term person shall mean the officers
and directors of any corporation or other legal entity having officers and
directors.
PLASTIC BOTTLES — Empty consumer product bottles made of
polyethylene terephthalate (PET) and high-density polyethylene (HDPE),
such as soft drink bottles and milk and bleach bottles. Excluded are plastic
wraps and bags.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Includes leaf waste and those materials
required to be recycled pursuant to the provisions of this article or other
§ 165-16 EAST NORRITON CODE § 165-16
163:330
ordinances of East Norriton Township or of regulations established by
resolution adopted hereunder as revised from time to time.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS COLLECTOR — Any person registered,
pursuant to this article and the regulations established by a resolution
adopted hereunder and to any intermunicipal agreement subsequently
executed by East Norriton Township with Montgomery County or other
municipalities, to collect, remove, transport or haul recyclable materials
from any property in East Norriton Township.
RECYCLING — The collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse of
recyclable materials which would otherwise be disposed or processed as
municipal waste or the mechanized separation and treatment of municipal
waste (other than through combustion) and creation and recovery of
reusable materials other than a fuel for the operation of energy.
RESIDENT — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, trust, municipal authority, federal
institution or agency, state institution or agency, municipality, other
governmental agency or any other legal entity or any group of such persons
whatsoever which is recognized by law as a subject of rights and duties
which owns, leases or occupies a property located in East Norriton
Township used as a residence.
RESIDENTIAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Includes homes, properties which
have three or less multifamily dwelling units and other residential
properties located within the East Norriton Township. The term "residential
establishments" shall exclude multifamily establishments.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLES — Recyclable materials that are
separated from municipal waste at the point of origin for the purpose of
recycling.
TOWNSHIP — East Norriton Township, Pennsylvania.
WHITE GOODS — Refrigerators, washing machines, dryers, window air
conditioners, hot-water heaters and other major home appliances.
§ 165-17. Municipal waste collectors and recyclable materials
collectors.
A. Registration. Every person desiring to engage in, continue to engage in
or hereafter begin to engage in the business of collecting, removing,
transporting or hauling municipal waste and/or recyclable materials
from any property in East Norriton Township shall first register with the
Montgomery County Waste System Authority or East Norriton
Township. All such persons shall register by January 31 of each year,
except those such persons who begin engaging in business in the
Township after January 1 shall be required to register prior to
beginning business in the Township. Such registration shall be for a
period of one year beginning January 1 of the year in which the
registration occurs.
§ 165-16 SHOPPING CARTS § 165-17
163:331
B. Collection equipment and transportation vehicles. The collection
equipment and transportation vehicles used for the collection of
municipal waste shall be of the closed-metal-body type with any
automatic compactor unit. These vehicles shall at all times be in good
and proper mechanical condition and in compliance with the minimum
safety and sanitary regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
All such vehicles shall be specifically designed to prevent leakage of any
liquid or fluids. Other types of vehicles may be used only for the
collection of recyclable materials, white goods and Christmas trees,
provided that such items are separately collected in accordance with
other regulations established by this article or regulations established
by resolution adopted hereunder. The municipal waste and recyclable
materials so collected shall be suitably enclosed or covered so as to
prevent roadside littering, attraction of vermin or creation of other
nuisances. The collection equipment and transportation vehicles shall
be kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
C. Certificates of insurance. No person shall be entitled to register with
the Waste System Authority or Township, under § 165-17A above,
unless such person can show certificates of insurance covering public
liability for both bodily injury and property damage, owners' and
contractors' protective insurance and automobile insurance with
respect to personal injuries and property damage. Such insurance shall
be in amounts that shall be from time to time set forth by the Board of
Supervisors of East Norriton Township by regulations established by
resolution adopted hereunder. Each and every policy of insurance
herein mentioned which is required pursuant to the terms of this article
shall carry with it an endorsement to the effect that the insurance
carrier will convey to the Waste System Authority or East Norriton
Township, by certified mail, written notice of any modifications,
alterations or cancellation of any such policy or policies or the terms
thereof. The above-mentioned written notice shall be mailed to the
Township at least 10 days prior to the effective date of any such
modification, alteration or cancellation.
D. Collection procedures. Municipal waste collectors shall not be required
to collect municipal waste of any resident where it is obvious that
recyclable materials have not been separated pursuant to this article.
Municipal waste collectors and recyclable materials collectors shall not
mix municipal waste and source-separated recyclables.
E. Rate schedules and route maps. Each municipal waste collector and
recyclable materials collector shall annually, at the time of registration,
file with the Township a rate schedule showing the rates to be charged
to its customers for the collection of municipal waste and recyclable
materials. Such rate schedules shall not be changed by the municipal
waste collector or recyclable materials collector without first giving
notice to the Township at least 30 days prior to the effective date of
such change. Each municipal waste collector and recyclable materials
collector shall also file with the Township annually, or upon changes of
§ 165-17 EAST NORRITON CODE § 165-17
163:332
§ 165-18. Separation and collection of municipal waste and
recyclable materials generated at residential establishments.
The following provisions in this section apply to the separation and
collection of municipal waste and recyclable materials at residential
establishments throughout the Township.
the routes, a map showing the areas of the Township in which it
operates and a timetable setting forth the days of collection.
F. Registration fee. At the time of registration, the municipal waste
collector and recyclable materials collector shall pay the Waste System
Authority or Township the appropriate fee.
G. Frequency of collection for residential establishments. Municipal waste
collectors shall collect municipal waste a minimum of one time per
week. Recyclable materials collectors shall collect recyclable materials,
excluding leaf waste, a minimum of one time per week from residential
establishments. Recyclable materials collectors that collect, remove,
transport or haul leaf waste shall collect the leaf waste on a scheduled
day at least once per month. [Amended 11-18-2014 by Ord. No. 558]
H. Reporting requirements. Unless East Norriton Township contractually
agrees otherwise, every person engaged in the business of collecting,
removing, transporting or hauling municipal waste and/or recyclable
materials from any property in East Norriton Township shall make
quarterly reports to the Township of the tonnage of municipal waste
and recyclable materials which they have collected from all
commercial, institutional, municipal and residential establishments in
the Township, on forms prepared by the Township. The report shall be
submitted within 15 days of the end of each calendar year quarter and
shall set forth the tonnage collected per establishment or facility for all
nonresidential establishments. The Township shall make forms
available for such reporting. Failure to report the required information
to the Township within the time period required will result in immediate
revocation of registration of the municipal waste collector or recyclable
materials collector and may result in the refusal of the Township to
register the person in the future. All reporting information received by
the Township will be maintained in confidence, with the exception of
any requirements of the federal or state government and as necessary
for release for the Township to obtain federal or state grant moneys.
I. Collection equipment and transportation vehicles used for the
collection of municipal and residual waste and recyclables from
residential and nonresidential establishments shall only be permitted to
operate on public streets and private property during the hours of 7:00
a.m. to 9:00 p.m. [Amended 11-18-2014 by Ord. No. 558]
A. Separation. All residents of residential establishments shall separate
recyclable materials from the municipal waste generated at their
property.
§ 165-17 SHOPPING CARTS § 165-18
163:333
§ 165-19. Separation and collection of municipal waste and
recyclable materials generated at commercial establishments,
institutional establishments, municipal establishments and
multifamily establishments.
The following provisions apply to the separation and collection of materials
from commercial establishments, institutional establishments, municipal
establishments and multifamily establishments throughout the Township:
B. Collection. All municipal waste shall be collected by a municipal waste
collector. All source-separated recyclables shall be collected by a
recyclable materials collector. All source-separated recyclables placed
by the resident for collection by the recyclable materials collector
serving the resident pursuant to this article and Township regulations
shall, from the time of being placed at the curb, become the property of
the recyclable materials collector.
C. Prohibition. No person shall place municipal waste in containers used
for the separation and collection of recyclable materials. No person
shall place recyclable materials in containers used for the separation
and collection of municipal waste.
D. Placement of containers at curbside. The municipal waste containers,
recyclable materials containers, newspaper bundles or leaf waste
bundles shall not be placed at the curb or street line of any resident's
property except during the period from 6:00 p.m. on the night prior to
the scheduled collection, and the empty container shall be removed by
12:00 midnight of the scheduled collection day.
E. Preparation of municipal waste and recyclables for collection. All
residents of residential establishments in East Norriton Township shall
place municipal waste at the curb or street line for collection in closed,
waterproof containers. All residents of the Township shall place
recyclable materials, with the exception of newspapers and leaf waste,
on the street line or curb for collection in containers provided by the
Township or recyclable materials collector for the storage of recyclable
materials. Newspapers must be bundled separately in bags or secured
by rope or twine. Leaf waste must be contained in Kraft paper bags,
bundles or trash cans approved by East Norriton Township unless
residents have otherwise provided for the composting of leaf waste. No
containers for municipal waste or recyclables shall be filled to exceed
50 pounds, and bundles shall not exceed 50 pounds. Residents shall
place neither municipal waste nor recyclables in the public streets.
F. Notice of violation. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this
section shall receive an official written notice of noncompliance from
the Township for the first and second offenses. Thereafter, all such
violations shall be subject to the penalties hereinafter provided.
A. Separation. All persons generating municipal waste or recyclable
materials at commercial establishments, institutional establishments,
§ 165-18 EAST NORRITON CODE § 165-19
163:334
municipal establishments and multifamily establishments shall
separate recyclable materials from the municipal waste generated at
their property. Owners of commercial establishments, institutional
establishments, municipal establishments and multifamily
establishments who comply with this section shall not be liable for the
noncompliance of occupants of their buildings.
B. Collection. All persons owning commercial establishments, institutional
establishments, municipal establishments, or multifamily
establishments in East Norriton Township shall be responsible for
providing a system for collection of municipal waste and recyclable
materials at their property. Such owners shall establish and maintain a
collection system that includes suitable containers for collecting and
sorting recyclable materials, easily accessible locations for the
containers and written instructions to the occupants concerning the use
and availability of the recyclable materials collection system. This
system should be developed with the assistance of their municipal
waste collector or recyclable materials collector.
C. Prohibition. No person shall mix municipal waste in containers to be
used for the separation and collection of recyclable materials. No
person shall mix recyclable materials in containers used for the
separation and collection of municipal waste.
D. Exemptions. The Township shall be notified by the owner if either of the
following two exemptions apply:
(1) Commercial establishments that reuse recyclable materials as part
of their manufacturing or processing operations shall be exempted
from recycling those items being reused.
(2) Commercial establishments, institutional establishments or
municipal establishments that have on-site captive commercial
disposal facilities for the exclusive disposal of municipal waste
generated at the establishment shall be exempted from recycling
those items used in stated facility.
E. Storage outside of enclosed buildings.
(1) Commercial establishments, institutional establishments,
municipal establishments and multifamily establishments shall
store all municipal waste outside an enclosed building in watertight
containers.
(2) Each commercial establishment, institutional establishment,
municipal establishment, and multifamily establishment within the
Township shall provide a paved area for the placement of municipal
waste and recyclable materials containers. If required by the
Township, an enclosure must be constructed around the containers
to prevent the spread of litter. This enclosure must meet the
required setback from the property line of the zoning district. The
height of the enclosure shall stand at least three feet above the top
§ 165-19 SHOPPING CARTS § 165-19
163:335
§ 165-20. Rules and regulations.
The collection of municipal waste and recyclable materials by municipal
waste collectors and recyclable materials collectors and the preparation
for collection of municipal waste and recyclable materials by property
owners and residents of the Township shall be made in compliance with
the regulations to be adopted by the Board of Supervisors of East Norriton
Township to carry out the intent and purpose of this article. Such rules and
regulations shall be approved by resolution of the Board of Supervisors of
East Norriton Township and, when so approved, shall have the same force
and effect as the provisions of this article. Said rules and regulations may
be amended, modified or replaced by resolution of the Board of Supervisors
of East Norriton Township.
§ 165-21. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article or of the regulations
adopted hereunder or any person who knowingly commits, takes part or
assists in any violation shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary
proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and not
less than $50. Each day on which a violation of this article continues
shall constitute a separate offense punishable by a like fine or penalty. In
addition to this penalty, the Township may institute any appropriate action
or proceeding, whether by legal process or otherwise, to prevent any illegal
act, conduct, business or use on or about such premises subject to this
article.
of the container, and in no case shall an enclosure higher than 10
feet be required.
(3) Any waste other than municipal waste and recyclable materials
must be disposed of in accordance with all government regulations
applying to that waste.
F. Preparation for and frequency of collection of recyclable materials. All
persons owning commercial establishments, institutional
establishments, municipal establishments or multifamily establishment
shall separate recyclable materials from their municipal waste and
place them in containers to be collected by the recyclable materials
collector. The frequency of collection for recyclable materials shall be a
scheduled day, at least once per month.
G. Reporting requirements. All persons owning commercial
establishments, institutional establishments, municipal establishments
or multifamily establishments shall be required to periodically report to
the Township the municipal waste and recyclable materials that were
collected from their respective establishments on a form prepared by
the Township.
H. Notice of violation. Any owner who violates the provisions of this
section shall be subject to the penalties hereinafter provided.
§ 165-19 EAST NORRITON CODE § 165-21
163:336
Chapter 166
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal authorities — See Ch. 18.
Stormwater Maintenance Fund — See Ch. 43.
Uniform Construction Code — See Ch. 74.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 105.
Grading and excavations — See Ch. 114.
Sewers — See Ch. 162.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 168.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
175.
Zoning — See Ch. 205.
§ 165-21 SHOPPING CARTS § 165-21
163:337

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 166-1. Statement of findings.
The governing body of the Township finds that:
A. Inadequate planning and management of stormwater runoff resulting
from land development and redevelopment throughout a watershed
increases flows and velocities, contributes to erosion and
sedimentation, overtaxes the carrying capacity of streams and storm
sewers, greatly increases the cost of public facilities to carry and
control stormwater, undermines floodplain management and floodcontrol
efforts in downstream communities, reduces groundwater
recharge, threatens public health and safety, and increases non-pointsource
pollution of water resources.
B. A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including
reasonable regulation of land development and redevelopment causing
loss of natural infiltration, is fundamental to the public health, safety,
and welfare and the protection of the people of the Township and all the
people of the commonwealth, their resources, and the environment.
C. Inadequate maintenance of stormwater management best management
practices (BMPs) contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes
the carrying capacity of streams and storm sewers, increases the cost of
public facilities to carry and control stormwater, undermines floodplain
management and flood-control efforts in downstream communities,
reduces groundwater recharge, threatens public health and safety, and
increases pollution of water resources.
D. Reasonable regulation of connections and discharges to municipal
separate storm sewer systems is fundamental to the public health,
safety, and welfare and the protection of the people of the
commonwealth, their resources, and the environment.
E. Stormwater is an important water resource, which provides
groundwater recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams,
which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
F. Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an
essential component in successfully addressing stormwater.
G. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to obtain a
permit for stormwater discharges from their National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES). Permittees are required to
enact, implement, and enforce a prohibition of nonstormwater
discharges to the permittee's regulated small municipal separate storm
sewer systems (MS4s).
§ 166-1 SHOPPING CARTS § 166-1
163:339
§ 166-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety, and welfare within
the Township and the Stony Creek/Saw Mill Run watershed by minimizing
the hazards and maximizing the benefits described in § 166-1 of this chapter
through provisions designed to:
H. Nonstormwater discharges to municipal separate storm sewer systems
can contribute to pollution of waters of the commonwealth by the
Township.
A. Provide standards to meet NPDES MS4 permit requirements.
B. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code § 93.4a, to protect and maintain "existing
uses" and maintain the level of water quality to support those uses in all
streams and to protect and maintain water quality in special-protection
streams.
C. Maintain the existing flows and quality of streams and watercourses.
D. Reduce accelerated erosion, scour, aggradation and degradation of
stream banks and stream beds.
E. Maintain groundwater recharge, to prevent degradation of surface
water and groundwater quality and to otherwise protect water
resources.
F. Manage stormwater runoff impacts at their source by regulating
activities that cause the problems.
G. Utilize and preserve the existing natural drainage systems as much as
possible.
H. Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source, which requires
a minimum of structures and relies on natural processes.
I. Provide performance standards and design criteria for watershed-wide
stormwater management and planning.
J. Provide for proper operation and maintenance of all stormwater
management facilities and all stormwater management BMPs that are
implemented within the Township.
K. Provide for proper operation and maintenance of all permanent
stormwater management facilities and BMPs that are implemented in
the Township.
L. Provide a mechanism to identify controls necessary to meet the NPDES
permit requirements.
M. Implement an illegal discharge detection and elimination program to
address nonstormwater discharges into the Township's separate storm
sewer system.
§ 166-1 EAST NORRITON CODE § 166-3
163:340
§ 166-3. Statutory authority.
The Township is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect
stormwater impacts by the Act of October 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), the
Storm water Management Act, and the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805 (Act
247), the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.112
§ 166-4. Applicability.
§ 166-5. Exemptions.
A. This chapter shall apply to all regulated activities within the Township
and all activities within the Township that may affect stormwater runoff,
including land development and earth disturbance activity, and all
activities that may contribute nonstormwater discharges to the
Township's separate storm sewer system, unless exempted by § 166-5
of this chapter.
B. This chapter shall apply to all activities related to proper operation and
maintenance of approved stormwater management BMPs.
C. Earth disturbance activities and associated stormwater management
facilities are also regulated under existing state law and implemented
regulations. This chapter shall operate in coordination with those
parallel requirements: the requirements of this chapter shall be no less
restrictive in meeting the purposes of this chapter than state law.
A. Subject to § 166-5D of this chapter, the following activities are exempt
from the stormwater management plan, volume controls, stormwater
management district and peak rate control, and BMP operation and
maintenance plan requirements of this chapter:
(1) Agricultural plowing or tilling activities, home gardening, animal
heavy-use areas or timber harvesting activities, municipal
composting activities, pavement resurfacing activities (including
pavement removal and replacement in kind) or road maintenance
activities.
(2) Regulated activities that create up to 250 square feet of new
impervious area. For development taking place in stages, the entire
development plan must be used in determining conformance with
this criteria. Any areas that may be designed to initially be
semipervious (e.g., gravel, crushed stone, etc.) shall be considered
as impervious areas for the purpose of exemption evaluation.
(3) Regulated activities that create up to 1,000 square feet of earth
disturbance. For development taking place in stages, the entire
development plan must be used in determining conformance with
this criteria.
112. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 166-3 SHOPPING CARTS § 166-5
163:341
(4) Clearing and grubbing activities, including earth disturbances
which are directly incidental to those clearing and grubbing
activities. This exemption shall not apply to those clearing and
grubbing activities performed in conjunction with another
regulated activity.
(5) Any maintenance of an existing stormwater management system
made in accordance with plans and/or specifications approved by
the Township or the Township Engineer.
(6) Emergency maintenance work performed for the protection of
public health, safety and welfare. A written description of the scope
and extent of any emergency work shall be submitted to the
Township within two days of the commencement of activity. If the
Township finds that the work is not an emergency, then the work
shall cease immediately, and the requirements of this chapter shall
be addressed as applicable.
B. Subject to § 166-5D of this chapter, the following activities are exempt
from the stormwater management plan, stormwater management
district and peak rate control, and BMP operation and maintenance
plan requirements of this chapter:
(1) Regulated activities that create between 250 square feet and up to
2,000 square feet of new impervious area. For development taking
place in stages, the entire development plan must be used in
determining conformance with this criteria. Any areas that may be
designed to initially be semipervious (e.g., gravel, crushed stone,
etc.) shall be considered as impervious areas for the purpose of
exemption evaluation.
(2) Regulated activities that create between 1,000 square feet and up
to 2,000 square feet of earth disturbance. For development taking
place in stages, the entire development plan must be used in
determining conformance with this criteria.
C. Subject to § 166-5D of this chapter, the following activities are exempt
from the stormwater management district and peak rate control
requirements of this chapter:
(1) Regulated activities that create between 2,000 square feet and up
to 5,000 square feet of new impervious area. For development
taking place in stages, the entire development plan must be used in
determining conformance with this criteria. Any areas that may be
designed to initially be semipervious (e.g., gravel, crushed stone,
etc.) shall be considered as impervious areas for the purpose of
exemption evaluation.
(2) Regulated activities that create between 2,000 square feet and up
to 5,000 square feet of earth disturbance. For development taking
place in stages, the entire development plan must be used in
determining conformance with this criteria.
§ 166-5 EAST NORRITON CODE § 166-5
163:342
§ 166-6. Repealer.
Any other chapter provision(s) or regulation of the Township inconsistent
with any of the provisions of this chapter is hereby repealed to the extent of
the inconsistency only.
§ 166-7. Severability.
In the event that any section or provision of this chapter is declared invalid
by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the
validity of any of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
§ 166-8. Compatibility with other requirements.
D. Exemption criteria:
(1) Exemption responsibilities. An exemption shall not relieve the
applicant from implementing such measures as are necessary to
protect public health, safety and property.
(2) HQ and EV streams. An exemption shall not relieve the applicant
from meeting the special requirements for watersheds draining
directly to identified high-quality (HQ) or exceptional-value (EV)
waters and source water protection areas (SWPAs) and
requirements for nonstructural design sequencing.
(3) Existing drainage issues. If a drainage problem is documented or is
otherwise known to exist downstream or if the proposed activity is
expected to result in a drainage problem, then the Township may
require the applicant to comply with this chapter.
(4) Qualifying for an exemption from this chapter does not relieve the
applicant from complying with other regulations.
(5) Activities which are exempted from stormwater management plan
requirements of this chapter by § 166-5B must meet the simplified
drainage plan requirements given in Article III.
A. Approvals issued and actions taken under this chapter do not relieve
the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or
approvals for activities regulated by any other code, law, regulation or
chapter. To the extent that this chapter imposes more-rigorous or -
stringent requirements for stormwater management, the specific
requirements contained in this chapter shall be followed.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect any of the
Township's requirements regarding stormwater matters which do not
conflict with the provisions of this chapter, such as local stormwater
management design criteria (e.g., inlet spacing, inlet type, collection
system design and details, outlet structure design, etc.). Conflicting
provisions in other Township chapters or regulations shall be construed
§ 166-5 SHOPPING CARTS § 166-8
163:343
§ 166-9. Erroneous permit.
Any permit or authorization issued or approved based on false, misleading
or erroneous information provided by the applicant is void without the
necessity of any proceedings for revocation. Any work undertaken or use
established pursuant to such permit or other authorization is unlawful.
No action may be taken by a board, agency or employee of the Township
purporting to validate such a violation.
to retain the requirements of this chapter addressing state water
quality requirements.
§ 166-8 EAST NORRITON CODE § 166-9
163:344
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 166-10. Definitions and word usage.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein
shall be interpreted as follows:
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the
singular number includes the plural, and the plural number
includes the singular; words of masculine gender include the
feminine gender, and words of feminine gender include the
masculine gender.
(2) The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
(3) The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land
through the combined action of human activities and the natural
processes, at a rate greater than would occur because of the natural
process alone.
APPLICANT — A landowner, developer or other person who has filed an
application for approval to engage in any regulated earth disturbance
activity at a project site in the Township.
BMP (BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE) — Activities, facilities,
designs, measures or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts
from regulated earth disturbance activities, to meet state water quality
requirements, to promote groundwater recharge and to otherwise meet
the purposes of this chapter. Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped
into one of two broad categories or measures: "structural" or
"nonstructural." In this chapter, "nonstructural BMPs or measures"
refer to operational and/or behavior-related practices that attempt to
minimize the contact of pollutants with stormwater runoff, whereas
"structural BMPs or measures" are those that consist of a physical
device or practice that is installed to capture and treat stormwater
runoff. Structural BMPs include, but are not limited to, a wide variety
of practices and devices, from large-scale detention ponds and
constructed wetlands, to small-scale underground treatment systems,
infiltration facilities, filter strips, low-impact design, bioretention, wet
ponds, permeable paving, grassed swales, riparian or forested buffers,
sand filters, detention basins, and manufactured devices. Structural
stormwater BMPs are permanent to the project site.
§ 166-10 SHOPPING CARTS § 166-10
163:345
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Montgomery County Conservation
District.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DEVELOPER — As defined in § 175-8, and a person that seeks to
undertake any regulated earth disturbance activities at a project site in
the Township.
DEVELOPMENT — As defined in § 175-8, and see also "earth
disturbance activity."
DEVELOPMENT SITE — The specific tract of land where any earth
disturbance activities in the Township are planned, conducted or
maintained.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human
activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited
to: clearing and grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments; road
maintenance; building construction; and the moving, depositing,
stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock or earth materials.
EROSION — The process by which the surface of the land, including
channels, is worn away by water, wind, chemical action or natural
elements.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A plan for a project
site which identifies BMPs to minimize accelerated erosion and
sedimentation.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that prevents the infiltration of
water into the ground. "Impervious surface" includes, but is not limited
to, any roof, parking or driveway areas, and any new streets and
sidewalks. Any surface areas designed to initially be gravel or crushed
stone shall be assumed to be impervious surfaces. Any surface areas
comprising paver patios or decks, including those which extend over
otherwise pervious surfaces, shall be assumed to be impervious
surfaces.
MUNICIPALITY — As defined in § 175-8, and see also "Township."
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, the federal
government's system for issuance of permits under the Clean Water
Act, which is delegated to the DEP in Pennsylvania.
OUTFALL — "Point source," as described in 40 CFR 122.2, at the point
where the Township's storm sewer system discharges to surface waters
of the commonwealth.
PERSON — An individual, natural person, partnership, public or private
association or corporation or a governmental unit, public utility or any
other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject
of rights and duties.
§ 166-10 EAST NORRITON CODE § 166-10
163:346
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance,
including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, or
conduit, from which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in
state regulations at 25 Pa. Code § 92.1.
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated earth
disturbance activities in the Township are planned, conducted or
maintained.
REDEVELOPMENT — Earth disturbance activities on land which has
previously been disturbed or developed.
REGULATED ACTIVITY — Any activity that may affect stormwater
runoff and any activities that may contribute nonstormwater
discharged to a regulated small municipal separate storm sewer system
(MS4).
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Activity involving
earth disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92,
25 Pa. Code Chapter 102, or the Clean Streams Law.113
ROAD MAINTENANCE — Earth disturbance activities within the
existing road cross section, such as grading and repairing existing
unpaved road surfaces, cutting road banks, cleaning or clearing
drainage ditches and other similar activities.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm
drains) primarily used for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory
requirements to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality
under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law,
including:
Each stream segment in Pennsylvania has a "designated use," such
as "cold water fishery" or "potable water supply," which are listed
in Chapter 93. These uses must be protected and maintained under
state regulations.
(1)
"Existing uses" are those attained as of November 1975, regardless
of whether they have been designated in Chapter 93. Regulated
earth disturbance activities must be designed to protect and
maintain existing uses and maintain the level of water quality
necessary to protect those uses in all streams and to protect and
maintain water quality in special-protection streams.
(2)
Water quality involves the chemical, biological and physical
characteristics of surface water bodies. After regulated earth
disturbance activities are complete, these characteristics can be
impacted by addition of pollutants such as sediment and changes
(3)
113. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 166-10 SHOPPING CARTS § 166-10
163:347
STORMWATER — Drainage runoff from the surface of the land
resulting from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
TOWNSHIP — East Norriton Township, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania.
WATERCOURSE — A channel or conveyance of surface water, such as
a stream or creek, having a defined bed and banks, whether natural or
artificial, with perennial or intermittent flow.
WATERSHED — A region or area drained by a river, watercourse or
other body of water, whether natural or artificial.
WATERS OF THIS COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams,
creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers,
lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies
or channels of conveyance of surface water, or parts thereof, whether
natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this commonwealth.
in habitat through increased flow volumes and/or rates as a result
of changes in land surface area from those activities. Therefore,
permanent discharges to surface waters must be managed to
protect the stream bank, stream bed and structural integrity of the
waterway, to prevent these impacts.
§ 166-10 EAST NORRITON CODE § 166-10
163:348
ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management Plan Requirements
§ 166-11. Plan required.
For any of the regulated activities of this chapter, the preliminary or final
approval of subdivision and/or land development plans, the issuance of
any building or occupancy permit, or the commencement of any earth
disturbance activity may not proceed until the property owner or applicant
or his/her agent has received written approval of a stormwater management
(SWM) plan from the Township and an adequate erosion and sediment
control plan review by the Conservation District. Activities which are
exempted from stormwater management plan requirements of this chapter
by § 166-5B must meet the simplified drainage plan requirements of
§ 166-12A.
§ 166-12. Plan contents.
A. A simplified drainage plan shall consist of general property information,
a clear description of the proposed improvements, pertinent
calculations and plans. All simplified drainage plan materials shall be
submitted to the Township in a format that is clear, concise, legible,
neat, and well organized; otherwise, the simplified drainage plan shall
not be accepted for review and shall be returned to the applicant. A
simplified drainage plan shall include all of the following information:
(1) General property information, including the property street
address, property area (in acres or square feet), the name of the
current property owner along with his/her street address, and
current property zoning information.
(2) Approximate property lines and roads within 100 feet of the project
area.
(3) A North arrow.
(4) Existing streams, lakes, ponds or other waters of the
commonwealth.
(5) Location of existing and proposed structures, driveways and any
other impervious areas on the property. The plan must indicate the
approximate dimensions and areas (in square feet) of each of these
features.
(6) Location of any existing or proposed on-site septic systems and/or
potable water wells. The plan must indicate the approximate
distance between these features and any proposed infiltration
BMPs.
(7) Separate calculations of the total existing pervious area and of the
total proposed impervious area on the property.
§ 166-11 SHOPPING CARTS § 166-12
163:349
(8) Calculation of the total earth disturbance area for the project.
(9) Show the location and construction of permanent stormwater
BMPs. The simplified drainage plan must describe the materials,
dimensions and construction of each permanent stormwater BMP.
(10) Proposed grading, including overland drainage patterns and
swales.
(11) Erosion and sediment controls.
B. A stormwater management plan shall consist of a general description of
the project, including sequencing items, calculations, maps and plans. A
note on the maps shall refer to the associated computations and erosion
and sediment control plan by title and date. The cover sheet of the
computations and erosion and sediment control plan shall refer to the
associated maps by title and date. All stormwater management plan
materials shall be submitted to the Township in a format that is clear,
concise, legible, neat, and well organized; otherwise, the stormwater
management plan shall not be accepted for review and shall be
returned to the applicant. The following items shall be included in the
stormwater management plan:
(1) General.
(a) A general description of the project.
(b) A general description of the proposed stormwater techniques,
including construction specifications of the materials to be
used for stormwater management facilities.
(c) Complete hydrologic, hydraulic, and structural computations
for all stormwater management facilities.
(d) An erosion and sediment control plan, including all reviews
and letters of adequacy from the Conservation District.
(e) A general description of proposed non-point-source pollution
controls.
(2) Map(s). Map(s) of the project area shall be submitted on twentyfour-
inch by thirty-six-inch sheets and/or prepared in a form that
meets the requirements for recording at the office of the
Montgomery County Recorder of Deeds. If the East Norriton
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
(SALDO)114 has more-stringent criteria than this chapter, than the
more-stringent criteria shall apply. The contents of the map(s) shall
include, but not be limited to:
114. Editor's Note: See Ch. 175, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 166-12 EAST NORRITON CODE § 166-12
163:350
(a) Plans of the proposed stormwater drainage systems, including
all storm drain pipes, manholes and inlets, runoff control
devices and open drainage channels.
(b) Clear identification of the location and nature of permanent
stormwater BMPs.
(c) The location of the project relative to highways, municipalities
or other identifiable landmarks.
(d) Mapping of the watershed area or areas in which the proposed
subdivision or land development is located (United States
Coast and Geodetic Survey quadrangle map or similar).
(e) Existing and final contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of
steep slopes (greater than 15%), five-foot contour intervals
may be used.
(f) Existing streams, lakes, ponds or other waters of the
commonwealth within the project area.
(g) Other physical features, including flood hazard boundaries,
stream buffers, existing drainagecourses, areas of natural
vegetation to be preserved and the total extent of the upstream
area draining through the site.
(h) The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sewers and
water lines within 50 feet of property lines.
(i) Soil type names and boundaries.
(j) Limits of earth disturbance, including the type and amount of
impervious area that would be added.
(k) Proposed changes to the land surface and vegetative cover.
(l) Proposed structures, roads, paved areas and buildings.
(m) The name of the development, the name and address of the
owner of the property, and the name of the individual or firm
preparing the plan.
(n) The date of submission.
(o) A graphic written scale of one inch equals no more than 50
feet; for tracts of 20 acres or more, the scale shall be one inch
equals no more than 100 feet.
(p) A North arrow.
(q) The total tract boundary and size, with distances marked to the
nearest foot and bearings to the nearest degree.
(r) Existing and proposed land use(s).
§ 166-12 SHOPPING CARTS § 166-12
163:351
(s) A key map showing all existing man-made features beyond the
property boundary that would be affected by the project.
(t) Location of all open channels.
(u) Overland drainage patterns and swales.
(v) A fifteen-foot-wide access easement around all stormwater
management facilities that would provide ingress and egress
from a public right-of-way.
(w) The location of all existing and proposed drainage facilities and
stormwater controls affecting the subject property.
(x) The location of all erosion and sediment control facilities.
(y) The location of the stormwater management district
boundaries, as described in § 166-24 of this chapter, which are
applicable to the site.
(z) A plan showing the berm embankment and outlet structure.
The plan shall indicate the top of the berm elevation, the top
width of the berm, side slopes, the emergency spillway
elevation, elevations of the outlet structure, including riser,
and the dimensions and spacing of anti-seep collars.
(aa) A cross-section diagram through the outlet structure,
emergency spillway and berm embankment.
(bb) A detailed plan of the trash rack and anti-vortex device.
(cc) An overall plan of the basin area, at a scale of one inch equals
40 feet or less, showing all grading and landscaping.
(dd) A note on the plan indicating a proposed maintenance program
for all stormwater management control facilities. This program
must include the proposed ownership of the control facilities,
the maintenance requirements for the facilities and the detail
of the financial responsibility for the required maintenance
period.
(ee) A note on the plan indicating the location and responsibility for
maintenance of stormwater management facilities that would
be located off site. All off-site facilities shall meet the
performance standards and design criteria specified in this
chapter.
(ff) A statement, signed by the applicant, acknowledging that any
revision to the approved stormwater management plan must
be approved by the Township, and that a revised erosion and
sediment control plan must be submitted to the Conservation
District for a determination of adequacy.
(gg) The following signature block for the design engineer:
§ 166-12 EAST NORRITON CODE § 166-12
163:352
"I, (design engineer), on this date (date of signature), hereby
certify that the stormwater management plan meets all design
standards and criteria of the East Norriton Township
Stormwater Management Ordinance."
(hh) Items required by the East Norriton Township Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance (SALDO).115
C. Supplemental information to be submitted to the Township.
(1) A written description of the following information shall be
submitted by the applicant and shall include:
(a) The overall stormwater management concept for the project
designed in accordance with this chapter. All existing drainage
features which are to be incorporated in the design shall be so
identified with an explanation of the operations of the facilities.
(b) Stormwater runoff computations for all points of runoff
concentration before, during and after the development,
including all supporting data, as specified in this chapter.
(c) Design computations for sizing each outlet device.
(d) A stage-storage curve for each detention or retention basin.
(e) Flood routing and storage requirement calculations.
(f) Stormwater management techniques to be applied both during
and after development.
(g) Expected project time schedule.
(h) Development stages or project phases, if so proposed. If the
project is to be developed in stages, the entire project
stormwater management plan shall be presented with the first
stage, and appropriate stages for the drainage system shall be
indicated, in accordance with DEP rules and regulations.
(i) An operations and maintenance plan in accordance with Article
V of this chapter.
(2) An erosion and sediment control plan.
(3) A description of the effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes
and peak flows) on adjacent properties and on any existing
Township stormwater collection system that may receive runoff
from the project site.
(4) A declaration of adequacy and highway occupancy permit from the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT) district
115. Editor's Note: See Ch. 175, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 166-12 SHOPPING CARTS § 166-12
163:353
§ 166-13. Submission procedure.
Unless exempted by § 166-5 of this chapter, the Township shall require
receipt of a complete stormwater management plan. For activities
exempted by § 166-5B of this chapter, the Township shall require receipt of
a simplified drainage plan.
office when utilization of a PennDOT storm drainage system is
proposed.
D. Stormwater management facilities.
(1) All stormwater management facilities must be located on a plan
and described in detail.
(2) When infiltration measures such as seepage pits, beds, or trenches
are used, the locations of existing and proposed septic tank
infiltration areas and wells must be shown.
(3) All calculations, assumptions, and criteria used in the design of the
stormwater management facilities must be shown.
A. Proof of application or documentation of required permit(s) or
approvals for the programs listed below shall be part of the complete
stormwater management plan:
(1) NPDES permit for stormwater discharges from construction
activities.
(2) DEP joint permit application.
(3) PennDOT highway occupancy permit.
(4) Chapter 105 (Dam Safety and Waterway Management).
(5) Chapter 106 (Floodplain Management).
(6) Any other permit under applicable state or federal regulations.
B. The plan shall be coordinated with the state and federal permit process
and the Township's subdivision and land development process.
C. For projects that require subdivision and land development approval,
the stormwater management plan shall be submitted by the applicant
as part of the preliminary plan submission, where applicable for the
regulated activity.
D. For projects that do not require subdivision and land development
approval, see § 166-12 of this chapter.
E. Submission of a stormwater management plan. The application shall be
received by the Zoning Officer. The date of receipt shall be stamped and
the filing fee received in full. A cursory examination of the application
and stormwater management plan will be conducted.
§ 166-12 EAST NORRITON CODE § 166-13
163:354
§ 166-14. Plan review.
(1) Five copies of the stormwater management plan shall be
submitted, unless otherwise required by the Zoning Officer.
(2) The Zoning Officer shall keep one copy and distribute copies to the
following:
(a) The East Norriton Township Manager.
(b) The East Norriton Township Engineer.
(c) The Conservation District.
(d) The Montgomery County Planning Commission.
F. Submission of a simplified drainage plan. The application shall be
received by the Zoning Officer. The date of receipt shall be stamped and
the filing fee received in full. A cursory examination of the application
and simplified drainage plan will be conducted.
(1) Three copies of the simplified drainage plan shall be submitted,
unless otherwise required by the Zoning Officer.
(2) The Zoning Officer shall keep one copy and distribute copies to the
following:
(a) The East Norriton Township Manager.
(b) The East Norriton Township Engineer.
A. The Township Engineer shall review the stormwater management plan
or simplified drainage plan for consistency with this chapter and the
Stony Creek/Saw Mill Run Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan. Any
found incomplete shall not be accepted for review and shall be returned
to the applicant.
B. The Township Engineer shall review the stormwater management plan
for any subdivision or land development against the East Norriton
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (SALDO)
provisions not otherwise superseded by this chapter.116
C. The Conservation District, in accordance with established criteria and
procedures, shall review the stormwater management plan for
consistency with stormwater management and erosion and sediment
pollution control requirements and provide comments to the Township.
Such comments shall be considered by the Township prior to final
approval of the stormwater management plan.
D. For activities regulated by this chapter, the Township Engineer shall
notify the applicant and the Township, in writing, within 30 calendar
116. Editor's Note: See Ch. 175, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 166-13 SHOPPING CARTS § 166-14
163:355
days, whether the stormwater management plan is consistent with the
requirements of this chapter.
(1) If the Township Engineer determines that the stormwater
management plan is consistent with the requirements of this
chapter, the Township Engineer shall forward a letter of
consistency to the Township, which will then forward a copy to the
applicant.
(2) If the Township Engineer determines that the stormwater
management plan is inconsistent or noncompliant with the
requirements of this chapter, the Township Engineer shall forward
a letter to the Township citing the reason(s) and specific chapter
sections for inconsistency or noncompliance. The Township shall
then forward a copy of the Township Engineer's letter to the
applicant. Inconsistency or noncompliance may be due to
inadequate information to make a reasonable judgment as to
compliance with the requirements of this chapter. Any stormwater
management plans that are inconsistent or noncompliant may be
revised by the applicant and resubmitted when consistent with this
chapter. The Township shall then notify the applicant of the
Township Engineer's findings. Any inconsistent or noncompliant
stormwater management plans may be revised by the applicant and
resubmitted consistent with this chapter.
E. For regulated activities under this chapter that require an NPDES
permit application, the applicant shall forward a copy of the Township
Engineer's letter stating that the stormwater management plan is
consistent with the requirements of the East Norriton Township
Stormwater Management Ordinance to the Conservation District. DEP
and the Conservation District may consider the Township Engineer's
review comments in determining whether to issue a permit.
F. The Township shall not grant preliminary or final approval to any
subdivision or land development for regulated activities if the
stormwater management plan has been found by the Township
Engineer to be inconsistent with the requirements of this chapter. All
required permits from DEP must be obtained prior to approval of any
subdivision or land development.
G. No building permits for any regulated activities shall be approved by
the Township if the stormwater management plan has been found to be
inconsistent with the requirements of this chapter, as determined by
the Township Engineer and Conservation District, or without
considering the comments of the Township Engineer and Conservation
District. All required permits from DEP must be obtained prior to
issuance of a building permit.
H. The applicant shall be responsible for completing record drawings of all
stormwater management facilities included in the approved stormwater
management plan. The record drawings and an explanation of any
§ 166-14 EAST NORRITON CODE § 166-14
163:356
§ 166-15. Modification of plans.
§ 166-16. Resubmission of inconsistent or noncompliant plans.
An inconsistent or noncompliant stormwater management plan may be
resubmitted with the revisions addressing the Township Engineer's
concerns documented in writing. It must be addressed to the Township in
accordance with § 166-13 of this chapter, distributed accordingly, and be
subject to review as specified in § 166-14 of this chapter. The applicable
Township review and inspection fee must accompany a resubmission of an
inconsistent or noncompliant stormwater management plan.
discrepancies with the design plans shall be submitted to the Township
Engineer for final approval. In no case shall the Township approve the
record drawings until the Township receives a copy of an approved
declaration of adequacy and/or highway occupancy permit from the
PennDOT district office, NPDES permit, and any other applicable
permits or approvals from DEP or the Conservation District. The above
permits and approvals must be based on the record drawings.
I. The Township's approval of a stormwater management plan shall be
valid for a period not to exceed five years commencing on the date that
the Township signs the approved stormwater management plan. If
stormwater management facilities included in the approved stormwater
management plan have not been constructed or, if constructed, record
drawings of these facilities have not been approved within this five-year
time period, then the Township may consider the stormwater
management plan inconsistent or noncompliant and may revoke any
and all permits. Stormwater management plans that are determined to
be inconsistent or noncompliant by the Township shall be resubmitted
in accordance with this chapter.
A. A modification to a submitted stormwater management plan under
review by the Township for a development site that involves the
following shall require the resubmission to the Township of a modified
stormwater management plan consistent with § 166-13 of this chapter
and be subject to review as specified in § 166-14 of this chapter:
(1) Change in stormwater management facilities or techniques;
(2) Relocation or redesign of stormwater management facilities;
(3) Soil or other conditions are not as stated on the stormwater
management plan as determined by the Township Engineer.
B. A modification to an already approved or inconsistent or noncompliant
stormwater management plan shall be submitted to the Township,
accompanied by the applicable Township review and inspection fee. A
modification to a stormwater management plan for which formal action
has not been taken by the Township shall be submitted to the Township
accompanied by the applicable Township review and inspection fee.
§ 166-14 SHOPPING CARTS § 166-16
163:357

ARTICLE IV
Stormwater Management Requirements
§ 166-17. General requirements.
A. All regulated activities, unless exempted by § 166-5 of this chapter,
within the Township shall be designed, implemented, operated and
maintained to meet the purpose of this chapter, through these
elements:
(1) Erosion and sediment control during the earth disturbance
activities (e.g., during construction).
(2) Water quality protection measures after completion of earth
disturbance activities (e.g., after construction), including
operations and maintenance.
(3) Providing facilities and best management practices to reduce the
runoff volume, in accordance with § 166-22 of this chapter.
(4) Providing facilities and best management practices to meet
stormwater management district and peak rate control
requirements, in accordance with § 166-23 and § 166-24 of this
chapter.
(5) Providing a complete plan for the continued operation and
maintenance of stormwater management facilities and best
management practices during and after construction, in
accordance with Article V of this chapter.
B. For all regulated activities, unless preparation of a stormwater
management plan is exempted by § 166-5 of this chapter:
(1) Preparation of an approved stormwater management plan is
required.
(2) No regulated activities shall commence until the Township issues
written approval of a stormwater management plan that
demonstrates compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
C. Erosion and sediment control during regulated earth disturbance
activities shall be addressed as required by § 166-19 of this chapter.
D. A copy of the stormwater management plan approved by the Township
shall be on site throughout the duration of the regulated activity.
E. For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment
(E&S) control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and
maintained during the regulated earth disturbance activities (e.g.,
during construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this
chapter and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania
Code and the Clean Streams Law. Various BMPs and their design
standards are listed in the Erosion and Sediment Control Program
§ 166-17 SHOPPING CARTS § 166-17
163:359
Manual (E&S Manual), No. 363-2134-008 (April 15, 2000), as amended
and updated.117
F. Techniques described in Appendix A (Low-Impact Development
Practices) of this chapter are encouraged, because they reduce the
costs of complying with the requirements of this chapter and the state
water quality requirements.118
G. Stormwater flows onto adjacent property shall not be created,
increased, decreased, relocated, or otherwise altered without written
notification of the adjacent property owner(s) by the developer. Such
stormwater flows shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter.
H. Infiltration BMPs should be spread out, made as shallow as practicable,
and located to maximize use of natural on-site infiltration features while
still meeting the other requirements of this chapter.
I. Storage facilities should completely drain both the volume control and
rate control capacities over a period of time not less than 24 hours and
not more than 72 hours from the end of the design storm.
J. For all regulated activities, stormwater management BMPs shall be
implemented, operated, and maintained to meet the purposes and
requirements of this chapter and to meet all requirements under Title
25 of the Pennsylvania Code, the Clean Streams Law, and the Storm
Water Management Act.
K. All stormwater detention/retention facilities and sedimentation control
measures shall be in place and functioning prior to the creation of any
impervious surface.
L. Any term not specifically defined in this chapter or in the East Norriton
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (SALDO)119
shall have the meaning set forth in the latest edition of Urban
Hydrology for Small Watersheds, Technical Release 55, and the
National Engineering Handbook, Section 4, Hydrology.
M. Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the BMP
Manual.120
N. Hardship waiver procedure.
(1) The Township may hear requests for waivers where it is alleged
that the stormwater management provisions of this chapter inflict
unreasonable or undue hardship upon the applicant. The waiver
request shall be in writing to the Township. The applicant shall fully
document the nature of the alleged hardship.
117. Editor's Note: See § 166-43B.
118. Editor's Note: The appendixes are on file in the Township offices.
119. Editor's Note: See Ch. 175, Subdivision and Land Development.
120. Editor's Note: See § 166-43A.
§ 166-17 EAST NORRITON CODE § 166-17
163:360
(2) The Township Board of Supervisors may grant a waiver from the
stormwater management provisions, provided that all of the
following findings are made in a given case:
(a) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity of lot size or shape, or exceptional
topographic or other physical conditions peculiar to the
particular property, and that the unreasonable or undue
hardship is due to such conditions and not the circumstances
or conditions generally created by the provisions applicable to
the stormwater management district in which the property is
located.
(b) That, because of such physical circumstances or conditions,
there is no possibility that the property can be developed in
strict conformance with the stormwater management
provisions of this chapter and that the authorization of a
waiver is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of
the property.
(c) That such unreasonable or undue hardship has not been
created by the applicant.
(d) That the waiver, if authorized, will represent the minimum
waiver that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulations as set forth.
(3) In granting any waiver, the municipality may attach such
reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to
implement the purposes of Pennsylvania Act 167.
O. Stormwater hotspots.
(1) If a site is designated as a hotspot, it has important implications for
how stormwater is managed. First and foremost, untreated
stormwater runoff from hotspots shall not be allowed to recharge
into groundwater where it may contaminate water supplies.
Therefore, infiltration requirements shall not apply to development
sites that fit into the hotspot category (the runoff volume must be
managed using appropriate methods). Second, a greater level of
stormwater management shall be considered at hotspot sites to
prevent pollutant washoff after construction. The Environmental
Protection Agency's (EPA) NPDES stormwater program requires
some industrial sites to prepare and implement a stormwater
pollution prevention plan. Below is a list of examples of designated
hotspots:
(a) Vehicle salvage yard and recycling facilities.
(b) Vehicle fueling stations.
(c) Vehicle service and maintenance facilities.
§ 166-17 SHOPPING CARTS § 166-17
163:361
(d) Vehicle and equipment cleaning facilities.
(e) Fleet storage areas (bus, truck, etc.).
(f) Industrial sites based on Standard Industrial Codes.
(g) Marinas (service and maintenance).
(h) Outdoor liquid container storage.
(i) Outdoor loading/unloading facilities.
(j) Public works storage areas.
(k) Facilities that generate or store hazardous materials, as
defined by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of
1976.
(l) Commercial container nursery.
(m) Other land uses and activities as designated by an appropriate
review authority.
(2) The following land uses and activities are not normally considered
hotspots:
(a) Residential streets and rural highways.
(b) Residential development.
(c) Institutional development.
(d) Office development.
(e) Nonindustrial rooftops.
(f) Pervious surfaces, except golf courses and nurseries [which
may need an integrated pest management (IPM) plan].
(3) While large highways [average daily traffic volume (ADT) greater
than 30,000] are not designated as stormwater hotspots, it is
important to ensure that highway stormwater management plans
adequately protect groundwater.
P. Extreme caution shall be exercised where infiltration is proposed in
SWPAs as defined by the local municipal or water authority.
Q. Infiltration facilities shall be used in conjunction with other innovative
or traditional BMPs. stormwater control facilities, and nonstructural
stormwater management alternatives.
R. Extreme caution shall be exercised where salt or chloride (municipal
salt storage) would be a pollutant since soils do little to filter this
pollutant, and it may contaminate the groundwater. The qualified
design professional shall evaluate the possibility of groundwater
§ 166-17 EAST NORRITON CODE § 166-17
163:362
§ 166-18. Permit requirements of other government entities.
The following permit requirements may apply to certain regulated earth
disturbance activities and must be met prior to commencement of regulated
earth disturbance activities, as applicable:
§ 166-19. Erosion and sediment control during regulated earth
disturbance activities.
contamination from the proposed infiltration facility and perform a
hydrogeologic justification study if necessary.
S. The infiltration requirement in HQ or EV waters shall be subject to the
Department's Chapter 93 Anti-Degradation Regulations.
T. An impermeable liner will be required in detention basins where the
possibility of groundwater contamination exists. A detailed
hydrogeologic investigation may be required by the Township.
U. The Township shall require the applicant to provide safeguards against
groundwater contamination for land uses that may cause groundwater
contamination should there be a mishap or spill.
V. BMP operations and maintenance requirements are described in Article
V of this chapter.
A. All regulated earth disturbance activities subject to permit
requirements by the DEP under regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter
102.
B. Work within natural drainageways subject to permit by the DEP under
25 Pa. Code Chapter 105.
C. Any stormwater management facility that would be located in or
adjacent to surface waters of the commonwealth, including wetlands,
subject to permit by the DEP under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105.
D. Any stormwater management facility that would be located on a state
highway right-of-way or would require access from a state highway
shall be subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation (PennDOT).
E. Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which must pass
or convey flows from the tributary area and any facility which may
constitute a dam subject to permit by the DEP under 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 105.
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the Township shall
commence until approval by the Township of an erosion and sediment
control plan for construction activities.
§ 166-17 SHOPPING CARTS § 166-19
163:363
§ 166-20. Water quality requirements after earth disturbance
activities.
B. The DEP has regulations that require an erosion and sediment control
plan for any earth disturbance activity of 5,000 square feet or more,
under 25 Pa. Code § 102.4(b).
C. In addition, under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92, a DEP NPDES construction
activities permit is required for regulated earth disturbance activities.
D. Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance
activities from the appropriate DEP regional office or Conservation
District must be provided to the Township. The issuance of an NPDES
construction permit [or permit coverage under the statewide general
permit (PAG-2)] satisfies the requirements of Subsection A.
E. A copy of the erosion and sediment control plan and any required
permit, as required by DEP regulation, shall be available at the project
site at all times.
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the Township shall
commence until approval by the Township of a plan which demonstrates
compliance with state water quality requirements after construction is
complete.
B. The BMPs must be designed, implemented and maintained to meet
state water quality requirements and any other more-stringent
requirements as determined by the Township.
C. To control post-construction stormwater impacts from regulated earth
disturbance activities, state water quality requirements can be met by
BMPs, including site design, which provide for replication of
preconstruction stormwater infiltration and runoff conditions, so that
post-construction stormwater discharges do not degrade the physical,
chemical or biological characteristics of the receiving waters. As
described in the DEP Comprehensive Stormwater Management Policy
(No. 392-0300-002, September 28, 2002), this may be achieved by the
following:
(1) Infiltration: replication of preconstruction stormwater infiltration
conditions;
(2) Treatment: use of water quality treatment BMPs to ensure filtering
out of the chemical and physical pollutants from the stormwater
runoff; and
(3) Stream bank and stream bed protection: management of volume
and rate of post-construction stormwater discharges to prevent
physical degradation of receiving waters (e.g., from scouring).
D. The DEP has regulations that require municipalities to ensure design,
implementation and maintenance of best management practices
§ 166-19 EAST NORRITON CODE § 166-20
163:364
§ 166-21. Volume controls.
The low-impact development practices provided in the BMP Manual shall
be utilized for all regulated activities to the maximum extent practicable.
Unless exempted from meeting volume control requirements by § 166-5 of
this chapter, water volume controls shall be implemented using the Design
Storm Method in Subsection A or the Simplified Method in Subsection B
below. For regulated activities equal or less than one acre that do not
require hydrologic routing to design the stormwater facilities, this chapter
establishes no preference for either methodology. Therefore, the applicant
may select either methodology on the basis of economic considerations, the
intrinsic limitations on applicability of the analytical procedures associated
with each methodology, and other factors.
(BMPs) that control runoff from new development and redevelopment
after regulated earth disturbance activities are complete. These
requirements include the need to implement post-construction
stormwater BMPs with assurance of long-term operations and
maintenance of those BMPs.
E. Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance
activities from the appropriate DEP regional office must be provided to
the Township. The issuance of an NPDES construction permit [or
permit coverage under the statewide general permit (PAG-2)] satisfies
the requirements of Subsection A.
A. The Design Storm Method (CG-1 in the BMP Manual) is applicable to
any size of regulated activity. This method requires detailed modeling
based on site conditions.
(1) Do not increase the post-development total runoff volume for all
storms equal to or less than the two-year frequency, twenty-fourhour
duration precipitation.
(2) For modeling purposes:
(a) Existing (predevelopment) nonforested pervious areas must be
considered meadow in good condition.
(b) Twenty percent of existing impervious area, when present,
shall be considered meadow in good condition in the model for
existing conditions.
B. The Simplified Method (CG-2 in the BMP Manual) provided below is
independent of site conditions and should be used if the Design Storm
Method is not followed. This method is not applicable to regulated
activities greater than one acre or for projects that require design of
stormwater storage facilities. For new impervious surfaces:
(1) Stormwater facilities shall capture at least the first two inches of
runoff from all new impervious surfaces.
§ 166-20 SHOPPING CARTS § 166-21
163:365
§ 166-22. Stormwater management districts.
(2) At least the first one inch of runoff from new impervious surfaces
shall be permanently removed from the runoff flow (i.e., the first
one inch of runoff shall not be released into the surface waters of
this commonwealth). Removal options include reuse, evaporation,
transpiration and infiltration.
(3) Wherever possible, infiltration facilities should be designed to
accommodate infiltration of the entire permanently removed
runoff. However, in all cases at least the first 0.5 inch of the
permanently removed runoff shall be infiltrated.
(a) Analyze hydrologic soil groups as well as natural and manmade
features within the site to determine general areas of
suitability for infiltration practices. In areas where
development on fill material is under consideration, conduct a
geotechnical investigation of subgrade stability; infiltration
may not be ruled out without conducting these tests.
(b) Provide field tests such as double-ring infiltrometer or
hydraulic conductivity tests (at the level of the proposed
infiltration surface) to determine the appropriate hydraulic
conductivity rate. Percolation tests are not recommended for
design purposes.
(c) Design the infiltration structure for the required retention
(Rev) volume based on field-determined capacity at the level of
the proposed infiltration surface.
(d) If on-lot infiltration structures are proposed by the developer, it
must be demonstrated to the Township that the soils are
conducive to infiltrate on the lots identified.
A. Management of stormwater management districts.
(1) In order to implement the provisions of the Stony Creek/Saw Mill
Run Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan, developed by the
Montgomery County Planning Commission with input from the
Montgomery County municipalities and adopted by the
Montgomery County Commissioners, dated June 1, 1991
(hereinafter the "Stony Creek Plan"), the Township is hereby
divided into stormwater management districts, consistent with the
designated watersheds for the Stony Creek/Saw Mill Run
Watershed Release Rate Map developed and adopted by the
Montgomery County Planning Commission, dated October 1991
(hereinafter the "Release Rate Map"). The boundaries of the
stormwater management districts are shown on an official map
which, along with the Stony Creek Plan and the Release Rate Map,
is incorporated herein by reference and all of which are available
for inspection at the Township administrative offices.
§ 166-21 EAST NORRITON CODE § 166-22
163:366
§ 166-23. Stormwater management district implementation
provisions.
(2) Three broad categories of stormwater management districts,
namely the Release Rate District, the Provisional No-Detention
District and the One-Hundred-Percent Release Rate District, shall
be applied in the Township.
B. Categories of districts. The stormwater management districts are
hereinafter divided into three groups or categories as follows:
(1) Release Rate District. Within a given district, the post-development
peak rate of stormwater runoff must be controlled to the stated
percentage of the predevelopment peak rate of stormwater runoff
in order to protect downstream watershed areas. There are
numerous Release Rate Districts which differ in the extent to which
post-development stormwater runoff must be controlled. The
release rates range from 50% to 100%, and a specific release rate
for each district is shown on the Release Rate Map and the Stony
Creek Plan.
(2) Provisional No-Detention District. These watershed areas may
discharge post-development peak stormwater runoff without
detention without adversely affecting the total watershed peak
flow. In certain instances, however, the local conveyance facilities,
which transport stormwater runoff from the site to the main
channel, may not have adequate capacity to safely transport
increased peak flows associated with no detention for a proposed
development. In those instances, the developer shall either use a
one-hundred-percent release rate control or provide increased
capacity of downstream drainage elements to convey increased
peak flows. In determining if adequate capacity exists in the local
watershed drainage network, the developer must assume that the
entire local watershed is developed per the existing current
Chapter 205, Zoning, and that all new development would use the
runoff controls specified within this chapter.
(3) One-Hundred-Percent Release Rate District. This is an area that
should use a one-hundred-percent release rate control to protect
the areas downstream of the development site. A one-hundredpercent
release rate control would result in the post-development
peak rate stormwater runoff being controlled to the
predevelopment level, as further defined in this chapter.
A. Compliance with release rate criteria. Any stormwater management
controls required by this chapter and subject to release rate criteria
(50% to 100%) shall meet the applicable release rate criteria for each of
the two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty- and one-hundred-year return
period runoff events consistent with the calculation methodology set
forth in this chapter.
§ 166-22 SHOPPING CARTS § 166-23
163:367
B. Boundary criteria. The exact location of the stormwater management
district boundaries as they apply to a given development within the
Township shall be determined by mapping the boundaries using a twofoot
topographic contours provided as part of the stormwater
management plan. The district boundaries as originally drawn on the
Stony Creek Plan coincide with topographic divides or, in certain
instances, are drawn from the intersection of the watercourse and a
physical feature such as the confluence with another watercourse or a
potential flow obstruction (road, culvert, bridge, etc.) to the
topographic divide consistent with topography.
C. Downstream capacity analysis criteria. Any downstream capacity
analysis conducted in accordance with this chapter shall use the
following criteria for determining adequacy for accepting peak flow
rates:
(1) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey
the increased runoff associated with a two-year return period event
within their banks at velocities consistent with protection of the
channels from erosion. Acceptable velocities shall be based upon
criteria included in the DEP Erosion and Sediment Pollution
Control Program Manual, latest edition.
(2) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey
the increased twenty-five-year return period runoff peak within
their banks or to otherwise not create any hazards to persons or
property.
(3) Culverts, bridges or storm sewers or any other facilities that must
pass or convey flows from the tributary area must have sufficient
capacity to pass or convey the increased flows associated with the
twenty-five-year return period event, except for facilities located
within a designated floodplain area that must be capable of passing
or conveying the one-hundred-year return period runoff. Any
facilities that constitute stream enclosures per DEP's Chapter 105
regulations shall be designed to convey the one-hundred-year
return period runoff.
D. Single release rate criteria. For a proposed development site located
within a single release rate category area, the total runoff from the site
shall meet the applicable release rate criteria. For development sites
with multiple points of concentrated runoff discharge, individual
drainage points may be designed for up to a one-hundred-percent
release rate, so long as the total runoff from the site is controlled to the
applicable release rate.
E. Two or more release rate criteria. For a proposed development site
located within two or more release rate category areas, the total runoff
that may be discharged at any point is limited to the predevelopment
peak rate of runoff at that point multiplied by the applicable release
rate. The control rates shall apply regardless of any grading
§ 166-23 EAST NORRITON CODE § 166-23
163:368
modifications that may change the drainage area that discharges to a
given point.
F. Locations of mixed categories. For proposed development sites located
partially within a release rate category area and partially within a
provisional no-detention area, in no event shall a significant portion of
the site area subject to the release rate be drained to the discharge
point(s) located in the no-detention area.
G. No-harm option. For any proposed development site not located in a
provisional no-detention district, the developer has the option of using a
less-restrictive runoff control (including no detention) if the developer
can prove that no harm would be caused by discharging at a higher
runoff rate than that specified by the plan. Proof of no harm must be
shown from the development site through the remainder of the
downstream drainage network to the confluence of the Stony Creek or
Saw Mill Run with the Schuylkill River. Proof of no harm must be shown
using the capacity criteria specified in § 166-24J of this chapter if the
downstream capacity analysis is a part of the no-harm justification. Any
no-harm justifications shall be submitted by the developer as part of the
stormwater management plan submission. Attempts to prove no harm
based upon downstream peak flow versus capacity analysis shall be
governed by the following provisions:
(1) The peak flow values to be used for the downstream areas for the
design return period storms (two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty- and
one-hundred-year) shall be the values from the calibrated Penn
State Runoff Model (PSRM) for the Stony Creek/Saw Mill Run
watershed. These flow values would be supplied to the developer
by the Township Engineer upon request.
(2) Any available capacity in the downstream conveyance system as
documented by a developer may be used by the developer only in
proportion to his development site acreage relative to the total
upstream undeveloped acreage from the identified capacity (i.e., if
the developer's site is 10% of the upstream undeveloped acreage,
the developer may use up to 10% of the documented downstream
available capacity).
(3) Developer-proposed runoff controls that would generate increased
peak flow rates at documented storm drainage problem areas
would, by definition, be precluded from successful attempts to
prove no harm, except in conjunction with proposed capacity
improvements for the problem areas consistent with § 166-24J of
this chapter.
H. Individual lots within a subdivision. When a site is proposed to be
subdivided for the sale and development of lots on an individual basis,
either by the subdividing party or other party, the subdividing party
shall, as part of the subdivision proposal, show all provisions for
§ 166-23 SHOPPING CARTS § 166-23
163:369
§ 166-24. Calculation methodology.
stormwater control, in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter.
I. Regional or subregional detention alternatives. For certain regions
within the watershed, it may be more cost effective to provide one
control facility for an entire subarea, group of subareas or portion of a
subarea incorporating more than one development site plan to provide
an individual control facility for each development site. The initiative
and funding for any regional or subregional runoff control alternatives
are the responsibility of prospective developers. The design of any
regional control basins must incorporate reasonable development of
the entire upstream watershed. The peak outflow of a regional basin
would be determined on a case-by-case basis using the hydrologic
model of the watershed consistent with protection of the downstream
watershed areas. "Hydrologic model" refers to the calibrated Stony
Creek/Sawmill Run version of the Penn State Runoff Model as
developed for the requirements of this chapter.
J. Capacity improvements.
(1) In certain instances, primarily within the provisional no-detention
and provisional one-hundred-percent release rate category areas,
local drainage conditions may dictate more-stringent levels of
runoff control than those based upon protection of the entire
watershed. In these instances, if the developer could prove that it
would be feasible to provide capacity improvements to relieve the
capacity deficiency in the local drainage network, then the capacity
improvements could be provided by the developer in lieu of
development controls on the development site. Any capacity
improvements would be designed based upon the development of
all areas tributary to the proposed improvement and the capacity
criteria specified in § 166-24C of this chapter. In addition, all new
development upstream of a proposed capacity improvement shall
be assumed to implement the applicable runoff controls consistent
with this chapter, except that all new development within the entire
subarea(s) within which the proposed development site is located
shall be assumed to implement the developer's proposed discharge
control, if any.
(2) Capacity improvements may also be provided as necessary to
implement any regional or subregional detention alternatives or to
implement a modified no-harm option which proposes specific
capacity improvements to document the validity of a less-stringent
discharge control that would not create any harm downstream.
A. Approved methodology. Stormwater runoff from all development sites
with a drainage area of greater than 200 acres shall be calculated using
a generally accepted calculation technique that is based on the NRCS
Soil Cover Complex Method. The Township may allow the use of the
§ 166-23 EAST NORRITON CODE § 166-24
163:370
Rational Method to estimate peak discharges from drainage areas that
contain less than 200 acres. The Soil Cover Complex Method shall
be used for drainage areas greater than 200 acres. The following
computation methods may be selected by the design professional,
based on the individual limitations and suitability of each method for a
particular use:
(1) TR-20 (or commercial computer package based on TR-20),
developed by the USDA and NRCS; applicable where use of full
hydrology computer model is desirable or necessary.
(2) TR-55 (or commercial computer package based on TR-55),
developed by the USDA and NRCS; applicable for land
development plans within the limitations described in TR-55.
(3) HEC-1/HEC-HMS, developed by the United States Army Corps of
Engineers; applicable where use of a full hydrologic computer
model is desirable or necessary.
(4) PSRM, developed by Penn State University; applicable where use
of a hydrologic model is desirable or necessary; simpler than TR-20
or HEC-1.
(5) Rational Method (or commercial computer package based on
Rational Method), developed by Emil Kuichling (1889); applicable
for sites less than 200 acres, or as approved by the Township.
(6) Other methods: other computation methodologies approved by the
Township.
B. All calculations consistent with this chapter using the Soil Cover
Complex Method shall use the appropriate design rainfall depths for the
various return period storms according to the region in which they are
located as presented in the PennDOT Drainage Manual (Publication
584). If a hydrologic computer model such as PSRM or HEC-1/HECHMS
is used for stormwater runoff calculations, then the duration of
rainfall shall be 24 hours. The Alternating Block Method shown in
Figure F-1 or the SCS Type II S Curve, Figure F-3 in Chapter Appendix
F, shall be used for the rainfall distribution.
C. The following criteria shall be used for runoff calculations:
(1) For development and redevelopment sites, the ground cover used
in determining the existing conditions' flow rates for the developed
portion of the site shall be considered as "meadow in good
condition," unless the natural ground cover generates a lower
curve number (CN) or Rational "c" value (i.e., woods) as presented
in the PennDOT Drainage Manual (Publication 584).
D. All calculations using the Rational Method shall use the rainfall
intensities consistent with appropriate times of concentration for
overland flow and return periods presented in the Region five Curves
§ 166-24 SHOPPING CARTS § 166-24
163:371
§ 166-25. Other requirements.
from the PennDOT Storm-Duration-Frequency Chart (Figure F-4).
Times of concentration for overland flow shall be calculated using the
methodology presented in Chapter 3 of Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, NRCS, TR-55 (as amended or replaced from time to time
by NRCS). Times of concentration for channel and pipe flow shall be
computed using Manning's Equation.
E. Runoff curve numbers (CN) for both existing and proposed conditions
to be used in the Soil Cover Complex Method shall be obtained from the
PennDOT Drainage Manual (Publication 584).
F. Runoff coefficients (c) for both existing and proposed conditions for use
in the Rational Method shall be obtained from the PennDOT Drainage
Manual (Publication 584).
G. Where uniform flow is anticipated, the Manning Equation shall be used
for hydraulic computations and to determine the capacity of open
channels, pipes, and storm sewers. Values for Manning's roughness
coefficient (n) shall be consistent with the PennDOT Drainage Manual
(Publication 584).
H. Outlet structures for stormwater management facilities shall be
designed to meet the performance standards of this chapter using any
generally accepted hydraulic analysis technique or method.
I. Basin designs. The design of any stormwater detention facilities
intended to meet the requirements of this chapter shall be verified by
routing the design storm hydrograph through the facilities using the
Storage-Indication Method. The storm hydrograph shall be computed
using a calculation method that produces a full hydrograph. The
Township may approve the use of any generally accepted full
hydrograph approximation technique that shall use a total runoff
volume that is consistent with the volume from a method that produces
a full hydrograph. For basins designed using the modified Rational
Method technique, the detention volume shall, at a minimum, equal the
volume derived from the approximate routing process as contained in
SCS Technical Release Number 55 (TR-55).
J. Freeboard requirements. All stormwater detention facilities shall
provide a minimum of one foot of freeboard above the maximum pool
elevation associated with the two-year through twenty-five-year events.
An emergency spillway shall be designed to pass the one-hundred-year
runoff event with a minimum six-inch freeboard.
A. General.
(1) The developer shall construct and/or install such drainage
structures as necessary to:
§ 166-24 EAST NORRITON CODE § 166-25
163:372
(a) Prevent erosion damage and to satisfactorily carry off or detain
and control the rate of release of surface waters.
(b) Encourage all runoff control measures to percolate the
stormwater into the ground to aid in the recharge of
groundwater.
(c) Carry surface water to the nearest adequate street, storm
drain, detention basin, natural watercourse or drainage
facility.
(d) Take surface water from the bottom of grades, to lead water
away from springs and to avoid excessive use of cross gutters
at street intersections and elsewhere.
(e) Control the anticipated peak discharge from the property
being subdivided or developed and the existing runoff
contributed from all land at a higher elevation in the same
watershed.
(f) Maintain the adequacy of the natural stream channels.
Accelerated bank erosion shall be prevented by controlling the
rate and velocity of runoff discharge to these watercourses so
as to avoid increasing the occurrence of stream bank overflow.
(g) Preserve the adequacy of existing culverts and bridges by
suppressing the new flood peaks created by new land
development.
(2) If, in the course of preparing or reviewing the stormwater
management plan, the Township determines that off-site
improvements are necessary to satisfactorily control the
stormwater from the proposed development, the developer shall be
responsible for the off-site improvements.
(3) All stormwater detention/retention facilities and erosion and
sedimentation control measures shall be in place and functioning
prior to the creation of any impervious surface.
(4) Any term not specifically defined in § 166-10 or in the Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance of East Norriton Township121
shall have the meaning set forth in the latest edition of Urban
Hydrology for Small Watersheds, Technical Release 55, and the
National Engineering Handbook, Section 4, Hydrology.
B. Retention of existing watercourses and natural drainage features.
(1) Whenever a watercourse, stream or intermittent stream is located
within a development site, it shall remain open in its natural state
and location and shall not be piped. However, if the stream banks
are of excessive slope (steeper than 3:1), it shall be the
121. Editor's Note: See Ch. 175, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 166-25 SHOPPING CARTS § 166-25
163:373
responsibility of the developer to improve the stream banks along
the watercourse.
(2) The existing points of natural drainage discharge onto adjacent
property shall not be altered without the written approval of the
affected landowners in a form satisfactory to the Township
Solicitor.
(3) No stormwater runoff or natural drainage shall be so diverted as to
overload existing drainage systems or create flooding or the need
for additional drainage structures on other private properties or
public lands.
C. Requirements for drainage structures and/or pipes.
(1) Drainage easements. Drainage easements to accommodate all
storm drainage requirements shall be a minimum of 20 feet in
width and shall be offered for dedication to the Township.
Easements shall be provided for all improved watercourses and
storm drainage piping that are not located within street rights-ofway.
(2) Storm drainage pipe. The minimum diameter of all storm drainage
pipe shall be 18 inches or an equivalent with equal area. No storm
drainage piping shall be permitted under buildings. The minimum
grade of piping shall be reinforced concrete and conform to
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation specifications. All
joints shall be mortared.
(3) Stormwater detention/retention. The following criteria shall be
used for design of retention/detention areas. Any reference to
detention basin shall also include retention basin.
(a) The design of stormwater detention areas shall be based upon
criteria set forth in the latest edition of Urban Hydrology for
Small Watersheds, Technical Release 55, and the National
Engineering Handbook, Section 4, Hydrology, as published by
the United States Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service, as revised.
(b) Detention areas shall be designed so that the time and rate of
runoff from the site, when developed at its maximum potential
use or development, will not exceed the rate of runoff for the
stormwater management district in which the site is located.
Further definitions and limitations affecting the rate of runoff
are set forth within the Stony Creek Plan and Release Rate
Map for the particular stormwater management districts.
(c) Discharge from detention basins and from detention areas
shall be designed to control the time and rate of runoff as
referred to in § 166-25C(3)(b) above and also as set forth
§ 166-25 EAST NORRITON CODE § 166-25
163:374
within the stormwater management district and within the
Stony Creek Plan.
(d) If permanent ponds are used, the developer shall demonstrate,
by a report to be submitted by a Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania registered certified professional engineer, that
such ponds are designed to protect the public health and
safety.
(e) Prior to the granting of final approval of any subdivision or land
development plan, the Township must be satisfied through
contractual arrangements that all stormwater facilities will be
properly maintained.
(f) When detention basins are provided, they shall be designed to
utilize the natural contours of the land wherever possible.
When such design is impracticable, the construction of the
basin shall utilize slopes as flat as possible to blend the
structure into the terrain. All basins shall have slopes of four
horizontal to one vertical or less.
(g) Detention basins shall be designed so that they return to
normal conditions within 12 hours after the termination of the
storm, unless the Township Engineer finds that downstream
conditions may warrant other design criteria for stormwater
release.
(h) Emergency overflow facilities (emergency spillways) shall be
provided for all detention facilities.
(i) If the land of the proposed subdivision or land development
will be conveyed to two or more separate owners, the
developer shall provide written assurance and deed
restrictions to the Township that the detention basins will be
properly maintained by the owners.
(j) The detention basin area will be enclosed by a four-foot-high
chain-link fence (green) or an equal approved by the Township
Engineer constructed along the berm of the basin. A double
gate shall be provided for access of maintenance equipment.
(k) In all cases, the bottom of the detention basin shall be provided
with a pipe underdrain and outletted from the basin.
D. Design criteria.
(1) Stormwater release rate.
(a) For a proposed development site located within a single
Release Rate District, the total stormwater runoff from the site
shall meet the applicable release rate criteria. For a
development site with multiple points of concentrated
stormwater runoff discharge, individual drainage points may
§ 166-25 SHOPPING CARTS § 166-25
163:375
be designed for up to a one-hundred-percent release rate, so
long as the total stormwater runoff from the site is controlled
to the applicable release rate.
(b) For a proposed development site located within two or more
Release Rate Districts, the maximum peak rate of stormwater
runoff that may be discharged at any point is limited to the
predevelopment peak rate of runoff at that point, multiplied by
the applicable release rate. The control rates shall apply
regardless of any grading modifications that may change the
drainage area that discharges to a given point.
(c) For a proposed development site located partially within a
Release Rate District and partially within a Provisional No-
Detention District, in no event shall a significant portion of the
site area subject to the release rate control be drained to the
discharge points located in the no-detention area.
(2) The following rainfall intensities shall be used for the twenty-fourhour
Type II distribution storm with average antecedent moisture
conditions for the frequencies shown:
(a) Two-year frequency: 3.16 inches.
(b) Five-year frequency: 3.91 inches.
(c) Ten-year frequency: 4.57 inches.
(d) Twenty-five-year frequency: 5.60 inches.
(e) Fifty-year frequency: 6.53 inches.
(f) One-hundred-year frequency: 7.63 inches.
(3) All developments shall limit the rate of stormwater runoff as
previously set forth within this chapter to be in strict conformance
with the Stony Creek Plan and this section.
(4) The increased stormwater runoff which may result from
subdivision or land development shall be controlled by permanent
stormwater runoff control measures and facilities. The design for
such facilities is as follows:
(a) For the two-, five-, and ten-year storm frequencies, the control
facility must achieve the required release rate as set forth in
this section and within the Stony Creek Plan.
(b) For storms greater than a ten-year storm frequency, but up to
and including the one-hundred-year storm frequency, the
control facility must achieve a release rate of 100%.
(5) An overflow system shall be provided to carry runoff to the
detention basin when the capacity of the storm drainage pipe
system is exceeded. The overflow system shall have sufficient
§ 166-25 EAST NORRITON CODE § 166-25
163:376
capacity to carry the runoff difference between the one-hundredyear-
storm peak flow rate and the capacity of the storm drain pipe.
The one-hundred-year-storm peak shall be calculated by the Soil
Cover Complex Method or by an equal method as may be approved
by the Township Engineer.
(6) Detention basins shall be designed to facilitate regular
maintenance, mowing and periodic desilting and reseeding. Basins
shall not be located within floodplains or floodplain soils. In
residential subdivisions and residential developments, shallow
broad basins shall be used.
(7) If the side slopes of the basin area exceed 3:1 over at least a fivefoot
area, a four-foot-high chain-link fence (green) shall be
required. The fence should be located on the outside of the berm or
slope. Plantings as required in this section shall be located next to
the fence on the outside to soften the appearance. If the side slopes
are less than 3:1, no fencing is required.
(8) The minimum top width of the detention basin berm shall be 10
feet. A cutoff trench (keyway) comprised of impervious material
shall be provided under all embankments that require fill material.
The cutoff trench shall be a minimum of eight feet wide and two
feet deep and have side slopes of 1:1.
(9) In order to ensure proper drainage on the floor of the basin, a
minimum grade of 2% shall be maintained for grassed areas. For
concrete channel flow, a minimum grade of 1% shall be maintained.
(10) All detention/retention basin embankments shall be placed in a
maximum of eight-inch concrete lifts to a minimum of 95% of
maximum dry density as established by the American Society for
Testing and Materials D-1557. Prior to proceeding to the next lift,
the compaction shall be checked by the Township Engineer or soils
engineer. Compaction tests will be run on the leading and the
trailing edge of the berm as well as the top of the berm.
(11) Whenever possible, the emergency spillway for detention basins
shall be constructed on undisturbed ground. In situations where
the spillway is constructed within a fill area, the emergency
spillways shall be constructed of reinforced concrete checker
blocks. All emergency spillways shall be constructed so that the
detention basin berm is protected against erosion. The minimum
capacity of all emergency spillways shall be the peak flow rate from
the one-hundred-year design storm after development. The
construction material of the emergency spillway shall extend along
the upstream and downstream berm embankment slopes. The
upstream edge of the emergency spillway shall be a minimum of
three feet below the spillway crease elevation. The downstream
slope of the spillway shall, as a minimum, extend to the toe of the
§ 166-25 SHOPPING CARTS § 166-25
163:377
berm embankment. The emergency spillway shall not discharge
over earth fill and/or easily erodible material.
(12) All stormwater management detention facilities shall provide a
minimum one foot of freeboard above the maximum pool elevation
associated with the storm event. Any emergency spillway shall be
designed to pass the one-hundred-year after-construction
stormwater runoff event with a minimum one foot of freeboard
from the design flow elevation in the emergency spillway to the top
of a settled detention basin embankment.
(13) Antiseep collars shall be installed around the pipe barrel within the
normal saturation zone of the detention basin berms. The antiseep
collars and their connections to the pipe barrel shall be watertight.
The antiseep collars shall extend a minimum of two feet beyond the
outside of the principal pipe barrel. The maximum spacing between
collars shall be 14 times the minimum projection of the collar
measured perpendicular to the pipe. A minimum of two antiseep
collars shall be installed on each pipe outlet.
(14) All outlet pipes through the basin berm shall be reinforced
concrete pipe having O-ring joints. All joints shall be mortared.
(15) Energy-dissipating devices, including, but not limited to, riprap and
endwalls, shall be placed at all basin outlets.
(16) During construction, a perforated riser pipe shall be provided at
each outlet of all detention basins for sediment control. The riser
shall be constructed of metal or concrete. The riser shall extend to
a maximum elevation of two feet below the crest elevation of the
emergency spillway. The perforated riser shall be designed so that
the rate of outflow is controlled by the pipe barrel through the
basin berm when the depth of water within the basin exceeds the
height of the riser. Circular perforations with a maximum diameter
of 1 1/2 inches shall be spaced eight inches vertically and 12 inches
horizontally on the upper 2/3 of the pipe. The perforations shall be
cleanly cut and shall not be susceptible to enlargement. All metal
risers shall be coated to prevent rust. A trash rack or similar
appurtenances shall be provided to prevent debris from entering
the riser. All risers shall have a concrete base attached with a
watertight connection. The base shall be of sufficient weight to
prevent flotation of the riser. An antivortex device, consisting of a
thin vertical plate normal to the basin berm, shall be provided on
the top of the riser.
(17) All drainage channels shall be designed to prevent erosion of the
bed and banks. The maximum permissible flow velocity shall not
exceed those outlined in the following table. Suitable stabilization
shall be provided where required to prevent erosion of the drainage
channels. Allowable water velocities shall be as follows:
§ 166-25 EAST NORRITON CODE § 166-25
163:378
(a) Well-established grass on good soil, short pliant bladed: five
feet to six feet per second.
(b) Well-established grass on good soil, bunch grass, soil exposed:
two feet to four feet per second.
(c) Well-established grass on good soil, stiff-stemmed grass: two
feet to three feet per second.
(d) Earth without vegetation, fine sand and silt: one feet to two
feet per second.
(e) Earth without vegetation, ordinary firm loam: two feet to three
feet per second.
(f) Earth without vegetation, stiff clay: three feet to five feet per
second.
(g) Earth without vegetation, clay and gravel: four feet to five feet
per second.
(h) Earth without vegetation, coarse gravel: four feet to five feet
per second.
(i) Earth without vegetation, soft shale: five feet to six feet per
second.
(j) Shoulders, earth: (see "earth without vegetation" entry above).
(k) Shoulders, stabilized: six feet per second.
(l) Shoulders, paved: 10 feet to 15 feet per second.
(18) All vegetated drainage channels shall have a maximum side slope
grade of three horizontal to one vertical.
(19) Because of the critical nature of vegetated drainage channels, the
design of all vegetated drainage channels shall, as a minimum,
conform to the design procedures outlined in the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources Erosion and Sediment
Control Handbook (April 1990, or as further revised).
(20) Access ramps (for maintenance equipment) shall be 12 feet in
width and have a maximum slope of 12 1/2% for all detention/
retention basins. These ramps shall be constructed of concrete
checker blocks on a six-inch compacted layer of PennDOT No. 2A
coarse aggregate or approved equal.
(21) The following standards shall apply to underground detention
basins:
(a) All underground storage shall be constructed of approved
culvert pipes or concrete vaults. No storage shall be permitted
within the voids of stone bedding.
§ 166-25 SHOPPING CARTS § 166-25
163:379
(b) All underground storage pipes shall meet the requirements of
storm drainage pipe as outlined in § 166-25C(2) and § 166-25L.
All underground vaults shall have a minimum wall thickness of
eight inches and be designed to withstand the anticipated
vehicular loads.
(c) If an underground detention basin is to be privately owned,
operated, and maintained, underground storage pipes may be
constructed of a material other than reinforced concrete. The
pipe and material shall meet all applicable PennDOT standards
and shall be subject to the approval of the Township Engineer.
The applicant shall provide satisfactory documentation on the
strength, durability and installation requirements of the
proposed material.
(d) All pipes, regardless of material, shall be installed on a six-inch
stone bedding. The remaining backfill shall be of crushed stone
if required by the manufacturer's specification or the Township
Engineer.
(e) All parts of an underground detention basin shall lie
completely outside and be adequately separated from
proposed or existing public rights-of-way, utility easements,
foundations, wetlands and floodplains, woods and landscaping,
or other sensitive areas.
(f) The design of underground detention basins shall provide for
complete access for regular cleaning and inspection. The
design shall incorporate an emergency spillway or other failsafe
means of addressing overflow conditions.
E. General storm and surface drainage.
(1) All subdivision and land development plans shall include methods
to withhold and release stormwater at a controlled rate onto
adjacent property.
(2) Lots shall be laid out and graded to provide positive drainage away
from buildings.
(3) Storm sewers, culverts and related installations shall be provided
to:
(a) Permit the unimpeded flow of natural watercourses in such a
manner as to protect the natural character of the watercourses
and to provide regulated discharge.
(b) Ensure adequate drainage of all low points along the line of
streets.
(c) Intercept stormwater runoff streets at intervals reasonably
related to the extent and grade of the area drained and to
prevent substantial flow of water across intersections.
§ 166-25 EAST NORRITON CODE § 166-25
163:380
(4) Storm sewers are required and shall be placed in the right-of-way
parallel to the roadway. When located in undedicated land, they
shall be placed within an easement not less than 20 feet wide.
(5) Manholes shall be spaced not more than 300 feet apart on pipe
sizes up to and including 24 inches in diameter and not more than
450 feet apart for pipe sizes greater than 24 inches in diameter.
Inlets may be substituted for manholes, on approval by the
Township Engineer, at the same spacing as required for manholes.
In no case shall inlets be spaced more than 450 feet apart.
Manholes or inlets shall be provided at all changes of direction of
storm sewer piping.
(6) Inlets and manhole cover frames shall conform to Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation specifications. At street
intersections, inlets shall be placed in the tangent and not in the
curved portion of the curbing. Manhole covers shall have the word
"STORM" cast in two-inch-high letters on the top of the cover.
(7) Stormwater roof drains and sump pumps shall not discharge water
directly onto a sidewalk or a street and shall be constructed to
discharge wholly to a storm sewer system.
(8) Drainage structures which drain watershed areas in excess of 1/2
square mile (320 acres) or which have a span of eight feet or more
shall be designed for a maximum expected runoff as calculated
using the Soil Conservation Service Technical Release 55, Urban
Hydrology for Small Watersheds (Less Than 2,000 Acres). The
design storm shall be a minimum one-hundred-year storm. A water
obstruction and encroachment permit shall be obtained from the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources or a waiver
from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources for
all waterway openings prior to final plan approval. The cartway
width over a structure shall be as wide as the widest road
connecting with the structure, or, if the character of the road is
expected to change for the future planning, the cartway over the
structure shall be made to anticipate this condition.
F. Storm sewer design.
(1) Storm frequency.
(a) Design flow rate. The storm drain system shall be designed to
carry the ten-year peak flow rate. The design ten-year peak
flow rate into each inlet shall be indicated on the stormwater
drainage plan. The ten-year flow rate shall be determined by
the Rational Formula.
Q = C*I*A
Where:
§ 166-25 SHOPPING CARTS § 166-25
163:381
Q = Peak runoff rate measured in cubic feet per second
(cfs).
C = Runoff coefficient. The coefficient of stormwater
runoff includes many variables, such as ground
slope, ground cover, shape of drainage area, etc.
I = Intensity. Average rainfall intensity in inches per
hour for a time equal to the time of concentration.
A = Area (drainage area in acres).
(b) Overflow system. An overflow system shall be provided to carry
flow to the detention basin when the capacity of the storm
drain pipe system is exceeded. The overflow system shall be of
sufficient capacity to carry the difference between the onehundred-
year and ten-year peak flow rates.
G. Storm duration.
(1) A five-minute storm duration shall be used if the duration does not
result in a maximum expected discharge that exceeds the capacity
of a thirty-inch pipe.
(2) If a five-minute storm duration results in a pipe size exceeding 30
inches, the time-of-concentration approach shall be used in
determining storm duration.
(3) If a five-minute storm duration results in a pipe size exceeding 30
inches, within any run of pipe, the time-of-concentration approach
may be used for the sizing of pipes from that point on by adjusting
the time of concentration.
H. Additional design criteria. Additional design criteria for specific
drainage facilities are required as follows:
(1) Shoulders in cut areas (without swales).
(a) Water flowing in the shoulder shall not encroach more than 2/3
of the shoulder width during a ten-year-frequency storm of
five-minute duration.
(b) The maximum velocity as determined by Manning's Equation
shall not exceed the allowable velocities as shown in
§ 166-25D(17) for the specific type of shoulder material.
(c) Inlets shall be provided to control the shoulder encroachment
and water velocity.
I. Swales adjacent to shoulders.
(1) When swales are provided in cut areas, the water shall not
encroach upon the roadway area during a ten-year-frequency
storm of five-minute duration.
§ 166-25 EAST NORRITON CODE § 166-25
163:382
(2) The maximum velocity as determined by Manning's Equation shall
not exceed the allowable velocities as shown in § 166-25D(17) for
the specific type of swale material.
J. Curbed sections.
(1) The maximum encroachment of water on the roadway pavement
shall not exceed three inches in depth at the curbline or 1/2 of a
vehicular travel lane during a ten-year-frequency storm of fiveminute
duration.
(2) Inlets shall be provided to control the encroachment of water on
the pavement.
K. Inlets.
(1) When there is a change in pipe size in the inlet, the elevation of the
top of pipes shall be the same or the smaller pipe higher. A
minimum drop of two inches shall be provided at the inlet pipe
invert elevation and the outlet pipe invert elevation.
(2) If the capacity of the shoulder, swale, curb section or depressed
median section is less than the inlet capacity, the shoulder, swale,
curb section or depressed medial section capacity shall govern
inlet spacing.
(3) Inlet capacities shall be based on a maximum flow of 5.0 cubic feet
per second.
L. Storm pipes.
(1) To facilitate the solution of Manning's Equation as applied to storm
pipes, charts are presented in Design Charts for Open Channel
Flow, prepared by the United States Department of Commerce, as
last revised, which permit a direct determination of the capacity of
circular pipes.
(2) Where headroom is restricted, equivalent pipe arches may be used
in lieu of circular pipe.
(3) The minimum diameter of storm pipe shall be 18 inches.
(4) Inlets or manholes shall be placed at changes in vertical or
horizontal direction of pipe.
(5) Pipe shall be designed with a slope such that the minimum velocity
of 2.5 feet per second will be attained; however, the slope shall not
be less than 0.5%.
(6) All inlets, manholes and piping shall be designed to provide a
minimum of 1.0 foot of freeboard at all inlets and manholes. The
stormwater piping system shall be designed to meet inlet and
outlet control.
§ 166-25 SHOPPING CARTS § 166-25
163:383
(7) All pipes shall be designed to have a minimum of 18 inches of cover
over the bell of the pipe.
(8) Subbase and U-drains in combination with six-inch pipe U-drains
and/or combination storm sewers and U-drains shall be installed on
roadways where the finished roadway grade is within one foot of
the seasonal high-water table as designated for the soils by the
Montgomery County Soil Survey.
(9) All plans showing the proposed storm sewer construction must be
accompanied by a complete design submitted by the registered
engineer.
(10) When subdivisions or land development are submitted to the
Township for approval in sections, a complete storm sewer design
for the proposed subdivision and land development shall be
submitted. The proposed design must include the entire tract and
not a portion.
(11) If only a section of a subdivision or land development is
contemplated for construction, the engineer shall show how he
proposes to handle stormwater from this section in order to
prevent damage to adjacent properties. If temporary construction
is required, the engineer shall include such structures in the plans
submitted.
(12) In the event that such temporary measures cannot ensure
protection to adjacent properties, then the main outfall line of the
storm sewer shall be included as part of the construction for the
proposed section.
M. Stormwater basin landscaping. It is the intent of this section to
conserve the value of land and buildings on surrounding properties and
neighborhoods by mitigating the visual impact of stormwater
management facilities, and to minimize soil erosion. Landscaping shall
be required in and around all stormwater management facilities with a
minimum surface area of 1,000 square feet. Basins may be natural or
maintained as described below. A planting plan shall be submitted in
accordance with the one of the following two types of landscape
treatments for stormwater basins:
(1) Landscaping for naturalized basins. The following shall apply to
basins left in a natural state, especially those in parks or large open
spaces:
(a) Basin floors. Basin floors shall be planted with wildflowers and
grasses, the intent being to create a mixed meadow of such
plantings, where appropriate. Selection of plantings should be
based on whether the area in question is usually well-drained
or permanently wet.
§ 166-25 EAST NORRITON CODE § 166-25
163:384
(b) Wet edges. Wet edges which remain wet all or most of the year
shall be planted with wildflowers, grasses and shrubs tolerant
of wet conditions. Plants to be located on rims or banks which
remain dry most of the year should be planted with species
tolerant to dry soil conditions.
(c) Wooded areas.
[1] Where basins adjoin wooded areas, trees and shrubs shall
be selected and planted so as to blend with existing
surroundings.
[2] Plantings in such areas shall be of sufficient density to
eliminate the need for mowing.
(d) Slopes.
[1] Where slopes are 30% or less, a mixture of wildflowers
and/or grasses shall be planted.
[2] No woody plant materials or trees shall be located on a
berm acting as the impoundment structure of a detention/
retention basin. Trees shall be located around the
perimeter of the downstream side of a berm a sufficient
distance from the toe of the slope to assure that the toe of
the slope is outside the dripline of the mature species
planted.
(2) Landscaping for maintained basins. The following shall be applied
for basins in developed areas where a manicured lawn is possible.
Lawn mowing shall take place at intervals sufficient to maintain the
grass ground cover at no higher than six inches.
(a) Basin floors and slopes. Basin floors and slopes shall be planted
with lawn grass and maintained as a lawn with a height of not
more than six inches.
(b) Wet areas. Low areas subject to prolonged wet conditions,
such as low-flow channels or areas with poor drainage, shall be
stabilized to allow mowing and prevent erosion. Such
stabilization may include geotextile fabrics or other porous
materials such as grass pavers or PVC stabilizers.
(c) Drainage structures in residential districts. Embankments
surrounding drainage structures, such as head- or endwalls,
are to be planted with shrubs or ornamental trees along the top
of the structure. Shrubs shall be planted three feet apart.
(d) No trees shall be located on a berm acting as the impoundment
structure of a detention/retention basin. Trees shall be located
around the perimeter of the downstream side of a berm a
sufficient distance from the toe of the slope to assure that the
§ 166-25 SHOPPING CARTS § 166-25
163:385
toe of the slope is outside the dripline of the mature species
planted.
§ 166-25 EAST NORRITON CODE § 166-25
163:386
ARTICLE V
Operation and Maintenance
§ 166-26. Responsibilities of developers and landowners.
A. The BMP operations and maintenance plan for the project site shall
establish responsibilities for the continuing operation and maintenance
of all permanent stormwater BMPs, as follows:
(1) If a plan includes structures or lots which are to be separately
owned and in which streets, sewers and other public improvements
are to be dedicated to the municipality, stormwater BMPs may also
be dedicated to and maintained by the municipality.
(2) If a plan includes operations and maintenance by a single
ownership, or if sewers and other public improvements are to be
privately owned and maintained, then the operation and
maintenance of stormwater BMPs shall be the responsibility of the
owner or private management entity.
B. Stormwater management BMPs should be inspected by the landowner,
or the owner's designee (including the Township for dedicated and
owned facilities), according to the following list of minimum
frequencies:
(1) Annually for the first five years following construction;
(2) Once every three years after;
(3) During or immediately after the cessation of a ten-year or greater
storm.
C. The Township shall make the final determination on the continuing
maintenance responsibilities prior to final approval of the stormwater
management plan. The Township may require a dedication of such
facilities as part of the requirements of the approved stormwater
management plan. Such a requirement is not an indication that the
Township will accept the facilities. The Township reserves the right to
accept or reject ownership and operating responsibility for any portion
of the stormwater management controls.
D. Facilities, areas, or structures used as stormwater management BMPs
shall be enumerated as permanent real estate appurtenances and
recorded as deed restrictions or conservation easements that run with
the land.
E. Operation and maintenance (O&M) plans for stormwater management
approved pursuant to 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102 after the date of this
chapter shall be recorded as a restrictive deed covenant that runs with
the land.
F. In the absence of an operation and maintenance plan or an operation
and maintenance agreement, the property owner is responsible for
§ 166-26 SHOPPING CARTS § 166-26
163:387
§ 166-27. Municipal review of BMP operations and maintenance.
§ 166-28. Adherence to approved BMP operations and maintenance
plan required.
It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any permanent stormwater BMP
required by an approved BMP operations and maintenance plan, or to
allow the property to remain in a condition which does not conform to an
approved BMP operations and maintenance plan, unless an exception is
granted in writing by the Township.
§ 166-29. Operation and maintenance agreements.
operation and maintenance (O&M), including periodic inspections, of
privately owned stormwater management BMPs.
G. The Township may take enforcement actions against an owner for any
failure to satisfy the provisions of this chapter.
A. The Township shall review the BMP operations and maintenance plan
for consistency with the purposes and requirements of this chapter and
any permits issued by the DEP.
B. The Township shall notify the applicant, in writing, whether the BMP
operations and maintenance plan is approved.
C. The Township may require an as-built survey of all stormwater BMPs
and an explanation of any discrepancies with the operations and
maintenance plan.
A. Prior to completing construction of a stormwater management site
plan, the property owner shall sign and record an operation and
maintenance (O&M) agreement covering all stormwater control
facilities which are to be privately owned. The agreement shall be
substantially the same as the agreement in Appendix B of this
chapter.122
(1) The owner, successor and assigns shall operate and maintain all
facilities in accordance with the approved schedule(s) in the O&M
agreement.
(2) The owner shall convey to the Township conservation easements to
assure access for periodic inspections by the Township and
maintenance, as necessary.
(3) The owner shall keep on file with the Township the name, address,
and telephone number of the person or company responsible for
operation and maintenance activities. In the event of a change, new
information shall be submitted by the owner to the Township within
10 working days of the change.
122. Editor's Note: The appendixes are on file in the Township offices.
§ 166-26 EAST NORRITON CODE § 166-29
163:388
§ 166-30. Easements.
§ 166-31. Recording of approved plans and agreements.
§ 166-32. Municipal Stormwater BMP Operation and Maintenance
Fund.
B. The owner is responsible for operation and maintenance (O&M) of the
stormwater management BMPs. If the owner fails to adhere to the O&M
agreement, the Township may perform the services required and
charge the owner appropriate fees. Nonpayment of fees may result in a
lien against the property.
A. Stormwater management easements are required for all areas used for
off-site stormwater control, unless a waiver is granted by the Township.
B. Stormwater management easements shall be provided by the property
owner if necessary for access for inspections and maintenance or for
preservation of stormwater runoff conveyance, infiltration, and
detention areas and other BMPs by persons other than the property
owner. The purpose of the easement shall be specified in any agreement
under § 166-29.
A. The owner of any land upon which permanent BMPs will be placed,
constructed or implemented, as described in the BMP operations and
maintenance plan, shall record the following documents in the office of
the Recorder of Deeds for Montgomery County within 15 days of
approval of the BMP operations plan by the Township:
(1) The operations and maintenance plan, or a summary thereof.
(2) Operations and maintenance agreements under § 166-29.
(3) Easements under § 166-30.
B. The Township may suspend or revoke any approvals granted for the
project site upon discovery of the failure of the owner to comply with
this section.
A. If stormwater BMPs are accepted by the Township for dedication, the
Township may require persons installing stormwater BMPs to pay a
specified amount to the Municipal Stormwater BMP Operation and
Maintenance Fund to help defray costs of operations and maintenance
activities. The amount may be determined as follows:
(1) If the BMP is to be owned and maintained by the Township, the
amount shall cover the estimated costs for operations and
maintenance for 10 years, as determined by the Township.
(2) The amount shall then be converted to present worth of the annual
series values.
§ 166-29 SHOPPING CARTS § 166-32
163:389
B. If a BMP is proposed that also serves as a recreation facility (e.g.,
ballfield, lake), the municipality may adjust the amount due accordingly.
§ 166-32 EAST NORRITON CODE § 166-32
163:390
ARTICLE VI
Prohibitions
§ 166-33. Prohibited discharges and connections.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that
allows any nonstormwater discharge, including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water, to enter a regulated small municipal
separate storm sewer system (MS4) or to enter the waters of this
commonwealth is prohibited.
B. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into a regulated
small MS4, or discharges into waters of this commonwealth, which are
not composed entirely of stormwater, except:
(1) As provided in Subsection C below; and
(2) Discharges allowed under a state or federal permit.
C. The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to
be significant contributors to pollution in a regulated small municipal
separate storm sewer system (MS4) or to the waters of this
commonwealth:
(1) Water line flushing.
(2) Discharges from potable water sources.
(3) Landscape irrigation.
(4) Lawn watering.
(5) Irrigation water.
(6) Diverted stream flows.
(7) Flow from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(8) Rising groundwaters.
(9) Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration [as defined at 40 CFR
35.205(20)].
(10) Uncontaminated pumped groundwater.
(11) Springs.
(12) Foundation or floating drains.
(13) Footing drains.
(14) Air-conditioning condensation.
(15)Water from crawl space pumps.
(16)Water from individual residential car washing.
§ 166-33 SHOPPING CARTS § 166-33
163:391
§ 166-34. Roof drains and sump pumps.
§ 166-35. Alterations of BMPs.
(17) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
(18) Pavement (street) wash water, where spills or leaks of toxic or
hazardous materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has
been removed) and where detergents are not used.
(19) Discharges from firefighting activities.
(20) Routine external building wash down (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
D. In the event that either the Township or DEP determines that any of the
discharges identified in Subsection C significantly contribute pollutants
to a regulated small MS4 or to the waters of the commonwealth, the
Township or DEP will notify the responsible person(s) to cease the
discharge.
E. Upon notice provided by the Township under Subsection D, the
discharger will have a reasonable time, as determined by the Township,
to cease the discharge consistent with the degree of pollution caused by
the discharge.
F. Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's responsibilities under
state law.
G. The following connections are prohibited, except as provided in
Subsection C above:
(1) Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface,
which allows any nonstormwater discharge, including sewage,
process wastewater, and wash water, to enter the separate storm
sewer system and any connections to the storm drain system from
indoor drains and sinks.
(2) Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or
industrial land use to the separate storm sewer system which has
not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and
approved by the Township.
A. Roof drains and sump pumps shall not be connected to streets, sanitary
or storm sewers or roadside ditches, except as provided in § 166-34B of
this chapter.
B. When it is more advantageous to connect directly to streets or storm
sewers, connections of roof drains to streets or roadside ditches may be
permitted by the Township.
C. Roof drains shall discharge to infiltration areas or vegetative BMPs to
the maximum extent practicable.
§ 166-33 EAST NORRITON CODE § 166-35
163:392
A. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape or alter any existing
stormwater BMP, unless it is part of an approved maintenance program,
without the written approval of the Township.
B. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping or vegetation into
a stormwater BMP or within a drainage easement which would limit or
alter the functioning of the BMP without the written approval of the
Township.
§ 166-35 SHOPPING CARTS § 166-35
163:393

ARTICLE VII
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 166-36. Right of entry.
§ 166-37. Inspections.
§ 166-38. Enforcement.
It is unlawful for any person to modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter
any approved stormwater management BMPs, facilities, area, or structures
without the written approval of the DEP or a delegated conservation district
and the Township.
§ 166-39. Suspension and revocation.
A. Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Township may enter at
reasonable times upon any property within the Township to inspect the
condition of the stormwater structures and facilities in regard to any
aspect regulated by this chapter.
B. BMP owners and operators shall allow persons working on behalf of the
Township ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
determining compliance with this chapter.
C. Persons working on behalf of the Township shall have the right to
temporarily locate on any BMP in the Township such devices as are
necessary to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the discharges
from such BMP.
D. Unreasonable delays in allowing the Township access to a BMP are a
violation of this chapter.
A. The DEP or its designees (e.g., Conservation District) normally ensure
compliance with any permits issued, including those for stormwater
management. In addition to DEP compliance programs, the Township or
its designee may inspect all phases of the construction, operations,
maintenance and any other implementation of stormwater BMPs.
B. During any stage of the regulated earth disturbance activities, if the
Township or its designee determines that any BMPs are not being
implemented in accordance with this chapter, the Township may
suspend or revoke any existing permits or other approvals until the
deficiencies are corrected.
A. Any approval or permit issued by the Township may be suspended or
revoked for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of an
approved stormwater management plan or O&M agreement.
§ 166-36 SHOPPING CARTS § 166-39
163:395
§ 166-40. Violations and penalties.
§ 166-41. Appeals.
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable
law, chapter, rule or regulation relating to a regulated activity.
(3) The creation of any condition or commission of any act which
constitutes or creates a hazard, nuisance, or pollution, or
endangers the life or property of others.
B. A suspended approval may be reinstated by the Township when:
(1) The Township has inspected and approved the correction to the
violations that caused the suspension.
(2) The Township is satisfied that the violation has been corrected.
C. An approval that has been revoked by the Township cannot be
reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new approval under the
provisions of this chapter.
D. If a violation causes no immediate danger to life, public health, or
property, at its sole discretion, the Township may provide a limited time
period for the owner to correct the violation. In these cases, the
Township will provide the owner, or the owner's designee, with a
written notice of the violation and the time period allowed for the owner
to correct the violation. If the owner does not correct the violation
within the allowed time period, the Township may revoke or suspend
any, or all, applicable approvals and permits pertaining to any provision
of this chapter.
A. Anyone violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
summary offense and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $1,000 for each violation, recoverable with costs. Each day
that the violation continues shall be a separate offense, and penalties
shall be cumulative.
B. In addition, the Township may institute injunctive, mandamus, or any
other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for the
enforcement of this chapter. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall
have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent
injunctions, mandamus, or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of the Township or its designee
relevant to the provisions of this chapter may appeal to the Township
within 30 days of that action.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Township relevant to the
provisions of this chapter may appeal to the County Court of Common
Pleas in Montgomery County within 30 days of the Township's decision.
§ 166-39 EAST NORRITON CODE § 166-41
163:396
ARTICLE VIII
Fees and Expenses
§ 166-42. Fees and expenses.
A. Fees shall be established by the Township to defray plan review and
construction inspection costs incurred by the Township. All fees shall be
paid by the owner at the time of the stormwater management plan
submission. A review and inspection fee schedule shall be established
by resolution of the Board of Supervisors based on the size of the
regulated activity and based on the Township's costs for reviewing
stormwater management plans, BMP operations and maintenance
plans, and conducting inspections. The Township shall periodically
update the review and inspection fee schedule to ensure that review
costs are adequately reimbursed.
B. For projects that require subdivision and land development approval,
the fees required by this chapter shall not be applicable, but the fees
required by § 175-51 shall be applicable.
C. For projects that do not require subdivision and land development
approval, see § 166-42 of this chapter.
D. Expenses covered by fees:
(1) Administrative/clerical processing.
(2) Review of the stormwater management plan and/or the BMP
operations and maintenance plan.
(3) Review of the BMP operations and maintenance agreement.
(4) Attendance at meetings.
(5) Site inspections, including, but not limited to, preconstruction
meetings, inspections during the construction of stormwater
management facilities, BMPs or other drainage improvements
during construction, and final inspection of all such improvements
upon completion of the work.
(6) Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions
regulated by this chapter, correct violations and assure proper
completion of stipulated remedial actions.
E. The engineering fees and other fees required to be paid by this chapter
shall be promptly paid to the Township by the owner upon the
submission of bills thereof to the owner by the Township from time to
time, as such fees are billed to the Township by its Engineer or other
professional consultants or as determined by the Township in the case
of Township employees. Failure to promptly pay any such fees shall
result in the revocation of stormwater management plan approval.
§ 166-42 SHOPPING CARTS § 166-42
163:397
F. To the engineering and other fees required to be paid to the Township
by this chapter, there shall be added the sum of 5%, which the owner
shall pay to the Township as reimbursement to the Township of the
costs incurred by the Township for the collection of such fees and the
disbursement of the same to the Township Engineer and other
professional consultants.
G. At the time of submission of the simplified drainage plan or stormwater
management plan, the applicant or developer shall deposit a cash
escrow with the Township to cover costs, fees and expenses (for
purposes of this section, "review fees"), including, but not limited to,
engineering and legal fees incurred during the review and approval
process of stormwater management plans.
§ 166-42 EAST NORRITON CODE § 166-42
163:398
ARTICLE IX
References
§ 166-43. References.
A. Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. No.
363-0300-002 (December 2006), as amended and updated.
Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual.
Harrisburg, PA.
B. Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. No.
363-2134-008 (April 15, 2000), as amended and updated. Erosion and
Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual. Harrisburg, PA.
C. Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. Publication 284 (2010), as
amended and updated. PennDOT Drainage Manual. Harrisburg, PA.
§ 166-43 SHOPPING CARTS § 166-43
163:399
Chapter 168
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Grading and excavations — See Ch. 114.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 152.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
175.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 196.
Zoning — See Ch. 205.
§ 166-43 EAST NORRITON CODE § 166-43
163:400
ARTICLE I
Sidewalk and Driveway Construction
[Adopted 6-5-1951 by Ord. No. 9]
§ 168-1. Permit required. [Amended 3-9-1999 by Ord. No. 406]
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership or corporation to construct
or enlarge any driveway or parking area or to construct or replace any
public sidewalk or curb in the Township of East Norriton until a permit for
such work has been applied for and approved by the Township.
§ 168-2. Application.
The application for such permit shall be made by the owner, occupier or
by his constructor or agent in writing on forms provided by said Township
Supervisors and in accordance with such rules and regulations as may
be prescribed by the Township Supervisors. There shall be appended to
each application a plan showing the outlines of the property affected,
with existing buildings thereon, existing sidewalks and driveways, with
the proposed driveway or sidewalk to be constructed or erected and its
relationship to any road for public use or travel in said Township of East
Norriton and, particularly, the construction of said sidewalk or drive and its
relationship to the drainage of said road.
§ 168-2.1. Sidewalks, curbing, driveway and parking design,
construction and maintenance standards. [Added 3-9-1999 by Ord.
No. 406]
A. All driveways and parking areas shall conform to § 175-19A and B of the
East Norriton Township Subdivision and Land Development Code.
B. All sidewalk and curbing shall comply with § 175-20 of the East
Norriton Township Subdivision and Land Development Code.
C. All driveways and parking areas shall comply with § 175-26,
Stormwater management, of the East Norriton Township Subdivision
and Land Development Code.
D. All nonresidential or multifamily driveways and parking areas shall
conform to §§ 175-22C and 175-22.1 of the East Norriton Township
Subdivision and Land Development Code.
E. All curb and sidewalk on a property shall be maintained in a safe
condition by the owner of the property. All replacement of curb or
sidewalk shall be the responsibility of the property owner. All low
overhanging tree limbs or bushes shall be removed so as not to obstruct
safe passage of sidewalks or cartways. Clear height shall be eight feet
over sidewalks and 18 feet over the cartway.
§ 168-1 SHOPPING CARTS § 168-2.1
163:401
§ 168-3. Fees.
The cost of filing such application or the cost of any permit issued thereon
and the cost of any inspection deemed necessary by the Township
Supervisors shall be determined according to the general fee schedule to be
adopted by a resolution of the Township Supervisors, and all such fees and
costs shall be paid into the Township treasury.123
F. Any crack or shift of the curb greater than one-inch from either vertical
or horizontal alignment shall require replacement of that section of the
curbing.
G. Any crack or separation of the curb one-inch or less, but where there is
no shifting of the curb, must be filled with mortar or crack sealant
approved by the Township.
H. Any spalling of the curb surface less than two inches deep and not
greater than 12 inches long may be filled with mortar mixture approved
by the Township.
I. Any curb with spalling of the surface greater than two inches deep and
greater than 12 inches long shall be replaced.
J. Any curbing leaning more than 25° from the vertical position shall be
replaced.
K. The profile of the curbing shall be uniform and consistent with good
engineering practices. If the curb has sunk due to poor construction,
remedial measures may be requested.
L. Any crack, bump, heave, depression or other distortion of the continuity
of the sidewalk or driveway apron shall not exceed 1/2 inch in elevation
differential.
M. Any sidewalk or driveway apron with spalling greater than one-inch
average depth and greater than one-foot wide will require replacement
of that section of sidewalk.
N. Any sidewalk panel or driveway apron with structural cracks
encompassing more than 25% of the area of the panel shall require
replacement of that panel.
O. Existing asphalt driveway aprons and sidewalks across driveways shall
have concrete installed when either part is replaced if the slope of the
driveway, within 20 feet of the sidewalk, exceeds 20° above level.
Asphalt replacements shall meet all code requirements as if concrete.
123. Editor's Note: The general fee schedule is on file in the office of the Township Manager
and may be examined there during regular business hours.
§ 168-2.1 EAST NORRITON CODE § 168-4
163:402
§ 168-4. Modifications.
The Township Supervisors may alter such plans and specify any changes
or modifications of any kind which they may deem necessary and make
their approval of the granting of any permit subject to any such alterations,
changes or modifications.
§ 168-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1988 by Ord. No.
274]
A. Upon the construction or erection of any such drive or sidewalk which
does not comply with any conditions imposed by the Township
Supervisors as aforesaid or any erection or construction of any such
drive or sidewalk made without the prior approval of the Township
Supervisors, and which does not meet with the approval of the
Township Supervisors after construction or erection, then, in either
case, the Township Supervisors may, with or without notice, make the
necessary correction and recover the cost of such correction in a
summary proceedings to be brought before a District Justice in said
Township.
B. Any person, corporation or other entity who shall violate any of the
provisions of this article or who should fail to comply with any notice of
violation herein, upon conviction before a District Justice within the
magisterial district within which the Township of East Norriton is a
part, shall be fined not more than $600 plus costs of prosecution after a
summary proceeding brought in the name of the Township before said
District Justice. A new and separate offense shall be deemed to be
committed for each day that such violation exists. In default of the
payment of any fine imposed and the costs, the person or persons that
are charged may be sentenced to be committed to the county jail for a
period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 168-4 SHOPPING CARTS § 168-5
163:403

ARTICLE II
Removal of Snow and Ice
[Adopted 11-9-1970 by Ord. No. 69]
§ 168-6. Unlawful acts. [Amended 4-10-1972 by Ord. No. 80]
§ 168-7. Pathways to be cleared. [Amended 4-10-1972 by Ord. No.
80]
§ 168-8. Placement of snow; fire hydrants.
A. It shall be unlawful for any owner or lessee of any property to allow or
permit snow or ice to lie upon, remain upon or be piled or accumulated
upon a sidewalk upon which such property abuts within the Township
for more than 24 hours.
B. It shall further be unlawful for any owner of an apartment to allow or
permit snow or ice to lie upon, remain upon or be piled or accumulated
upon any walkway used by residents of the apartment or upon any
paved surface used for ingress, egress or parking of motor vehicles for
more than 24 hours.
A. It shall be the duty of the property owner or the lessee of the same, not
later than 24 hours after snow has ceased to fall, to clear or cause to be
cleared a pathway in the sidewalk upon which said property abuts.
Such pathway shall not be less than 30 inches in width and shall be
thoroughly cleaned to the extent of snow and ice or other obstruction.
B. It shall be the duty of the owner of any apartment within East Norriton
Township, not later than 24 hours after snow has ceased to fall, to clear
or cause to be cleared a pathway in any walkway within the apartment
complex. Such pathway shall be not less than 30 inches in width and
shall be thoroughly cleaned to that extent of snow and ice or other
obstruction.
C. It shall be the duty of the owner of any apartment within East Norriton
Township, not later than 24 hours after snow has ceased to fall, to clear
or cause to be cleared any paved surface used for ingress, egress or
parking of motor vehicles. Such paved surface shall be thoroughly
cleaned of snow and ice or other obstruction.
A. Snow or ice removed from sidewalk area shall be placed on the
property of the owner, adjacent to the removal area. Excessive amounts
of snow or ice may be placed in the area between the sidewalk and the
curbline, but not in the street. If the snow and ice is frozen so hard that
it cannot be removed without injury to the pavement or damaging the
base of the footpath, the owner of the property shall cause the sidewalk
abutting or adjacent to such permit to be strewn with ashes, sand,
sawdust or any suitable abrasive material and shall, as soon thereafter
as the weather shall permit, thoroughly clean such sidewalks.
§ 168-6 SHOPPING CARTS § 168-8
163:405
§ 168-9. Parking during and after snowfall and snow emergencies.
[Amended 12-19-1996 by Ord. No. 375; 10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 565]
§ 168-10. Motor vehicles left unattended.
It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle to be left parked, stalled,
incapable of moving under its own power or left unattended on any street
or road within this Township in violation of the provisions of this article, and
in addition to the penalties hereinafter provided for such violation, any such
motor vehicle may be removed and/or impounded by the Township.
§ 168-11. Impoundment of motor vehicles.
B. Fire hydrants shall not be covered with snow or ice.
C. It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent, tenant, occupant or person in
charge of a property within the Township to throw, shovel, push or plow
snow into, across or upon any road, street, sidewalk or right-of-way in
the Township. [Amended 11-16-2010 by Ord. No. 532]
A. Whenever there shall be any snowfall or if the Chairman of the Board of
Supervisors, or his or her designee, shall declare a snow emergency, no
on-street parking of vehicles shall be permitted on any street or road in
the Township.
B. Any time a snow emergency shall be deemed to be in effect by virtue of
the foregoing provisions, such emergency shall continue to exist until
such time as the Chairman of the Board of Supervisors, or his or her
designee, shall declare that the snow emergency has been terminated.
C. During any snowfall or any snow emergency which has been declared
throughout the Township, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any
street or road within the Township until the snow has been completely
plowed for the full width of the cartway, except on those streets within
the Township where only on-street parking is available. Where only onstreet
parking is available, all motor vehicles shall be parked on the
even-address side of the street on even-numbered calendar days and on
the odd-address side of the street on odd-numbered calendar days.
A. In the event that motor vehicles are impounded, such motor vehicles
shall be stored in storage areas or garages as are approved from time to
time by the Township Supervisors by resolution. Such storage areas or
garages used as pounds for the storage of motor vehicles mentioned
above shall be approved by the Township Supervisors only after the
owners or operators of such storage areas or garages have provided
bond in a sufficient and adequate amount for the indemnification of the
owners of such impounded motor vehicles against the loss thereof or
injury or damage thereto while in the custody of such pound keeper and
have provided, in writing, with the Township Supervisors fixed specific
towing and storage charges to be assessed against the owners of the
§ 168-8 EAST NORRITON CODE § 168-11
163:406
§ 168-12. Snow emergency routes. [Amended 10-27-2015 by Ord.
No. 565]
By resolution, the Supervisors may designate snow emergency routes, the
marking and posting and the rules and regulations in reference to the
same, as well as rules and regulations in reference to any of the other
requirements and provisions of this article, and such rules and regulations
shall have the same force and effect and be subject to the same penalties as
any other provisions of this article.
§ 168-13. Word usage.
The word "person" shall include individuals and also firms, partnerships,
associations of persons, corporations, organizations or any other group
acting as a unit, and where other than individuals, the officers of such
groups or entities shall be considered as the person or persons subject to
the provisions of this article.
§ 168-14. Violations and penalties.
motor vehicles and which must be paid before release of the motor
vehicles to the owners.
B. Within 12 hours from the time of the impounding of any vehicle or
ascertainment by the Township as to the identity of the owner of such
vehicle, notice of the fact that such vehicle has been impounded shall be
sent by the Township to the owner of record of such vehicle,
designating the place from which the said vehicle was removed, the
reason for its impounding and the place in which it has been
impounded.
C. The payment of such charges assessed above, unless such payment
shall be made under protest, shall be final and conclusive and shall
constitute a waiver of any right to recover the money so paid by the
owner of the motor vehicle so impounded. In the event that the towing
and impounding charges are paid under protest, the offender shall be
entitled to a hearing before a District Justice or a court of record having
jurisdiction.
D. No vehicle shall be removed under the terms of this article if, at the
time of such intended removal, the owner or person for the time being
in charge of such vehicle is present and expresses a willingness and
intention to immediately remove said vehicle.
A. Any person, corporation or other entity who shall violate any of the
provisions of this article or who should fail to comply with any notice of
violation herein, upon conviction before a District Justice within the
magisterial district within which the Township of East Norriton is a
part, shall be fined not more than $600 plus costs of prosecution after a
summary proceeding brought in the name of the Township before said
District Justice. A new and separate offense shall be deemed to be
§ 168-11 SHOPPING CARTS § 168-14
163:407
committed for each day that such violation exists. In default of the
payment of any fine imposed and the costs, the person or persons that
are charged may be sentenced to be committed to the county jail for
a period not exceeding 30 days. [Amended 12-19-1988 by Ord. No.
274]
B. In all cases where a police officer of East Norriton Township shall first
give notice of the offense by either handing to the offending operator or
affixing to the motor vehicle in question a ticket on which he has noted
the time and place of the offense, nature of the offense charged and the
license registration of the motor vehicle in question, no prosecution
shall be instituted for 72 hours thereafter, provided that, if, during said
seventy-two-hour period, the offender shall voluntarily appear at the
office of the Township Secretary of East Norriton Township during
regular business hours and voluntarily enter a plea of guilty and pay a
fine of $30 to the Township, no prosecution for such offense shall
thereafter be brought. [Added 6-11-1974 by Ord. No. 108; amended
12-19-1996 by Ord. No. 375; 11-16-2010 by Ord. No. 532]
§ 168-14 EAST NORRITON CODE § 168-14
163:408
ARTICLE III
Installation of Railways, Conduits and Pipes on Roadways
[Adopted 8-13-1974 by Ord. No. 112]
§ 168-15. Construction of railways, conduits and pipes.
In accordance with the provisions of Section 1156 of Article XI of the
Second Class Township code, as amended,124 no railroad or street railway
shall hereafter be constructed upon any Township road, nor shall any
railroad or street railway crossings nor any gas pipe, water pipe, electric
conduits or other piping be laid upon or in, nor shall any telephone,
telegraph or electric light or power poles or any coal tipples or any other
obstructions be erected upon or in any portion of a Township road except
under such conditions, restrictions and regulations relating to the
installation and maintenance thereof as may be prescribed in permits
granted by the Township for such purpose.
§ 168-16. Application; fee. [Amended 6-27-1988 by Ord. No. 266]
The application for a permit shall be on a form prescribed by the Township,
which includes notification both to the Code Enforcement Officer and the
Police Department. The application shall be submitted in triplicate and shall
be accompanied by a fee in accordance with the schedule of fees set forth
by the Department of Transportation for highway occupancy permits and
restoration charges. In addition, the applicant shall submit three copies of
a sketch showing such dimensions as the location of the intended facility,
width of the traveled roadway, right-of-way lines and a dimension to the
nearest intersecting street.
§ 168-17. Permit. [Amended 6-27-1988 by Ord. No. 266]
§ 168-18. Restoration of work site. [Amended 6-27-1988 by Ord. No.
266]
After the applicant completes the work for which the permit was sought, the
applicant shall clean up the work site and return the highway, as near as
practical, to its prework condition. Total restoration of the work site shall
be completed within 60 days after the work has been completed.
A. For the health, safety and welfare of the public, and in particular the
motorists within the Township of East Norriton, the Police Department
may establish specific time frames within which the applicant shall
conduct the work for which the permit was sought. Such time limitation
shall be noted on the permit.
B. A permit shall be issued to the applicant after all of the aforementioned
requirements have been met.
124. Editor's Note: 53 P.S. § 66156 was repealed 11-9-1995 by P.L. 350, No. 60. See now 53 P.S.
§ 67322.
§ 168-15 SHOPPING CARTS § 168-19
163:409
§ 168-19. Written notice upon completion; inspection. [Amended
6-27-1988 by Ord. No. 266]
Upon completion of the work, the applicant shall give written notice thereof
to the Township. Thereupon the Township shall inspect the work, and the
applicant shall pay to the Township an inspection fee in accordance with the
schedule of fees set forth by the Department of Transportation for highway
occupancy permits and restoration charges.
§ 168-20. Settlements; defects in work. [Added 6-27-1988 by Ord.
No. 266]
Where any settlement or defect in the work occurs, and if the settlement or
defect constitutes an emergency, the applicant shall make such emergency
repairs as are necessary within 24 hours after notice thereof from the
Township. If the applicant shall fail to rectify any such settlement or other
defect, whether an emergency or not, within 30 days after written notice
from the Township to do so, the Township may do the work and shall impose
upon the applicant the cost thereof, together with an additional 20% of such
cost.
§ 168-21. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-27-1988 by Ord. No.
266]
Any person, firm, corporation or utility which shall violate any of the
provisions of this article, as amended, shall be subject, upon conviction
before a District Justice, to pay a fine of not more than $600 and costs of
prosecution. Should any person, firm, corporation or utility default in the
payment of such fine and costs, said entity shall be subject to imprisonment
in the county jail for not more than five days.
§ 168-19 EAST NORRITON CODE § 168-21
163:410
ARTICLE IV
Highway Openings and Excavations
[Adopted 6-25-2002 by Ord. No. 439125]
§ 168-22. Purpose.
The purpose of this specification is to provide for the public good and
establish a permit process and requirements for roads, utility cuts in roads
and streets, backfilling of trenches, replacing of removed pavement sections
and regulating the location and construction of utility facilities and other
structures with Township highway right-of-way for the purpose of insuring
the structural integrity of the highway, economy of maintenance,
preservation of proper drainage and safe and convenient passage of traffic.
§ 168-23. Definitions.
The definitions of words and terms, when used in this article, have the
meaning set forth in the PennDOT regulations for occupancy of highways by
utilities, 67 Pa. Code § 459.1, as amended.
§ 168-24. Permit application procedure.
A. General rule. Except for emergency repairs of utility facilities, no work
may be performed within the right-of-way involving the placing of utility
facilities or other structures or opening of the surface without first
obtaining a permit from the Township. Work performed within the rightof-
way shall conform to PennDOT regulations Chapter 203 (relating to
work zone traffic control).
B. Emergency repairs of utility facilities. Emergency repairs of utility
facilities may be performed without first obtaining a permit under this
article; however, application must be made by the applicant or person
making such repair, pursuant to this article, for a permit under this
section, within 16 hours of beginning the emergency repair work or the
next business day for weekends and holidays when the Township
Building is closed.
C. Who may execute applications.
(1) If a corporation, authority, political subdivision or other person in
the business of providing utility service owns, operates or intends
to operate the facility, the application shall be submitted in the
name of, and executed by, the party. An application may not be
submitted in the name of contractors of the owner or operator, nor
in the name of persons only being serviced by the facility.
(2) In the case of a facility owner who is not in the business of
providing utility service, such as a developer whose land is located
125. Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. IV, Highway Openings, adopted
6-27-1988 by Ord. No. 267.
§ 168-22 SHOPPING CARTS § 168-24
163:411
outside a utility's service jurisdiction, the application shall be
submitted in the name of, and executed by, the owner of the facility
at the time of construction. The applicant shall indemnify and hold
harmless the Township from claims by anyone claiming residual
property interests in the permitted area.
(a) An applicant under this section shall provide satisfactory
evidence to the Township of ability to completely discharge
construction, maintenance and financial duties imposed by this
article. An applicant shall provide satisfactory evidence that
the proposed facility will not be inconsistent with the
structural integrity of the right-of-way, the Township's
maintenance responsibilities, or the safe and convenient
passage of traffic. The Township may require security,
including, but not limited to:
[1] Executing indemnity agreements satisfactory to the
Township.
[2] Obtaining insurance in a form and amount acceptable to
the Township.
[3] Obtaining financial security in a form and amount
acceptable to the Township to guarantee restoration of the
permitted area in a manner satisfactory to the Township
for a period of at least two years after the acknowledged
completion of the permitted work. [Amended
11-18-2014 by Ord. No. 558]
[4] Obtaining financial security in a form and amount
acceptable to the Township to guarantee necessary
maintenance costs for the facility and the right-of-way in
which it is located for a period of at least two years after
the acknowledged completion of the permitted work.
[Amended 11-18-2014 by Ord. No. 558]
[5] Depositing sufficient currency in an escrow account
acceptable to the Township to fully secure the obligations
in Subsection C(2)(a)[1] and [2] above. [Amended
11-18-2014 by Ord. No. 558]
[6] The use of bonded contractors as well as consultants and
engineers having professional liability insurance.
(b) An applicant under this section shall submit a detailed traffic
control plan for permitted work.
(c) An applicant under this section is not authorized to place a
facility longitudinally within the pavement, nor in the shoulder,
unless the applicant provides detailed plans which verify there
is no feasible space outside the shoulder for placing the facility.
§ 168-24 EAST NORRITON CODE § 168-24
163:412
§ 168-25. Required application information.
A permit application:
§ 168-26. Plans for occupancy of the pavement or shoulder.
A permit application for occupancy of the pavement or shoulder shall
include detailed plans which, in addition to § 168-25, comply with the
following:
(d) The application and/or permit are not transferable or
assignable.
A. Shall be submitted in person or by mail on a properly completed
Township form, available at the Township Building.
B. Shall be signed by the applicant, and the consulting engineer, if any,
performing work related to the application.
C. Shall include at least four sets of plans, of quality sufficient for
microfilming, detailing the location and pertinent horizontal and
vertical dimensions of the opening, the proposed utility installations
and related highway features, including specific highway location,
center line, edges of pavement, outside edges of shoulders, curbing,
guide rail, highway drainage structures and right-of-way lines. Colorcoded
plans and freehand drawings of roadway or utility feature are
unacceptable. A digital file shall be required for all as-built conditions.
D. Shall be accompanied by a check or money order, payable to the
Township according to the Schedule of Fees126 of the Township.
E. Shall be submitted to the Township at least 30 days prior to the
anticipated start of work. If the permitted work shall be performed for
the permittee by a contractor, the application shall, if possible, be
submitted to the Township at least 60 days prior to soliciting bids for
the permitted work so that the permittee may notify bidders of permit
requirements. If the application specifies that the permitted work
involves providing priority utility service, the Township office will
process the priority application before other nonpriority applications
submitted by the applicant.
F. Shall identify consulting engineers performing work related to the
application. The consulting engineer shall also sign the application.
A. Plans depicting new occupancy of more than 500 linear feet of
pavement or shoulder, or both, shall have a horizontal scale of one inch
equal to no more than 40 feet. Plans depicting other occupancy of the
pavement or shoulder shall specify dimensions from the near edge of
pavement.
126. Editor's Note: Said schedule is on file in the Township offices.
§ 168-24 SHOPPING CARTS § 168-26
163:413
§ 168-27. Traffic control plan.
A traffic control plan shall be submitted with the application in the following
manner:
B. Plans depicting installation or replacement of a facility involving more
than 100 linear feet of pavement or shoulder opening shall identify
utility facilities and other structures within the right-of-way that will be
affected by the proposed occupancy, and shall include typical cross
sections at each significant change in highway cross-section features.
C. Plans depicting installation of a facility longitudinally within more than
100 linear feet of pavement or shoulder, or both, shall verify there is no
feasible space outside the pavement or shoulder available for placing
the facility.
A. With the exception of emergency work performed under § 168-24B, the
applicant shall submit a traffic control plan for Township approval for
work on roadways or rights-of-way whenever it will be necessary to
close a portion of a travel lane during hours of darkness without work in
active progress, or whenever it will be necessary to completely close a
highway to perform the permitted work. If a roadway is approved for
closure the applicant must:
(1) Advertise in the local newspaper at least twice, one week prior to
the anticipated closure notifying motorists of closure.
(2) Provide written notices to emergency services (police, fire, and
ambulance) and school district notifying them of work, at least two
weeks prior to the closure.
(3) Provide written notices to residents who reside along that roadway
notifying of the work to be done, one week prior to the closure.
(4) Copies of all items required for Subsection A(1), (2) and (3) shall be
provided to the Township prior to the commencement of work.
B. The Township may require an applicant to submit a traffic control plan
under other special circumstances
C. A traffic control plan shall comply with PADOT regulations, Chapter
203, and shall clearly indicate how the work area, vehicular and
pedestrian traffic will be protected, maintained and controlled.
D. A traffic control plan shall consist of one of the following:
(1) A reference to specific figures in PADOT regulations, Chapter 203,
if the referenced figures properly depict actual site conditions and
address the necessary traffic control.
(2) Four copies of specific figures from PADOT regulations, Chapter
203, which have been modified to depict actual site conditions and
the necessary traffic control requirements for the specific project.
§ 168-26 EAST NORRITON CODE § 168-27
163:414
§ 168-28. Blasting requirements.
When blasting methods other than controlled blasting, as specified in
PADOT regulations, Section 203.3(b)1 of Publication 408, will be used or
when blasting is anticipated within 100 feet of a bridge, box or culvert,
a detailed plan of excavating, shoring, blasting and backfilling procedures
shall be submitted at least 15 days prior to blasting. Prior to blasting within
the right-of-way, insurance shall be furnished.
§ 168-29. Accuracy of application.
The applicant is responsible for the accuracy of information submitted
to the Township including the application, plans, drawings, reports and
correspondence.
§ 168-30. Penalty for falsifying application.
Information provided in applications shall be accurate. Section 4904 of the
Crimes Code (relating to unsworn falsification to authorities), makes it a
misdemeanor of the second degree for a person to mislead a public servant
in performing an official function by making a written false statement which
the person does not believe to be true.
§ 168-31. Authority to reject application.
The Township will examine and determine the genuineness, regularity and
legality of every application, and may reject an application if not satisfied
as to its genuineness, regularity or legality, or the truth of a statement
contained in the application. The Township may also make investigations
and require additional information as it deems necessary.
§ 168-32. Debarred persons.
(3) Four copies of a detailed drawing, showing actual site conditions
and the necessary traffic control requirements for the specific
project.
A. The Township may debar a person, including permittee, consultants,
contractors, and their employees, agents, successors and assigns, from
placing a facility, working within or otherwise occupying Township
highway right-of-way under permit, directing work, or having
involvement in a permit issued or an application submitted under this
article for one or more of the following:
(1) Unsatisfactory past performance, as documented by records,
reports or performance ratings.
(2) Failure to complete permitted work under the permit and this
article, as documented by records, reports or performance ratings.
(3) Bribing, attempting to bribe or giving gratuities to a Township
employee or permit inspector.
§ 168-27 SHOPPING CARTS § 168-32
163:415
§ 168-33. Issuance of permits.
§ 168-34. Highway occupancy permit.
Scope of permit. The permit is binding upon the permittee, its agents,
contractors, successors and assigns.
B. The first debarment of a person shall be for six months to 18 months. A
subsequent debarment of the same person ordered within five years
after the first debarment is served, shall be for 18 months to three
years.
A. General rule. Upon approval of an application submitted under this
article, a permit will be issued by the Township, subject to this article,
and the conditions contained in the permit and its attachments and
supplements. The permit shall be the applicant's authority to proceed
with the work specified in the permit. A copy of the permit and relevant
plans must be available at the work site for review.
B. Agreement/security. If a permittee will be authorized to perform a
substantial amount of work within the right-of-way, the Township may,
at its discretion, require the applicant to execute an agreement or
provide security, or both, as a prerequisite to issuance of the permit. If
security is required, it shall be delivered to the Township in a form and
amount acceptable to the Township and shall guarantee restoration and
maintenance of the highway for a period of at least five years after
acknowledged completion of the permitted work.
C. Photo documentation. At least 15 days prior to opening more than 100
linear feet of pavement or shoulder, or both, the permittee shall deliver
photo documentation to the Township office verifying the
preconstruction condition of the pavement and shoulder surfaces.
(1) The pavement and shoulder that will be disturbed shall be photo
documented in its entirety with color videotape or color film. Photo
documentation shall be compatible with Township viewing
equipment.
(2) The permittee may submit color slides or color prints in lieu of
videotape or film, if each slide or print is clearly labeled and
arranged to verify the surface condition of each successive 25
linear feet of pavement and shoulder that will be disturbed.
(3) The date of photo documentation shall be identified on each
cartridge, reel, slide or print.
A. The permittee is responsible for causing compliance with the terms and
conditions of the permit by its employees, agents and contractors.
B. The permit shall be located at the work site and be available for
inspection by a police officer or representative of the Township.
§ 168-32 EAST NORRITON CODE § 168-34
163:416
C. The permit shall be maintained by the permittee as a permanent record
and remain in effect, subject to the permit conditions and this article, as
long as the permittee's facilities authorized by the permit occupy the
right-of-way.
D. The permittee is liable to the Township for failure to comply with the
permit and this article. The liability of the permittee to the Township
does not preclude the permittee or the Township from bringing an
action against the permittee's contractor, subcontractor, engineer,
architect, assignee, agent, workers, employees or other persons.
E. Additional restrictions. Work authorized by the permit is subject to:
(1) Applicable laws, rules and regulations.
(2) The conditions, restrictions and provisions of the permit.
F. Work to conform to Township standards. Work shall conform to
Township standards, including the following:
(1) The work shall be done at a time and in a manner consistent with
the safety of the public and conform to requirements and standards
of the Township, including, but not limited to, Publication 408.
(2) Highway materials shall be obtained from PADOT-approved sources
which are identified in current PADOT Publication Numbers 34, 35,
41, and 42. Upon request, the permittee shall make available for
review certifications for backfill and restoration materials placed
within the improved area.
(3) If it is found by the Township that the work is not being done or has
not been properly performed, the permittee shall promptly take the
necessary steps, at its own expense, to place the work in condition
to conform to the requirements or standards.
(4) If a dispute arises between the permittee and the Township's
inspector, the Township's inspector has the authority to suspend
work until the question at issue may be referred to and decided by
the Township office.
G. Permittee responsibilities. Permittee responsibilities include the
following:
(1) The permittee shall pay the costs and expense incident to or arising
from the project, including the prescribed fees for the project, the
cost of making and maintaining temporary restoration of the
disturbed areas and making permanent restoration. The permittee
shall reimburse the Township for inspection cost which the
Township deems necessary to incur within 30 days after receipt of
the Township's invoice.
(2) In the event of failure or neglect by the permittee to perform and
comply with the permit the Township may immediately revoke and
§ 168-34 SHOPPING CARTS § 168-34
163:417
annul the permit and order and direct the permittee to remove
structures, equipment or property belonging to the permittee or its
contractors, or both, from the legal limits of the right-of-way and
to restore the right-of-way to its former condition. If the Township
determines that the structures, equipment or property poses a
threat to the public safety and the permittee fails to remove it after
notice from the Township to do so, the Township solicitor or his
attorneys is authorized to enter an amicable action of ejectment
and confess judgement against the permittee. The attorney is
authorized to issue forthwith a writ of possession with a clause of
fieri fascias for costs, without leave of court.
(3) At the end of a workday, an opening in the right-of-way shall be
covered, backfilled or protected under § 168-35 relating to special
conditions; subsurface operations. If work is stopped on a project,
other than at the end of a normal workday, the permittee shall
promptly backfill the opening and restore the surface, and work
may not be resumed until the permittee is prepared to proceed with
the work to its completion. If the permittee fails to backfill the
opening or proceed until completion of the work, the Township
reserves the right to do the work upon notice to the permittee,
where practicable, and shall be reimbursed for the costs by the
permittee within 30 days after receipt of the Township's invoice.
(4) If the permittee, after making an opening in the surface to place or
repair a facility or for another purpose, fails to restore a portion of
the right-of-way the Township reserves the right to do the work
upon notice to the permittee, if practicable, and the permittee shall
reimburse the Township for the costs within 30 days after receipt of
the Township's invoice.
(5) If backfill or restoration work will be performed for the permittee
by contractor, the permittee shall identify to the Township both its
contractor and its inspector-in-charge who shall be assigned to
monitor backfill and restoration work performed within the
improved area. The permittee's inspector-in-charge, as well as the
permittee, is responsible for ensuring the work is performed in
compliance with the permit, this article, and PennDOT Publication
408.
(6) The permittee shall notify the Township office at least three full
workdays prior to the start of work when the permit identifies that
the permitted work will be inspected on a more than spotinspection
basis.
H. Altering drainage is prohibited. Altering drainage shall be prohibited by
the following conditions:
(1) Unless specifically authorized by the permit, the permittee may
not:
§ 168-34 EAST NORRITON CODE § 168-34
163:418
(a) Alter the existing drainage pattern or the existing flow of
drainage water.
(b) Direct additional drainage of surface water toward, onto, or
into, or in any way affect the highway right-of-way or highway
facilities.
(2) The permit does not authorize the permittee to direct, divert or
otherwise drain surface waters over the property of another
property owner.
(a) The permit does not relieve the permittee from acquiring the
consent; permission or other authorization from a property
owner who may be adversely affected by drainage alterations.
(b) The permittee is responsible for damage caused to property
owners as a result of work done under the permit.
(3) A permit will not be issued to authorize the discharge of water into
the right-of-way unless the water is surface drainage.
I. Equipment damaging highway. A highway shall be protected in
accordance with the following:
(1) To protect the pavement and shoulders, equipment shall have
rubber wheels or runners and have rubber, wood or similar
protective pads between the outriggers and the surface unless
otherwise authorized by the permit.
(2) If other than rubber equipped machinery is used the pavement and
shoulders shall be protected from equipment damage by the use of
matting or other suitable protective material, unless the permittee
requests, in writing, a waiver from the use of protective material,
thereby acknowledging its obligation and commitment to repair or
reconstruct the pavement and shoulder, if damaged, to its former
condition.
(3) If the equipment damages the pavement or shoulders, the
permittee shall restore the damaged pavement or shoulder or both,
to its former condition, in a manner authorized by the Township.
(4) The Township office may authorize the permittee to restore the
pavement or shoulder from superficial surface damage with a seal
coat or surface treatment.
J. Work zone traffic control. Maintenance and protection of traffic shall be
carried out by the permittee under 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6123 (as amended)
(relating to erection of traffic control devices while working), the
approved traffic control plan and the applicable provisions of PADOT
Chapter 203 (relating to work zone traffic control).
K. Limited access right-of-way. No utility may conduct operations,
including maintenance or inspection of existing facilities, within limited
§ 168-34 SHOPPING CARTS § 168-34
163:419
access right-of-way without first obtaining a permit, except for an
emergency.
L. Indemnification of the Township for property and personal injury will be
governed as follows:
(1) The permittee shall fully indemnify and save harmless and, if
requested, defend the Township, its officers, agents and employees,
of and from liability for damages or injury to persons or property in
a claim or suit seeking to impose liability on the Township, its
officers, agents or employees, arising out of an act or omission of a
contractor, agent, servant, employee or person engaged or
employed in, about or upon the work, by, at the instance of or with
the approved consent of the permittee, including a failure of the
permittee or a person to comply with the permit or this article.
(2) Upon request, the permittee shall deliver to the Township
certificates of insurance.
M. Insurance. The permittee shall obtain, prior to the start of work, a
policy of insurance, issued by an insurer having a certificate of
authority and a licensed agent authorized to transact the business of
insurance in this Commonwealth, in accordance with the following
conditions:
(1) The permittee or its contractor shall obtain insurance for public
liability and property damage, in form, amount and duration
satisfactory to the Township to cover a loss that may be incurred for
construction, reconstruction, repair, relocation or installation of
the permitted structure or facilities.
(2) If blasting is authorized by permit, the insurance coverage shall
include property damage and personal injury occasioned by
blasting. In addition, the insurance policy shall provide coverage
for damage to the highways, highway structures and
appurtenances or other Township property and shall be in an
amount satisfactory to the Township.
(3) Upon request, the permittee shall deliver to the Township
certificates of insurance evidencing the insurance coverage
required.
(4) The permittee's obligation to indemnify the Township and obtain
insurance to secure indemnification and its obligations to restore
the highway and obtain financial security in a form and amount
acceptable to the Township relating to restoration are separate
obligations from obtaining insurance for the purposes required.
[Amended 11-18-2014 by Ord. No. 558]
N. Maintaining structure or facility. As long as the permittee operates and
leaves in place structures or facilities in, upon or along the right-of-way,
the permittee shall maintain and keep them in good order and repair.
§ 168-34 EAST NORRITON CODE § 168-34
163:420
O. Damaged structure or facility to be repaired. If a structure or facility
becomes damaged, the permittee shall promptly have it removed,
repaired or otherwise made safe. The permittee is responsible for
repair or restoration of the portion of the highway damaged by a
structure or facility. The permittee's obligation to repair or restore the
highway necessitated by a damaged structure or facility under this
section is separate from the obligations to restore the highway and
obtain financial security relating to restoration and maintenance of the
highway. [Amended 11-18-2014 by Ord. No. 558]
P. Damage to highway. Responsibility of the permittee for restoration of
the highway includes the following:
(1) If there is a failure of the highway, including a slope or other
appurtenance thereto, in the area of the permitted work within two
years after the acknowledged completion of the permitted work
and there is no similar failure of the highway beyond the area of the
permitted work, the permittee has absolute responsibility to make
temporary and permanent restoration of this area unless the
permittee delivers clear and convincing evidence to the Township
office demonstrating that the highway failure was caused by
another person.
(2) In situations where the permittee has the responsibility to restore
the highway, including slope or another appurtenance thereto, the
permittee has the duty to restore the improved area in accordance
with the permit. If the permittee fails to restore the improved area
properly, the Township will have the authority to do the work at the
expense of the permittee. The permittee shall reimburse the
Township for the costs within 30 days after receipt of the
Township's invoice.
(3) The obtaining of financial security in the form and amount
acceptable to the Township to secure restoration costs does not
relieve the permittee of the restoration obligations imposed. The
obtaining of financial security will not act as a release of the
permittee from liability under principles of tort law with respect to
a failure of the highway in the permitted area occurring after the
expiration of the security. [Amended 11-18-2014 by Ord. No.
558]
Q. Future highway changes. If in the future the highway is altered for
public convenience or necessity, the permittee shall at its own cost and
expense, change or relocate all or a part of the structures or facilities
authorized by the permit which interfere with the highway alterations
or which is inconsistent with the purpose of the highway alterations.
R. Acknowledgment by inspector. Acknowledgment by the inspector of the
Township that all or part of the permitted work has been completed
does not constitute approval or acceptance of the work or agreement
that the work was performed in accordance with the permit.
§ 168-34 SHOPPING CARTS § 168-34
163:421
§ 168-35. Special conditions; subsurface operations.
Acknowledgment of completion by the inspector will not act as a
release of the permittee or waiver by the Township of its right to seek
performance or restitution from the permittee.
A. Drilling, boring, driving or tunneling across improved area. Drilling,
boring, driving or tunneling across improved areas shall comply with
the following conditions:
(1) When crossing under an improved area, the opening for a utility
facility shall be drilled, bored, driven or tunneled a minimum depth
of three feet from the surface to the top of the opening.
(a) If the facility or its casing is 30 inches or greater in diameter,
the bored cylindrical space surrounding either an uncased
facility or a facility casing shall be filled with grout, in a
manner authorized by the Township office.
(b) Jet or other nonmechanical boring methods are prohibited.
Water may be used under low pressure only to cool the drill bit
and to facilitate removal or cuttings from the bore opening, if
retrievable liquids are immediately removed from the boring
pit.
(2) No openings for the purpose of placing utility facilities or other
structures under the improved area by drilling, boring, driving or
tunneling may be made closer than three feet to the edge of the
shoulder, unless the permit authorizes a lesser clearance.
(3) A facility or other structure crossing under the improved area shall
be constructed to assure the safety of the traveling public and to
preclude the necessity of entering upon the improved area to effect
future maintenance or replacement.
(4) If, during the course of the boring operation it is revealed that the
equipment cannot continue due to encountered rock, unmarked
utilities or other physical conflicts, then open trenching may be
allowed. This open trenching cannot occur until such time as
written authorization has been obtained from the appropriate
Township Official.
B. Trenching across the improved area. Trenching across an improved
area may be performed only when specifically authorized by the permit,
in accordance with the following:
(1) The top of every utility facility shall be installed at least three feet
beneath the surface.
(2) Trenching across the improved area may be authorized by the
permit where drilling, boring, driving or tunneling are not feasible
because:
§ 168-34 EAST NORRITON CODE § 168-35
163:422
(a) The subsurface is solid rock, as documented with satisfactory
evidence such as drill records, or where boring was attempted
without success.
(b) There are other facilities located longitudinally under the
improved area and their location precludes methods other than
trenching, as documented with a detailed plan.
(c) Adjacent development in a very congested urban area makes
the construction of a tunneling or boring shaft impossible.
(3) Not required because of one of the following:
(a) The highway is unpaved.
(4) When trenching is authorized by the permit, the trenching
operation shall be performed by one of the following methods:
(a) Utility facility placed in one piece across highway.
[1] Traffic shall be routed over 1/2 of the pavement width.
[2] The closed half of the pavement shall be opened to the
required depth and bridged with steel plates.
[3] Traffic shall be shifted to the bridged half of the pavement.
[4] The remaining half of the pavement shall be opened to the
required depth.
[5] The facility shall be placed full width.
[6] The open trench shall be backfilled with restored halfwidth
in accordance with this section.
[7] Traffic shall be shifted to the restored half of the
pavement.
[8] The bridging shall be removed and the remaining half of
the trench shall be backfilled and restored in accordance
with this section.
(b) Utility facility placed in more than one piece across highway:
[1] Traffic shall be routed over 1/2 of the pavement width.
[2] The closed half of the pavement shall be opened to the
required depth, the facility placed and the trench
backfilled and restored in accordance with this section.
[3] Traffic shall be shifted to the restored half of the
pavement.
[4] The remaining half of the pavement shall be opened to the
required depth, the facility placed and the trench
§ 168-35 SHOPPING CARTS § 168-35
163:423
backfilled and restored in accordance with the provisions
of this section.
(c) The permittee shall protect its openings to provide for the
safety of the traveling public, including motorists, bicyclists
and pedestrians.
(d) The permit may authorize the placement at depths less than
three feet of traffic signal detectors or other highway facilities
which are not capable of operating more than three feet below
the surface.
(5) Openings parallel to the highway. Requirements for openings
parallel to the highway are as follows:
(a) A utility facility shall be placed outside the pavement and
shoulder unless there is no feasible space outside the
pavement and shoulder for placing the facility, in which case
occupancy within the pavement or shoulder may be authorized
by the permit.
(b) The top of a utility facility shall be installed at least three feet
beneath the surface.
(c) On an unpaved highway, the near edge of the opening shall be
at least 12 feet from the general line of the traveled highway,
or as authorized.
(d) No opening may be made for more than 200 linear feet at one
time, unless authorized by the permit.
(e) The permittee shall protect its openings to provide for the
safety of the traveling public, including motorists, bicyclists,
and pedestrians.
(6) Daily stoppage of work requirements. Daily stoppage of work
requirements include the following:
(a) Except for emergency repairs of utility facilities, work within
the pavement or shoulder shall be stopped prior to peak traffic
hours that may exist on a particular highway on a particular
day and as specified in the permit.
(b) At the end of each workday, an opening in the right-of-way shall
be one of the following:
[1] Covered with steel plates or bridges over openings which
are less than six feet in either length or width. The plates
or bridging shall be extended a minimum of 18 inches from
each edge of the opening and shall be secured in a safe
manner.
§ 168-35 EAST NORRITON CODE § 168-35
163:424
[2] Backfilled to the bottom elevation of the pavement or base
course, or to the original surface elevation if outside the
pavement and shoulder, and protected in accordance with
PADOT regulations, Chapter 203, (relating to work zone
traffic control) and an approved traffic control plan until
the surface is restored to its former condition.
[3] Protected under PADOT regulations, Chapter 203, and an
approved traffic control plan, if the permittee has
delivered certificates of insurance.
(c) The permittee shall protect its opening to provide for the safety
of the traveling public, including motorists, bicyclists and
pedestrians.
(7) Plowing operations shall comply with the following:
(a) No plowing will be permitted within the right-of-way, unless
authorized by the permit.
(b) Plowing operations will not be authorized in the pavement or
paved shoulder.
(c) Plowing operations in unpaved shoulders are not allowed from
December through March inclusive or at other times when
there is frost in the top three feet beneath the surface.
(d) No plowing is authorized within three feet from the edge of the
pavement. A greater distance shall be attained wherever
possible.
(e) The opening shall be a minimum depth of three feet. If this
depth cannot be consistently maintained, the proper depth
shall be achieved by trenching.
(f) The utility facility shall be installed under any structures that
are less than three feet deep. Disturbed structures shall be
repaired or replaced by the permittee.
(g) The disturbed area shall be restored in conjunction with the
plowing operation. Heaved surfaces shall be scarified to a
depth of at least four inches, extending at least one foot on
either side of the heaved area for the entire length of heaved
area. The disturbed area shall then be graded, backfilled
where necessary, and compacted until the disturbed area is
restored to a condition at least equal to that which existed
before plowing. Disturbed shoulders shall also be restored.
(8) Disposition of materials. The responsibility of the permittee for
disposition of materials is as follows:
(a) The permittee shall keep the improved area free of material
which may be deposited by vehicles traveling upon or entering
§ 168-35 SHOPPING CARTS § 168-35
163:425
onto the highway during the performance of work authorized
by the permit.
(b) The permittee is responsible for controlling dust conditions
created by its own operations.
(c) Excess material and material that is not suitable for backfill
shall be promptly removed and properly disposed of outside
the right-of-way as the work progresses.
(d) Other material shall be stored so that there will be no
interference with the flow of highway drainage.
(e) The permittee is not authorized to close a portion of the
pavement or shoulder to traffic for the primary purpose of
storing material. If the permittee stores material on the
pavement or shoulder, the permittee thereby acknowledges its
obligation and commitment to repair or reconstruct the
pavement and shoulder if damaged, to its former condition, in
a manner authorized by the Township office. Delivered
material may not be stored overnight on the pavement.
(f) The Township may authorize the permittee to restore the
pavement or shoulder from superficial surface damage with a
seal or surface treatment.
(9) Backfilling. An opening shall be backfilled by the permittee in
accordance with the following:
(a) The opening may first be backfilled with fine aggregate
material, meeting the requirements of PADOT regulations,
Section 703.1 of Publication 408, or granular material to
protect the facility, placed to a height not to exceed one foot
over the top of the facility, if the material is compacted in not
more than four-inch loose layers or as authorized under
Publication 408. To help protect its facility from future
excavations, the permittee is encouraged to place a permanent
ribbon colored under Subsection B(1) at least one foot above
its facility. If the facility is nonmetallic, the permittee is also
encouraged to place a metallic ribbon at a depth from which
the ribbon can be sensed by typical metal-locating
instruments.
(b) The opening shall then be backfilled with 2A modified.
(c) Backfill shall be compacted as follows.
[1] General rule. Backfill material shall be placed in loose
layers not to exceed eight inches if vibratory compaction
equipment is used. Each layer shall be thoroughly
compacted to 97-100% compaction.
§ 168-35 EAST NORRITON CODE § 168-35
163:426
[2] Existing pavement elevation. Compaction shall be
completed to the bottom elevation of the existing
pavement.
(d) The Township may require the permittee to have material
proposed for use as backfill and compacted material tested at
the expense of the permittee, for conformance to the
applicable gradation and compaction requirements of
Publication 408.
(e) Test holes shall be backfilled, as soon as safely possible, with
material authorized by the Township. The Township office may
authorize test holes in the pavement or shoulder to be restored
with a two-foot cutback of the surrounding surface.
(10) Restoration of flexible base pavement. Base and surface restoration
of flexible base pavements shall be performed under this
subsection and as specified in the permit. Prior to replacement of
the base course, two feet outside of each edge of the opening shall
be sawed, in a neat straight line, to the top elevation of the existing
aggregate subbase or stone base course, and the detached material
shall be removed. Other surface-opening methods such as cutting
may be authorized if the methods result in the opened pavement
having a neat straight vertical line. Permanent restoration of areas
shall not occur until 60 calendar days have passed from the date of
temporary restoration.
(a) Exposed vertical and horizontal surfaces shall be prepared
under PADOT regulations, Section 401.3 (f) of Publication 408.
(b) The base course shall consist of bituminous concrete meeting
the requirements of PADOT regulations, Section 305 of
Publication 408 or other base course material authorized by
the Township office. The base course material shall have a
minimum depth of five inches or a depth equal to the existing
base course, whichever is greater.
(c) If required, the binder course shall consist of ID-2 material
meeting the requirements of PADOT regulations, Section 421
of Publication 408. The binder course shall have a minimum
depth of two inches or a depth equal to the existing binder
course, whichever is greater.
(d) The wearing course shall consist of ID-2 material meeting the
requirements of PADOT regulations, Section 420 of Publication
408 or FJ-1 material meeting the requirements of PADOT
regulations, Section 422 of Publication 408. The wearing
course shall have a minimum depth of one-and-one-half-inch
ID-2, or one-inch FJ-1, or a depth equal to the existing wearing
course, whichever is greater.
§ 168-35 SHOPPING CARTS § 168-35
163:427
(11) Restoration of plain or reinforced cement concrete pavements
(including all transverse openings). Base and surface restoration of
plain or reinforced cement concrete pavements shall be performed
under this subsection and as specified in the permit. Drilling is not
permitted where sawing or cutting is required. Permanent
restoration of areas shall not occur until 60 calendar days have
passed from the date of temporary restoration.
(a) Prior to replacement of the pavement, two feet outside of each
edge of the opening shall be sawed the full depth of pavement
in a neat straight line. The detached material shall be removed
without damaging the adjacent pavement. The use of a
pavement breaker is prohibited. The permittee may partially
saw cut the pavement to a depth of at least three inches and
cut the remaining pavement with a jackhammer weighing no
more than 90 pounds, if:
[1] The restored opening does not exceed six feet in either
length or width.
[2] The restored opening is at least two feet from a pavement
edge or joint.
(b) Outside existing shoulder. If the disturbed area extends outside
the existing shoulder, the disturbed area outside the restored
shoulder shall be properly graded and a ditch line shall be
constructed wherever necessary to maintain highway
drainage.
(12) Temporary pavement restoration of a pavement or paved shoulder
shall be required by the Township office prior to permanent
restoration, under the following:
(a) Temporary pavement restoration shall be completed before
traffic is allowed to travel on the disturbed area. The
temporary pavement may be kept in place for up to six months
or as specified in the permit and properly maintained.
(b) The temporary pavement shall be removed and permanent
restoration performed.
(c) Temporary pavement shall be one inch of ID-2 wearing course.
(13) Appurtenances to underground installations. Requirements
relating to appurtenances to underground installations shall
include:
(a) The top of every manhole, valve box or other access to the
facility shall be approximately one inch below the surface in
which it is located.
(b) The surface surrounding manhole covers, valve boxes, or other
facilities located in paved shoulders shall be paved with four
§ 168-35 EAST NORRITON CODE § 168-35
163:428
inches bituminous concrete base course a distance of at least
two feet around the structure to prevent washouts.
(c) A manhole, including those cast-in-place, shall be constructed
in compliance with current industry standards and PADOT
regulations, Section 713.2(c) of Publication 408.
(14) Additional restoration shall be required as follows:
(a) Disturbed portions of the highway, including, but not limited
to, slopes and appurtenances and structures such as guide
rails, curbs, signs, markings, drain pipes, driveways and
vegetation, shall be restored by the permittee to a condition at
least equal to that which existed before the start of work
authorized by the permit, if the restoration is consistent with
the roadway construction standards. Additional restoration
may also be required, upon written notification, to restore the
structural integrity of the pavement or shoulder.
(b) If the permittee opens pavement having a bituminous concrete
surface and the Township's wearing course is less than five
years old, the permittee shall, in addition to the restoration
conditions outlined in the permit and in this section, overlay
the pavement in accordance with the following conditions:
[1] When a longitudinal or transverse opening longer than five
linear feet has been made in the pavement, the permittee
shall overlay the traffic lanes for the entire length of
highway that was opened, in a manner authorized by the
Township. Minimum width for transverse openings is 12
feet.
(c) If the permittee opens pavement having a bituminous concrete
surface and the wearing course is over five years old, the
permittee shall, in addition to the restoration conditions
outlined in the permit and in this section, overlay the pavement
in accordance with the following conditions:
[1] When two or more transverse openings have been made
the permittee shall overlay traffic lanes, for the entire
length of highway between the openings, in a manner
authorized by the Township, no matter what the distance
between the transverse openings.
[2] When four or more emergency openings have been made
by the same permittee, the permittee shall overlay traffic
lanes, for the entire length of highway between the
openings, in a manner authorized by the Township.
[3] If disturbed lanes adjacent to undisturbed lanes are
overlaid, the edge of the disturbed lane shall be saw cut or
milled to a depth of 1 1/2 inches or the depth of the
§ 168-35 SHOPPING CARTS § 168-35
163:429
existing surface course, whichever is less, for the length of
the opening to insure a smooth joint, with proper elevation
and cross section. A full-width overlay may be authorized
on various highways instead of saw cutting or milling the
disturbed lane.
[4] If disturbed lanes adjacent to shoulders are overlaid, the
shoulder shall be raised, with material and in a manner
authorized by the Township for the type of existing
shoulder, so that the overlaid pavement and shoulder
edges are at the same elevation.
(d) Regardless of the age of the wearing course:
[1] If more than 100 linear feet of longitudinal or transverse
openings, or both, are made in the pavement, the
Township may require the permittee to overlay traffic
lanes for the entire length of highway that was opened, if
the Township office determines that the ride ability or
structural integrity of the pavement has been impaired by
the openings.
(e) Aggregate used in a bituminous overlay wearing course shall
comply with skid resistance level (SRL) criteria specified in
PADOT regulations, Design Manual, Part 2, Chapter 11.
(f) If an opening is made in a bituminous concrete pavement
within three feet from the edge of pavement or other
longitudinal joint or opening, the surface restoration shall be
extended to the edge of pavement or other longitudinal joint or
opening.
(g) At each end of an overlay, the permittee shall install a paving
notch, under PADOT regulations, Roadway Construction
Standard RC-28, by milling, planing or other authorized
method and provide a minimum ten-foot transition.
(h) The transition areas at each end of an overlay shall follow the
contour of the surrounding surface.
(i) When pavement markings on more than 50 linear feet of
highway are covered or destroyed by the permitted work,
including overlays, they shall be replaced with temporary
pavement markings, under PADOT regulations, Section 203.72
(relating to temporary pavement markings) before opening the
disturbed pavement to traffic. When the pavement surface is
restored, pavement markings that were covered or destroyed
shall be replaced in their former location.
(j) Sealing. Restored openings in the pavement or paved shoulder
shall be sealed under PADOT regulations, Section 401.3(j)(3) of
Publication 408 in the case of bituminous concrete or PADOT
§ 168-35 EAST NORRITON CODE § 168-35
163:430
§ 168-36. Special conditions, aboveground facilities.
regulations, Section 501.3(n) of Publication 408 in the case of
cement concrete.
A. General rule. A permit will not be issued to install aboveground
facilities at a location which the Township determines to have a high
accident potential.
B. Location of aboveground facilities. The location of an aboveground
facility shall be:
(1) Within nonlimited access right-of-way.
(a) New poles and other aboveground facilities shall be installed
outside the highway clear zone as near the right-of-way line as
practicable, under the permit and applicable provisions of
PADOT regulations, Design Manual, Parts 2 and 5.
(b) Replacement of poles and other aboveground facilities shall
comply with the permit and applicable provisions of PADOT
regulations, Design Manual, Part 5.
(c) Installation of poles and other aboveground facilities in
locations where highway guide rail or curb exists shall comply
with the permit and applicable provisions of PADOT
regulations, Design Manual, Parts 2 and 5.
(2) Installation of poles, guys and other aboveground facilities within
limited access right-of-way shall comply with applicable provisions
of the Federal Highway Program Manual, Volume 6, Chapter 6,
Section 3; the AASHTO Policy of the accommodation of utilities on
freeways; and PADOT regulations, Design Manual, Part 5.
C. Location of wires, cables or conductors. A wire, cable, or conductor
which overhangs a portion of the right-of-way shall be placed to provide
a minimum vertical clearance of 18 feet over the pavement and
shoulder, except where the National Electrical Safety Code requires
vertical clearances in excess of 18 feet due to voltage or span lengths.
D. Guys. A guy shall be placed and insulated in the following manner:
(1) A guy shall be placed to avoid interference with vehicular or
pedestrian traffic.
(2) A guy shall be insulated or grounded in compliance with the
National Electrical Safety Code.
E. Identification of poles. A pole shall bear the name or initials of the
facility owner and the pole numbers assigned by the facility owner.
F. Seismograph — vibrioses method. Seismograph — vibriosis method
shall comply with the following:
§ 168-35 SHOPPING CARTS § 168-36
163:431
§ 168-37. Bridge occupancy.
License required. No person may attach a utility facility to Township bridge
or modify an existing facility until the owner of the utility facility has
obtained a permit from the Township.
§ 168-38. Penalties and enforcement.
(1) Seismograph operations by other than vibriosis method will not be
permitted.
(2) A permit will not be issued to authorize seismograph operations
within limited access highway right-of-way.
(3) Wherever possible, seismograph operations shall be performed
entirely off the pavement and shoulder to lessen interference to
traffic.
G. Modular concrete replacement units, metal reinforcing collars and
similar devices.
(1) Modular concrete replacement units, metal reinforcing collars and
similar devices may not be placed in Township right-of-way unless
located:
(a) Thirty feet or more beyond the edge of pavement under PADOT
regulations, Design Manual, Part 2, Chapter 12.
(b) At the top of a slope (two-to-one or greater) or at least eight
feet beyond the toe of the slope.
(c) Beyond parallel drainage ditches.
(d) Beyond the specified deflection distance for the type guide rail
in front of the location, under PADOT regulations, Design
Manual, Part 2.
(2) No permit will be issued for the placement of a new facility, or for
the repair, modification, reinforcement or replacement of an
existing facility, by modular concrete replacement units, metal
reinforcing collars or similar devices unless the facility is located in
compliance with Subsection G(1).
A. General rule. Violation of this article or the permit requirements
constitutes ground for imposition of the following penalties:
(1) Upon receipt of oral or written notice of violations from the
authorized representative of the Township or a Township police
officer, the permittee shall cease to perform any further work in the
permitted area except to restore the area to a safe condition. No
further work may commence in the permitted area until the
violations have been remedied. When the permittee has received
§ 168-36 EAST NORRITON CODE § 168-38
163:432
oral notice of the violations, written notice shall be sent to the
permittee within 10 days of receipt of the oral notice.
(2) Confiscation of the applicant's permit or emergency permit card by
any police officer or authorized representative of the Township.
(3) Revocation of the applicant's permit or emergency permit card by
the Township.
(4) Removal of facilities installed without a permit or in violation of the
provisions of this article.
(5) Fines, imprisonment or other penalties as are provided by statute.
(6) Other action as may be deemed necessary or proper after
consultation with the Township Solicitor.
(7) Other conditions which may be specified on a Township citation.
B. Additional grounds for revocation shall be as follows:
(1) The Township may revoke a permit whenever it determines that the
permitted facility is not being maintained, is in violation of a
condition of the permit or this article, constitutes a hazard to traffic
or interferes with the proper use of the highway by the Township or
the public.
(2) The Township may revoke a permit for nonpayment for a fee
authorized by the Schedule of Fees,127 including default of a check
submitted for payment.
C. Modification of conditions:
(1) General rule. When a term or condition of this article cannot be
met, an applicant may request, in writing, that the Township modify
that term or condition if it is not required by law, under the
following:
(a) The applicant has done all that can reasonably be done to
comply with the term or condition.
(b) The proposed modification satisfies the intent of the term or
condition to be modified.
(c) The proposed modification represents the minimum feasible
deviation from the term or condition to be modified.
(d) The reason for the requested modification is in feasibility of
meeting the exact terms or conditions of this article rather
than more economic benefit to the applicant.
127. Editor's Note: Said schedule is on file in the Township offices.
§ 168-38 SHOPPING CARTS § 168-38
163:433
§ 168-39. Street grading.
All streets shall be graded the full width of the right-of-way to the grades
shown on the street profile and cross-section plan submitted and approved
with the preliminary plan. They shall be inspected and checked for accuracy
by the Township Engineer or the Township representative.
§ 168-40. Paving and curbing.
The pavement and curbing for all streets and all commercial and industrial
parking areas and driveways into and out of said parking areas shall be
installed as shown on the preliminary plan, and in accordance with the
following:
(2) Modification granted. If a requested modification is granted, the
permit will specify the allowable modification. A permit issued
under authority of this section shall be signed only by the Director
of Public Works or Township Manager. The granting of a
modification will be predicated on the applicant's complying with
the following:
(a) Unless the applicant is excused in writing, executing a hold
harmless and indemnity agreement acceptable to the
Township.
(b) Unless the applicant is excused in writing, obtaining financial
security satisfactory to the Township to guarantee highway
restoration and maintenance costs. [Amended 11-18-2014
by Ord. No. 558]
(c) Unless the applicant is excused in writing, obtaining public
liability insurance for personal injury and property damage on
behalf of the Township, its officers, agents and employees, in a
form and amount acceptable to the Township for the life of the
facility.
(d) Permit conditions, which may include use restrictions, special
traffic control devices or safety features.
(e) Third parties. The modification of a term or condition by the
Director of Public Works does not create rights in a third party,
nor does a waiver act as a modification of the common law duty
of the applicant to relocate its facilities upon demand by the
Township to another location within the right-of-way at the sole
cost of the applicant.
A. Pavement construction.
(1) Rural and residential roads and commercial, industrial and
multifamily parking areas and driveways. All paved rural and
residential cartway areas and commercial, industrial and
multifamily parking areas and driveways covered by these
§ 168-38 EAST NORRITON CODE § 168-40
163:434
§ 168-41. Excavation.
Prior to any excavation, the pavement shall be cut vertically and to a
straight line, preferably with a pavement saw, equal to the width of the
trench. The trench shall be as narrow as possible to provide adequate
working space, but shall not exceed the outside diameter of the barrel of
the pipe plus 16 inches. Sidewalls of the trench shall be as nearly vertical
as possible.
§ 168-42. Blasting.
regulations shall have a thickness of not less than 9 1/2 inches,
which shall consist of three inches modified stone subbase, five
inches bituminous concrete base course and 1 1/2 inches ID-2
wearing course conforming to the current specification of the
PADOT regulations.
(2) Major and secondary roadways. All major and secondary roadways
covered by these regulations shall have a thickness of not less than
16 inches, the subbase of which shall consist of six inches of
compacted 2A modified stone, a base course of seven inches of
bituminous concrete base course, a one-and-one-half-inch ID-2
binder course and one-and-one-half-inch ID-2 wearing course, or
approved equivalent, conforming to the current specifications of
the PADOT regulations.
A. Blasting must be in accordance with PADOT regulations, Form 408.
B. If blasting is necessary, the Township may require a full-time inspector.
The expense of that inspector shall be reimbursed back to the Township
by the developer or contractor.
C. If roadway is raised or damaged, the Township will require those
sections to be repaired to Township standards.
D. If blasting is required, the Township will require the contractor and/or
developer to post security in a form and amount acceptable to the
Township for the protection of the roadways. [Amended 11-18-2014
by Ord. No. 558]
E. If 50% or more of a roadway is damaged, the Township will require base
restoration and on overlay of the entire roadway.
F. No predrilling or blasting may be performed within the right-of-way
unless authorized by a permit and until the permittee provides
insurance for property damage and public liability.
G. The blaster's license number shall be furnished upon request.
H. No blasting will be permitted within 50 feet of the nearest part of a
bridge, box or culvert.
§ 168-40 SHOPPING CARTS § 168-42
163:435
§ 168-43. Backfilling.
§ 168-44. Sanitary sewer.
I. The permittee's obligation for restoration of the highway shall include
failure of the highway occasioned by blasting.
A. Backfill material.
(1) Existing improved rights-of-way. Within the right-of-way, must be
2A modified or equivalent, full depth and compacted, in accordance
with § 168-44C.
(2) Proposed new construction of roadways. Within the right-of-way,
must be 2A modified or equivalent, full depth and compacted in
accordance with § 168-44C.
B. As an alternative, the Township will accept suitable material, as defined
by PADOT regulations, Form 408, to be used as backfill in new road
construction only with the following conditions: If 2A modified stone is
not used, the construction and the backfill will be subject to full-time
inspection by the Township Inspector as well as full-time soil
compaction tests by an independent soil scientist, all at the expense of
the owner/developer/contractor. In addition, no dedication of the
roadway will be accepted prior to four years from the date of
completion of the base paving. At the time of dedication, the developer/
owner/contractor must provide a three-year maintenance guarantee in
a form and amount acceptable to the Township. [Amended
11-18-2014 by Ord. No. 558]
A. Any sanitary sewer that is constructed within the legal right-of-way of
any existing road shall be backfilled with a minimum of two feet of No. 8
stone over the pipe then backfilled with 2A modified stone to the
subgrade of the road.
B. Within the cartway of a new road, a minimum of two feet of No. 8 (onehalf-
inch clean) stone must be placed over the pipe; 2A modified stone
shall then be placed to the subgrade of the road. As an alternative, the
pipe may be backfilled with No. 8 clean stone two feet above the pipe
and the balance of the backfill may be suitable material as defined by
PADOT regulations, Form 408. If 2A modified stone is not used, the
construction of the sanitary sewer and backfill will be subject to fulltime
inspection by both the Sewer Authority and the Township
Inspector as well as full-time soil compaction tests by an independent
soil scientist. The conditions set forth in § 168-43B above shall apply.
C. Compaction. After the pipe has been placed and properly bedded and
backfilled with approved material by the Township to a depth of two
feet above the top of the pipe in accordance with the job requirements
and specifications, the remainder of the trench shall be backfilled in
eight-inch maximum layers to within six inches of the pavement
§ 168-42 EAST NORRITON CODE § 168-44
163:436
§ 168-45. Cut requirements prior to pavement replacement.
Prior to placement of the subbase and pavement, the existing pavement and
base course shall be cut back two feet from the edge of the trench. The
cut shall be vertical and to a straight line. Streets with asphalt pavement
surfaces shall be cut with a pavement saw.
§ 168-46. Pavement replacement.
§ 168-47. Road restoration.
If a utility project (installation) is being done in conjunction with a road
reconstruction project, the Sewer Authority and the Public Works Director
shall coordinate the restoration work.
surface. Each layer shall be compacted to a density equal to the
requirements of PADOT regulations, Form 408, and shall be inspected
and confirmed by approved testing devices. Tamping shall be done
with mechanical equipment, tamping rollers or vibrating compactors,
depending upon field conditions. Of more importance is that it be done
carefully to insure a thoroughly tamped backfill. The last 2 1/2 inches
shall be cold patched until final restoration. Compaction by puddling or
jetting with water shall not be permitted or acceptable.
A. Transverse trenches.
(1) The permanent pavement replacement on all transverse trenches
(trenches crossing the normal direction of traffic) shall consist of a
seven-inch thick plain concrete base course, a two-inch ID-2 binder
course, and a one-and-one-half-inch thick ID-2 bituminous wearing
course, all in accordance with PADOT regulations, Publication 408.
(2) The surface course shall be properly placed and compacted with a
ten-ton roller even with the existing road surface.
(3) The joint between the new paving and the existing paving shall be
sealed with an application of Class BM-1 petroleum asphalt.
B. Longitudinal trenches. The permanent pavement replacement on all
longitudinal trenches (trenches parallel to the normal direction of
traffic) shall consist of a five-inch-thick bituminous concrete base
course, a two-inch ID-2 binder course, and a one-and-one-half-inch thick
ID-2 bituminous wearing course, all in accordance with PADOT
regulations, Publication 408. All other requirements shall be as
specified for transverse trenches.
§ 168-44 SHOPPING CARTS § 168-47
163:437
Chapter 175
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Historic preservation — See Ch. 11.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 30.
Uniform Construction Code — See Ch. 74.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 105.
Grading and excavations — See Ch. 114.
Sewers — See Ch. 162.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 166.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 168.
Use and occupancy permits — See Ch. 190.
Zoning — See Ch. 205.
§ 168-47 EAST NORRITON CODE § 168-47
163:438
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 175-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "East Norriton
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance."
§ 175-2. Purpose.
This chapter is adopted for the following purposes:
§ 175-3. Interpretation.
The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements
to meet to the above stated purposes. Where the provisions of this chapter
impose greater restrictions than those of any statute, other ordinance or
regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. Where the provisions
of any statute, other ordinance or regulation impose greater restrictions
than those of this chapter, the provisions of such statute, ordinance or
regulation shall prevail.
A. To assist orderly, efficient, integrated and harmonious development of
the Township.
B. To assure sites suitable for building purposes and human habitation.
C. To coordinate proposed streets with existing streets or other proposed
streets, parks or other features of the Township Plan of Streets.
D. To provide adequate open spaces for traffic, recreation, light and air
and for proper distribution of population.
E. To ensure conformance of subdivision and land development plans with
the public improvements of the Township and coordination of
intermunicipal, county and commonwealth improvement plans and
programs.
F. To secure equitable handling of all subdivision and land development
plans by providing uniform procedures and standards.
G. To regulate subdivisions and land developments within the jurisdiction
of the Township and concurrently to promote the highest quality
environment obtainable.
H. To ensure that the layout and arrangement of the subdivision or land
development plan is in conformance with the approved articles or
chapters of the Comprehensive Plan when such plan is adopted and to
any regulations or maps adopted in furtherance thereof.
§ 175-1 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-4
163:439
§ 175-4. Compliance.
No subdivision of any lot, tract or parcel of land shall be effected and no
street, alley, sanitary sewer, storm drain, water main, gas, oil and electric
transmission line, or other facilities in connection therewith shall be laid
out, constructed, opened or dedicated for public use or travel or for the
common use of occupants of a building abutting thereon except in strict
accordance with the subdivision and land development regulations adopted
hereunder.
§ 175-5. Approval required prior to sale or building permit.
§ 175-6. Erosion and sediment control.
A. No lot in a subdivision or land development may be sold and no permit
to erect, alter or repair any building upon land in a subdivision or land
development may be issued, unless and until a plan has been approved
and, where required, recorded and until the required improvements in
connection therewith from the lot or building to an existing improved
street have either been constructed or the Township has been assured
by means of a proper completion guaranty in the form of the deposit of
funds or securities in escrow sufficient to cover the cost of the required
improvements, as estimated by the Township Engineer, that the
improvements will subsequently be installed. [Amended 10-27-2015
by Ord. No. 567]
B. Modifications due to hardship.
(1) Modification of the requirements of one or more provisions of the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance may be granted if
the literal enforcement will exact undue hardship because of the
peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question, provided that
such modification will not be contrary to the public interest and
that the purpose and intent of the ordinance is observed.
(2) All requests for modification shall be in writing and shall
accompany and be a part of the application for development. The
request shall state in full the grounds and facts of
unreasonableness or hardship on which the request is based, the
provision or provisions of the ordinance involved and the minimum
modification necessary. The request for modification may be
referred to the Planning Commission for advisory comments. The
Township shall maintain a written record of all action on all
requests for modifications.
A. General.
(1) No changes shall be made in the contour of the land and no
grading, excavating, removal or destruction of the topsoil, trees or
other vegetative cover of the land shall be commenced until such
time that a plan for minimizing erosion and sedimentation has been
§ 175-4 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-6
163:440
processed with and reviewed by the Township Planning
Commission or there has been a determination by the Commission
that such plans are not necessary.
(2) No subdivision or land development plan shall be approved unless:
(a) There has been a plan approved by the Board of Supervisors
that provides for minimizing erosion and sedimentation
consistent with this section, and financial security in a form
and amount acceptable to the Township is deposited with the
Township, including, but not limited to, an escrow guaranty
which will ensure installation and completion of the required
improvements; or [Amended 10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 567]
(b) There has been a determination by the Board of Supervisors
that a plan for minimizing erosion and sedimentation is not
necessary.
(3) Measures used to control erosion and reduce sedimentation shall
as a minimum meet the standards and specifications of the
Montgomery County Soil and Water Conservation District. The
Township Engineer, or other officials as designated, shall ensure
compliance with the appropriate specifications, copies of which are
available from the district or the Municipal Building or the
Township Secretary of East Norriton Township.
B. Performance principles. The following measures are effective in
minimizing erosion and sedimentation and shall be included where
applicable in the control plan:
(1) Stripping of vegetation, regrading or other development shall be
done in such a way that will minimize erosion.
(2) Development plans shall preserve salient natural features, keep
cut-fill operations to a minimum and ensure conformity with
topography so as to create the least erosion potential and
adequately handle the volume and velocity of surface water runoff.
(3) Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected
and supplemented.
(4) The disturbed area and the duration of exposure shall be kept to a
practical minimum.
(5) Disturbed soils shall be stabilized as quickly as possible.
(6) Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect
exposed critical areas during development.
(7) The permanent (final) vegetation and mechanical erosion control
and drainage measures shall be installed as soon as practical in the
development.
§ 175-6 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-6
163:441
(8) Provisions shall be made to effectively accommodate the increased
runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and
after development. Where necessary, the rate of surface water
runoff will be mechanically retarded.
(9) Sediment in the runoff water shall be trapped until the disturbed
area is stabilized by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt
traps or similar measures.
C. Grading for drainage. In order to provide more suitable sites for
building and other uses, improve surface drainage and control erosion,
the following requirements shall be met:
(1) All lots, tracts or parcels shall be graded to provide proper
drainage away from buildings and dispose of it without ponding,
and all land within a development shall be graded to drain and
dispose of surface water without ponding, except where approved
by the Board.
(2) All drainage provisions shall be of such design to adequately handle
the surface runoff and carry it to the nearest suitable outlet, such
as a curbed street, storm drain or natural watercourse. Where
drainage swales are used to divert surface waters away from
buildings, they shall be sodded or planted as required and shall be
of such slope, shape and size as to conform to the requirements of
the Township. (See § 175-26 of this chapter.)
(3) Concentration of surface water shall only be permitted in swales or
watercourses.
(4) Excavation and fills.
(a) Cut and fill slopes shall not be steeper than 3:1 unless
stabilized by a retaining wall or cribbing, except as approved
by the Board when handled under special conditions.
(b) Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent surface water
from damaging the outface of excavations and of the sloping
surfaces of fills.
(c) Cut and fill shall not endanger adjoining property.
(d) Fill shall be placed and compacted so as to minimize sliding or
erosion of the soil.
(e) Fill shall not encroach on natural watercourses or constructed
channels.
(f) Fill placed adjacent to natural watercourses or constructed
channels shall have suitable protection against erosion during
periods of flooding.
§ 175-6 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-6
163:442
(g) Grading shall not be done in such a way so as to divert water
onto the property of another landowner without the written
consent of the Board of Supervisors and the affected property
owner.
(h) During grading operations, necessary measures for dust
control will be exercised.
(i) Grading equipment will not be allowed to cross live streams.
Provision will be made for the installation of culverts or bridges
as recommended by the Township Engineer and approved in
writing by the Board of Supervisors.
D. Responsibility.
(1) Whenever sedimentation is caused by stripping vegetation,
regrading or other development, it shall be the responsibility of the
person, corporation or other entity causing such sedimentation to
remove it from all adjoining surfaces, drainage systems and
watercourses and to repair any damage at his expense as quickly as
possible.
(2) Maintenance of all drainage facilities and watercourses within any
subdivision or land development is the responsibility of the
developer until they are accepted by the Township or some other
official agency, after which they become the responsibility of the
accepting agency.
(3) It is the responsibility of any person, corporation or other entity
doing any act on or across a stream, watercourse or swale or upon
the floodplain right-of-way thereof to maintain as nearly as possible
in its present state the stream, watercourse, swale, floodplain or
right-of-way during the pendency of the activity and to return it to
its original or equal condition after such activity is completed.
(4) Maintenance of drainage facilities or watercourses originating and
completely on private property is the responsibility of the owner to
their point of open discharge at the property line or at a communal
watercourse within the property.
(5) No person, corporation or other entity shall block, impede the flow
of, alter, construct any structure or deposit any material or thing or
commit any act which will affect normal or flood flow in any stream
or watercourse without having obtained prior approval from the
Township and/or the Department of Environmental Resources,
whichever is applicable.
(6) Where a subdivision or land development is traversed by a
watercourse, there shall be provided a drainage easement or rightof-
way conforming substantially to the line of such watercourses
and of such width as will be adequate to preserve natural drainage.
§ 175-6 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-6
163:443
E. Compliance with regulations and procedures.
(1) Final plans for minimizing erosion and sedimentation as approved
will be incorporated into the agreement and financial security
requirements under both § 175-37 and Article VII of this chapter.
[Amended 10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 567]
(2) The approval of plans and specifications for the control of erosion
and sedimentation shall be concurrent with the approval of the
final plats of subdivision or land development and become a part
thereof.
(3) At the time that a building permit is applied for, a review shall be
conducted by the Township Engineer to ensure conformance with
the plan as approved. During the construction, further consultative
technical assistance will be furnished, if necessary, by the Township
Engineer and the Montgomery County Soil and Water Conservation
District. During this development phase, the Township Engineer
shall inspect the development site and enforce compliance with the
approved plans.
(4) Permission for clearing and grading prior to recording of plats may
be obtained under temporary easements or other conditions
satisfactory to the Township.
(5) In the event that the developer proceeds to clear and grade prior to
recording plats, without satisfying conditions specified under
Subsection E(4), the Board may revoke the approval of the
preliminary plan and require restoration to the original grade and
vegetation as equal as possible to the original natural conditions at
the developer's expense and cost. Damages to adjoining property's
owners because of the developer's action in such cases will not be
the responsibility of the Township but will be the sole responsibility
of the developer who is in violation of this chapter.
§ 175-6 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-6
163:444
ARTICLE II
Definitions and Word Usage
§ 175-7. Word usage.
Words used in the singular include the plural, and words in the plural
include the singular. The word "person" indicates a corporation, an
incorporated association and a partnership as well as an individual. The
word "building" indicates "structure" and shall be construed as if followed
by the words "or part thereof." The word "street" indicates "avenue,"
"highway," "road" and "lane," and "watercourse" includes "drain," "ditch"
and "stream." The word "may" is permissive; the words "shall" and "will" are
mandatory subject to the provisions of § 175-8 of these regulations.
§ 175-8. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ALLEY — A strip of land over which there is a right-of-way, municipally
or privately owned, on which no dwellings or stores front, serving as the
secondary means of access to two or more properties.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has
filed an application for development, including his heirs, successors and
assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary, tentative or final, required to be filed and approved prior
to start of construction or development, including but not limited to an
application for a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plat or
plan or for the approval of a development plan.
BASE FLOOD — The flood which has been selected to serve as the basis
upon which the floodplain management provisions of this chapter and other
ordinances have been prepared; for purposes of this chapter, the onehundred-
year flood, as referenced in the current Flood Insurance Study,
East Norriton Township, prepared by the Federal Insurance Administration,
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year flood elevation, as
referenced in the Flood Insurance Study, prepared by the Federal Insurance
Administration, United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development.
BLOCK — An area usually bounded by streets or streets and natural or manmade
features.
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors of East Norriton Township.
BUILDER — A person, who is not necessarily the owner of the land or
agent of the same, who, by contract or other agreement, is charged with the
responsibility of construction of buildings or other structures or of making
any construction improvements on any parcel of land.
§ 175-7 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-8
163:445
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — The line which establishes the minimum
depth of front yard required by the particular zoning district as measured
from the ultimate right-of-way line, between which line and the ultimate
right-of-way line of the street on which the lot abuts a building may not be
erected.
CALIPER — Diameter of a tree's trunk measured 12 inches above the
ground.
CARTWAY — The portion of a street or alley intended for vehicular use.
CONSTRUCTION — The construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair,
extension, expansion, alteration or relocation of a building or structure,
including the placement of mobile homes.
CROSSWALK — A right-of-way for pedestrian travel across a block
connecting two of the bounding streets.
CUL-DE-SAC — A street with access at one end and terminated at the other
end by a paved vehicular turnaround.
CUT —
DECISION — Final adjudication of any board or other body granted
jurisdiction under this chapter or other applicable law, either by reason
of the grant of exclusive jurisdiction or by reason of appeals from
determinations. All decisions shall be appealable to the Court of Common
Pleas of Montgomery County.
DETERMINATION —
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with
the permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision or land development. Written evidence of authorization,
A. An excavation.
The difference between a point on the original ground and a designated
point of lower elevation on the final grade.
B.
C. Also, the material removed in excavation.
Final action by an officer, body or agency charged with the
administration of this chapter or applications thereunder, except the
following:
(1) The governing body;
(2) The Zoning Hearing Board; or
The Planning Commission, only if and to the extent that the
Planning Commission is charged with final decision on preliminary
or final plans under the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance or planned residential development provisions, if any.
(3)
A.
Determinations shall be appealable only to the boards designated as
having jurisdiction for such appeal.
B.
§ 175-8 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-8
163:446
satisfactory in form to the Township Solicitor, shall be filed with the
application and plan when signed by an agent of the registered owner.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, the
placement of mobile homes, streets and other paving, utilities, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, excavation or drilling operations.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A plan of land development.
DRAINAGE — The flow of water or liquid waste and the methods of
directing such flow, whether natural or artificial.
DRIP LINE — The line marking the outermost edges of the branches of a
tree, trees or woodlands.
DRIVEWAY — A private street providing for vehicular and pedestrian access
between a public street and a parking area within a lot or property.
EASEMENT — A right-of-way or other right granted for the use of private
land for certain public, quasi-public or private purposes.
ENDORSEMENT — The review stamp of the Montgomery County Planning
Commission.
ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the engineer for a
municipality, planning agency or joint planning commission.
EROSION — The removal of surface materials by the action of natural
elements.
EXCAVATION — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other
similar material is dug into, cut, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced,
relocated or bulldozed, and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
FILL —
FLOOD — A temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas.
FLOODPLAIN — That area defined in Article XVII of Chapter 205, Zoning,
as the Floodplain Conservation District; the "floodplain" definition
contained therein is made part of this chapter by reference.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is
placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved to a new
location above the natural surface of the ground or on top of stripped
surface, and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
A.
The difference in elevation between a point on the original ground and
a designated point of higher elevation on the final grade.
B.
C. The material used to make a fill.
§ 175-8 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-8
163:447
facilities, structures and their contents. Such measures are set forth in
floodproofing regulations published by the Office of the Chief Engineers,
United States Army, publication number EP 1165 2 314 (June 1972 and as
subsequently amended). Floodproofing measures for all new construction
and substantial improvements of structures shall satisfy the requirements
of the Completely Dry Spaces (W1) and Essentially Dry Spaces (W2) classes
referenced in these regulations. In said publication where reference is made
to "below (or above) the BFD (base flood datum)," it shall be interpreted as
meaning below (or above) the base flood elevation.
GRADE — A slope of a street or other public way, specified in percent, and
shown on plans as specified herein.
IMPROVEMENT — Grading, paving, curbing, guttering, streetlights, street
signs, fire hydrants, water mains, gas mains, sanitary sewers, on-site
sewage disposal facilities, storm drains, inlets and appurtenances, culverts,
bridges, sidewalks, crosswalks, monuments, telephone and electric lines,
shade trees and all construction appurtenances incidental thereto; also
wells and parking areas.
LAND DEVELOPMENT —
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of or for the purpose of streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
Certain land development shall be specifically excluded from the
definition of land development set forth hereinabove, when such land
development involves:
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or
single-family semidetached dwelling into not more than three
residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium.
(1)
The addition of an accessory building, including farm buildings, on
a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal building.
(2)
The addition to any existing nonresidential building, where the
gross floor area of the addition, when combined with the gross floor
area of the existing building, does not exceed 1,500 square feet.
(3)
C.
§ 175-8 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-8
163:448
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition). A lessee if he is authorized under
the lease can exercise the rights of the landowner or other person for a
property.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
LOT AREA — The area contained within the property lines of the individual
parcels of land as shown on a subdivision plan, excluding any area within
any right-of-way, but including the area of any easements.
MINIMIZE — To reduce to the smallest amount possible. "Minimize" does
not mean eliminate but rather that the most substantial efforts possible
under the circumstances have been taken to reduce the adverse effect of
the action (such as grading, clearing, construction, etc.) to be minimized.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — The division of a single lot or parcel of land into
two residential lots, tracts or parcels of land, for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of leasing or transfer of ownership or of building
development, provided that the proposed lots, tracts or parcels of land
thereby created have frontage on an improved public street or streets, and
provided, further, that there is not created by the subdivision any new street
or streets or the need for improvements or easements.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one unit or in two or more units
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready
for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent
foundation.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved
with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary
for the erection thereon of a single mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has
been so designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile home
lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
OFFICIAL MAP — The Official Map of current adoption showing the exact
location of the lines of existing and proposed public streets, including the
ultimate width of the corridor for such streets, watercourses and public
grounds for the whole of the municipality of East Norriton Township,
provided that proposed streets, watercourses or public grounds shall not, in
and of itself, constitute a taking or acceptance of any land by East Norriton
Township.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that has one chance in 100, or a
one-percent chance, of being equaled or exceeded in any given year; for
the purposes of this chapter, the one-hundred-year flood (base flood) as
§ 175-8 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-8
163:449
defined by the Federal Insurance Administration, United States Department
of Housing and Urban Development, in the Flood Insurance Study, East
Norriton Township. Within the approximated floodplain, the one-hundredyear-
flood elevation shall be established as a point on the boundary of the
approximated floodplain nearest to the construction site in question.
PLAN —
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the Township of
East Norriton.
PLANTING ISLANDS — "Planting islands" shall be a minimum of nine feet
by 18 feet in area, be underlain by soil and not base course material, be
mounded at no more than a four-to-one slope, contain plantings of trees,
shrubs and ground cover to cover the entire area and be protected by curbs,
wheel stops or bollards. (See Diagram 1.128)
PLANTING STRIPS — "Planting strips" shall be a minimum of eight feet
wide and run the length of the parking row, be underlain by soil and not
base course material, be mounded at no more than a four-to-one slope,
contain plantings of trees, shrubs and ground cover to cover the entire area,
and be protected by curbs, wheel stops or bollards. (See Diagrams 1 and
2.129)
PLAT — The map or plan of a subdivision or land development, whether
preliminary or final.
PLAN, IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION — A plan prepared by a
registered engineer, showing the construction details of streets, drains,
sewers, bridges, culverts and other improvements as required by these
regulations, showing the horizontal details, profile and typical cross
section to be constructed or installed.
A.
PLAN, LAND DEVELOPMENT — A tentative, preliminary or final plan,
including written and graphic material, showing the provision for
development of a subject tract when plans of subdivision would not be
applicable.
B.
PLAN, PRELIMINARY — A plan prepared by a registered engineer or a
registered surveyor, showing existing features of the land and proposed
street and lot layout within and adjacent to a subdivision.
C.
PLAN, RECORD — A plan prepared for recording by a registered
engineer or surveyor, showing the ultimate width of streets, the lot
lines, easements and any other relevant information pertaining to the
subdivision required by this chapter.
D.
PLAN, TENTATIVE — A rough draft showing proposed streets and lots
related to topography, to be used as the basis for informal discussion
between the representatives of the Planning Commission and
subdivider, developer or builder.
E.
128. Editor's Note: Diagram 1 is on file in the Township offices.
129. Editor's Note: Diagrams 1 and 2 are on file in the Township offices.
§ 175-8 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-8
163:450
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by
the Board of Supervisors or the Planning Commission, intended to inform
and obtain public comment, prior to taking action in accordance with this
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance and the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code (P.L. 805, No. 247, as amended).130
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of July
3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84), known as the "Sunshine Act."131
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in East Norriton Township.
Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular
nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication
shall not be more than 30 days and second publication shall not be less than
seven days from the date of the hearing.
REPORT — Any letter, review, memorandum, compilation or similar writing
made by any body, board, officer or consultant other than a solicitor to
any other body, board, officer or consultant for the purpose of assisting the
recipient of such report in the rendering of any decision or determination.
All reports shall be deemed recommendatory and advisory only and shall
not be binding upon the recipient, board, officer, body or agency, nor shall
any appeal lie therefrom. Any report used, received or considered by the
body, board, officer or agency rendering a determination or decision shall
be made available for inspection to the applicant and all other parties to
any proceeding upon request, and copies thereof shall be provided at cost
of reproduction.
RESERVE STRIP — A parcel of land separating a street from adjacent
properties.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by
a street, alley, crosswalk, sanitary or storm sewer, stream, drainage ditch
or for another special use. The usage of the term "right-of-way" for landplotting
purposes in the Township of East Norriton shall mean that every
right-of-way established and shown on a final record plan is to be separate
and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way and not
included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. These
rights-of-way that involve maintenance by the Township of East Norriton
shall be dedicated to public use by the subdivider of the plan on which such
rights-of-way are established.
RUNOFF — The surface water discharge or rate of discharge of a given
watershed after a fall of rain or snow that does not enter the soil but runs
off the surface of the land.
RUNOFF FROM A FULLY DEVELOPED AREA UPSTREAM — The surface
water runoff that can be reasonably anticipated upon maximum
development of that area of the watershed located upstream from the
subject tract, as permitted by prevailing zoning.
130. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
131. Editor's Note: See now 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq.
§ 175-8 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-8
163:451
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by moving wind, water or gravity. Once this
matter is deposited (or remains suspended in water), it is usually referred
to as "sediment."
SIGHT DISTANCE — The distance of unobstructed view along the center
line of a street from the driver's sight height of five feet to the farthest
visible point four inches above the street surface.
SITE ELEMENT — Elements of a development whose visual or other impact
requires planting screens. "Site elements" include but are not limited to
the following: parking lots; dumpsters, trash or recycling areas; service
or loading docks; outdoor storage or sales yards; vehicle storage or sales
yards; single-family attached dwellings' rear yards; multifamily (including
high-rise) dwellings' rear yards; active recreation facilities; fenced
detention basins; and sewage treatment plants or pump stations.
SLOPE — The face of an embankment or cut section; any ground whose
surface makes an angle with the plane of the horizon. Slopes are usually
expressed in a percentage based upon vertical difference in feet per 100
feet of horizontal distance.
SOIL STABILIZATION — Chemical or mechanical treatment designed to
increase or maintain the stability of a mass of soil or otherwise to improve
its engineering properties.
SOIL SURVEY — A report entitled "Soil Survey of Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania," published April 1967, by the Soil Conservation Service,
United States Department of Agriculture, which is available in the Township
or through the Extension Service, Agricultural Agent, the Pennsylvania
State University in Norristown, Pennsylvania.
STREET — Includes, street, avenue, boulevard, road, freeway, parkway,
lane, alley, viaduct and any other ways used or intended to be used by
vehicular traffic or pedestrians, whether public or private.
STREET LINE — The dividing line between the street and the lot. The street
line shall be the same as a legal right-of-way, provided that:
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
The street right-of-way line shall not be less than 25 feet from the
center line of any road or street; and
A.
Where a future right-of-way width for a road or street has been officially
established, the street right-of-way line shall be the side line of the
future right-of-way so established.
B.
§ 175-8 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-8
163:452
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair
is started or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored,
before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, substantial
improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether
or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The
term does not, however, include either:
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED — Where, in the judgment of the Township
Engineer, at least 90% (based on the cost of the required improvements for
which financial security was posted pursuant to the requirements of this
chapter) of those improvements required as a condition for final approval
have been completed in accordance with the approved plan, so that the
project will be able to be used, occupied or operated for its intended uses.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land characterized as a depression used to
carry surface water runoff.
TREE MASS — A grouping of three or more trees each at least 1 1/2 inches
in caliper, within a one-hundred-square-foot area.
TOPSOIL — Surface soils and subsurface soils which presumably are fertile
soils and soil material, ordinarily rich in organic matter or humus debris.
Topsoil is usually found in the uppermost soil layer called the "A. Horizon."
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the engineer for a
municipality, planning agency or joint planning commission.
ULTIMATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The expected future right-of-way width
computed from the center line of an established right-of-way, as shown on
the Ultimate Right-of-Way Map of the Township adopted by the Board as
part of the Official Map of the Township.
ULTIMATE RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE — The line parallel to the center line of
any public street which defines the boundary of the ultimate right-of-way as
defined above.
WATERCOURSE — A stream of water, river, brook, creek or a channel or
ditch for water, whether natural or man-made.
WATER SURVEY — An inventory of the source, quantity, yield and use of
groundwater and surface water resources within a municipality.
Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state
or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of a structure listed on a National Register of Historic
Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
B.
§ 175-8 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-8
163:453
WOODLAND — A continuous stand of mixed age trees, shrubs and ground
cover, covering at least 1/4 acre, consisting of at least 50% mature trees at
least six inches in caliper.
§ 175-8 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-8
163:454
ARTICLE III
Improvement Construction Requirements
§ 175-9. Required improvements.
The applicant shall agree in writing to construct streets and other
improvements from the lot or lots to be sold or built upon to an existing
improved street, subject to the provisions of § 175-5 herein. The work shall
be performed in strict accordance with approved plans and the Township
standards and specifications or the applicable provisions of Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Specifications 408, latest edition, or any
subsequent number or section thereof. No plat shall be finally approved
until the developer has completed all of the necessary and appropriate
improvements as required as a condition for final approval of a plat or until
such time as the applicant has provided for the deposit with the Township of
a security acceptable to the governing body in an amount sufficient to cover
the costs of any improvement which may be required.
§ 175-10. Public utilities and laterals.
All water, gas, electric and other pipes and conduits and all service
connections or laterals shall be laid to the full width of the ultimate right-ofway,
where the need therefor can be reasonably anticipated, before streets
are paved. The arrangements for said service connections or laterals shall
be the responsibility of the subdivider, developer or builder.
§ 175-11. Notice of commencement of construction prior to
inspection.
§ 175-12. Snowplowing.
The applicant shall be responsible from the time there is at least one
occupant in the proposed development to plow snow on undedicated
development roads as may be necessary to provide ingress and egress to
the occupants, at the applicant's cost. The applicant shall post with the
Township the sum of $2,500 as an escrow to provide for snow removal prior
to acceptance of dedication of the streets. The applicant simultaneously
shall present a contract with a snow removal firm indicating that that
firm has been contracted to remove snow from the development streets
within four hours after snow has stopped falling. All payments for said
A. The Township Engineer shall be notified 48 hours in advance of the
commencement of any construction operation, in order that provision
may be made for inspection by the Township.
B. All property owners within 200 feet of the subject property shall be
notified by first class mail that construction on the subject property is
about to commence. This notification shall be sent seven days prior to
the beginning stages of removal of trees, underbrush, installation of
storm sewer and the like or prior to any work that necessitates the
installation of soil and erosion control devices, whichever occurs first.
§ 175-9 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-12
163:455
snow removal shall be made from the escrow fund. In the event that the
escrow should become depleted, the applicant shall post an additional sum
of $2,500 and such further amounts as may be necessary until such time as
the dedication of the streets is accepted by the Township. In the event that
the applicant or the snow removal firm does not perform in accordance with
the contract presented, the Township may hire contractors to perform the
necessary work and pay those contractors from the escrow fund.
§ 175-12.1. Recreational facilities.
The applicant shall be responsible to dedicate land suitable for use as park
and recreational facilities in a manner agreed to by the Board. Whenever
the applicant is providing a fee in lieu of otherwise required facilities and
land dedication, the applicant shall agree, in writing, to the amount of fee
and the method to be used to secure and pay that amount as a condition
precedent to final plan approval.
§ 175-12 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-12.1
163:456
ARTICLE IV
Procedures for Plat Approval
§ 175-13. Compliance by applicants.
The procedures set forth in this article shall be followed by all applicants.
§ 175-14. Plans required for approval.
§ 175-15. Procedures.
A. A preliminary plan is required for all subdivisions and land
developments proposed within the Township.
B. A final plan is required for all subdivisions and land developments
proposed within the Township. A plan showing all information required
for a final plan, which has been submitted as a preliminary plan and for
which no changes have been required by the Township, may be
approved as a final plan. A final plan shall consist, when applicable, of
two parts:
(1) Improvement construction plan.
(2) Record plan.
C. A land development plan shall be required whenever the application for
approval of a plat shall be construed to be a land development in
accordance with the definition of the same as provided in this chapter. A
land development plan may be required in conjunction with a
subdivision plan or in lieu of a subdivision plan when review of a plan on
a lot-by-lot basis would not be applicable.
D. All plats, surveys and plans, whether preliminary or final, for
subdivision or land development submitted to the Township shall be
prepared in accordance with the Act of May 23, 1945 (P.L. 913, No.
367), known as the "Professional Engineers Registration Law"132 and
shall be certified that they have been so prepared.
A. Unless determined otherwise, all plans for approval of a plat shall be
submitted in the following order: preliminary plan and final plan. A
plan, and all required copies of each plan, shall be filed one at a time,
and no subsequent plans for approval of a plat shall be filed until such
time that a decision has been reached concerning the preceding plan.
When the decision reached concerning an application for approval of a
plat, whether preliminary or final, has rendered the application for
approval finally denied, then the applicant, when and if he should
reapply requesting approval of a plat, shall do so in accordance with the
procedure outlined above.
132. Editor's Note: See 63 P.S. § 148 et seq.
§ 175-13 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-15
163:457
B. Application for approval of a subdivision and land development shall be
received by the Zoning Officer of the Township. Twelve copies of all
plans shall be submitted unless otherwise required by the Zoning
Officer.
C. Schedule of steps.
(1) The application shall be received by the Zoning Officer. The date
shall be stamped and the filing fee received. A cursory examination
of the application and plan will be conducted.
(2) Copies to be distributed.
(a) The Zoning Officer shall keep one copy and distribute copies
to:
[1] The Montgomery County Planning Commission.
[2] The East Norriton Township Planning Commission.
[3] The East Norriton Township Engineer.
[4] The East Norriton Township Solicitor.
[5] The East Norriton Township Board of Supervisors.
[6] The East Norriton Township Manager.
(b) The Zoning Officer shall keep one copy and when applicable
distribute copies to:
[1] The East Norriton Township Sewer Authority.
[2] The East Norriton Township Park Board.
[3] The East Norriton Township Building Inspector.
[4] The Montgomery County Conservation District (when
plans are for subdivision and/or land development in or
bordering on a flood-prone area).
[5] Adjacent municipalities and other governmental agencies
affected by the plans (when the Zoning Officer or Board of
Supervisors believe it would be beneficial to solicit review
and reports from such groups in furtherance of the general
purposes of this article).
(3) An application for approval of a subdivision or land development
plan shall be placed on the agenda for the meeting of the Board.
(4) The recommendation of the Montgomery County Planning
Commission, Township Planning Commission and others shall be
submitted to the Board.
(5) Board's action:
§ 175-15 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-15
163:458
(a) If the Board approves the plan, the Township Secretary will so
certify thereon, and two copies will be given to the applicant.
(b) If the Board disapproves the plan, the Zoning Officer will notify
the applicant, in writing, of the defects in the application and
will describe the requirements which have not been met and
shall cite the provisions of state law or Township ordinance
relied upon unless otherwise agreed by the applicant.
(c) Approval will be effective for five years only, unless extended
by the Board. Where final approval is preceded by preliminary
approval, the five-year period shall be counted from the date of
preliminary approval, provided that when an applicant shall
commence with any aspect of an approved plan, the terms of
development or subdivision shall be governed by any
subsequent change to the Zoning Ordinance,133 Subdivision
Regulations or other governing ordinances or plans, should
effectuation of the approved plat not be completed within the
prescribed five-year period.
(d) All applications for approval must be acted upon and a decision
rendered to the applicant not later than 90 days following the
date of the regular meeting of the Board of Supervisors next
following the date the application is filed. If the regular
meeting is more than 30 days following the filing of the
application, the ninety-day period begins after the 30th day
from the date the plan was filed.
(e) The decision must be in writing and must be delivered no later
than 15 days following the decision but still within the ninetyday
period.
(6) When deemed desirable, the applicant may be requested to agree,
in writing, to an extension of time, to the prescribed period of time
normally allocated to the applicant, in which a decision concerning
the status of the application for approval of a plat is to be rendered
or to agree to a change in the prescribed manner of communication
of the decision of the Board, in which case, the Board shall render a
decision and communicate it accordingly to the applicant before a
termination of the extended time period.
(7) 134The approval of a plat, whether preliminary or final may be
subject to conditions which shall be communicated, in writing, to
the owner and which the applicant must accept or reject in writing
within 10 calendar days of receipt of the communication of the
conditions by the Township. The approval of the plat shall be
rescinded automatically upon written rejection of the conditions by
the owner or upon the owner's failure to communicate acceptance
133. Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Zoning.
134. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(7) was redesignated as Subsection C(9) to
accommodate the addition of Subsection C(7) and (8).
§ 175-15 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-15
163:459
or rejection of such conditions within 10 calendar days. If the
conditions are not accepted, the conditional approval is rescinded
and deemed to be a rejection as of the date the Board of
Supervisors acted to grant conditional approval.
(8) All appeals from a subdivision or land development plan decision,
including appeals from a person aggrieved, are made directly to the
Court of Common Pleas.
(9) Recording the plat. Upon approval of a final plat of subdivision or
land development, the applicant shall, within 90 days of such final
approval, record such plat in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of
Montgomery County, Pennsylvania. The approved final plat shall
bear the official signature and Seal of the Township and stamp of
review by the Montgomery County Planning Commission.
§ 175-15 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-15
163:460
ARTICLE V
Design Standards
§ 175-16. Requirements.
The following principles of subdivision and land development, general
requirements and minimum standards of design shall be observed by the
applicant in all instances, whether or not the proposed improvements are to
be accepted by the Township:
A. All portions of a tract being subdivided shall be taken up in lots, streets,
public lands or other proposed uses so that remnants and landlocked
areas shall not be created.
B. When only a portion of a tract is being reviewed relative to subdivision
and land development, but where future subdivision or land
development is imminent, the applicant shall, subject to approval of his
plan, demonstrate that the remainder of the tract or parcel may be
subdivided or developed in conformance with the existing zoning
classification of land use in a logical and satisfactory manner.
C. Whenever a parcel of land is being subdivided for the specific purpose
of being added to an adjoining parcel of land, then such subdivision
application shall be accompanied by an executed agreement of sale
between the applicant for subdivision and the owner of the parcel to
which the subdivided parcel is to be annexed. Any such subdivision
must result in a lot or lots owned by the applicant and the adjoining
landowner which shall conform in all respects to the regulations
contained in this chapter. In the event that settlement is not held in
accordance with the agreement of sale within six months of the date of
subdivision approval, then the approval shall be voided.
D. Whenever possible, applicants shall preserve trees, groves, waterways,
scenic points, historic spots and other community assets and
landmarks.
E. Subdivisions and land developments should be laid out so as to avoid
the necessity for excessive cut or fill unless specifically warranted by
terrain or location.
F. Flood-prone areas shall not be subdivided or developed except in strict
compliance with the standards and requirements of § 175-33 of this
article.
G. Where no public water supply is available to the subdivision or land
development, the Supervisors shall require the subdivider, developer or
builder to obtain from the District Sanitarian of the Pennsylvania
Department of Health or other appropriate state agency certificates of
approval as to the quality and adequacy of the water supply proposed to
be utilized by the subdivider, developer or builder and approval of the
type of construction methods to be employed in the installation of the
individual water supply system.
§ 175-16 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-16
163:461
§ 175-17. Modifications or adjustments to standards.
H. Where the subdivision or land development is inaccessible to sanitary
sewers, the Supervisors shall require the subdivider, developer or
builder to obtain from the Sewage Enforcement Officer, the Department
of Environmental Resources or other appropriate state agency
certificates of approval of the sewage disposal facilities to be provided
by the subdivider, developer or builder.
I. Applicants shall observe the ultimate right-of-way for contiguous
existing streets as prescribed by the Official Map for the Township.135
Additional portions of the corridors for such streets shall be offered to
the government agency having jurisdiction at the time the subdivision
or land development is consummated. Applicable building setback
lines, as defined by the Township Zoning Ordinance of current
adoption,136 shall be delineated as measured from the ultimate right-ofway
street line.
J. Proposed subdivision and land development shall be coordinated with
the existing nearby neighborhood so that the community as a whole
may develop harmoniously.
K. Improvement construction requirements will be completed under
specifications of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources or other
appropriate state agency, the Montgomery County Soil and Water
Conservation District or other appropriate agency or the specifications
included herein, whichever specifications shall result in the stricter
interpretation of this chapter.
L. Construction of facilities. The subdivider, developer or builder shall,
where specified by the Township, construct and install, with no expense
to the Township, the streets, curbs, sidewalks, water mains, sanitary
and storm sewers, streetlights, fire hydrants, street signs, shade trees,
monuments and recreational facilities and other facilities and utilities
specified in this article. Construction and installation of such facilities
and utilities shall be subject to inspection by appropriate Township
officials during the progress of the work, and the subdivider shall pay
for inspection.
A. The standards of design in this article should be used to judge the
adequacy of subdivision proposals. Where, in the opinion of the
Planning Commission, the literal application of these standards in
certain cases would work undue hardship or be plainly unreasonable,
the Township Planning Commission may recommend to the Board such
reasonable exceptions as will not be contrary to the public interest.
135. Editor's Note: The Official Map is on file in the Township offices and may be examined
there during regular business hours.
136. Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Zoning.
§ 175-16 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-17
163:462
§ 175-17.1. Transportation impact study.
B. Modification of the requirements of one or more provisions of the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance may be granted if the
literal enforcement will exact undue hardship because of the peculiar
conditions pertaining to the land in question, provided that such
modification will not be contrary to the public interest and that the
purpose and intent of the ordinance is observed.
C. All requests for a modification shall be in writing and shall accompany
and be a part of the application for development. The request shall state
in full the grounds and facts of unreasonableness or hardship on which
the request is based, the provision or provisions of the ordinance
involved and the minimum modification necessary. The request for
modification may be referred to the Planning Commission for advisory
comments. The Township shall maintain a written record of all action on
all requests for modifications.
A. A transportation impact study shall be undertaken for all subdivision
and land developments meeting the criteria of Subsection C below to:
(1) Enable the Township to assess the impact of a proposed
development on the local transportation system.
(2) Ensure that proposed developments do not adversely affect the
transportation network and to identify any traffic problems
associated with access from the site to the existing transportation
network.
(3) Delineate solutions to potential problems.
(4) Present improvements to be incorporated into the proposed
development.
(5) Protect air quality, conserve energy and encourage use of public
transportation.
B. The transportation impact study shall be prepared by a qualified traffic
engineer and/or transportation planner with previous traffic study
experience. The procedures and standards for the traffic study are set
forth in Subsection D of this section utilizing the terminology contained
in the Transportation Research Board Highway Capacity Manual,
Special Report 209, 1985, as may be hereafter revised (hereinafter
referred to as the "Highway Capacity Manual").
C. Criteria.
(1) A transportation impact study shall be required for all subdivisions
and land developments that meet one or more of the following
criteria:
(a) Residential: 10 or more dwelling units.
§ 175-17 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-17.1
163:463
(b) Commercial: a commercial building(s) consisting of 10,000
square feet or more of gross leasable floor space.
(c) Office: a development consisting of 10,000 square feet or more
of gross leasable floor space.
(d) Industrial: any development of such nature.
(e) Institutional: any development of such nature.
(2) For other types of development or where special conditions exist,
the supervisors may request the preparation of a transportation
impact study for any other subdivisions or land development.
Special conditions include but are not limited to development
generating 100 new trips into or out of the site at either a.m. or
p.m. peak hour, using Institute of Transportation Engineers
standards.
D. The transportation impact study shall contain but not be limited to the
following information:
(1) General site description.
(a) The site description shall include the size, location, proposed
land uses, construction staging and completion date of the
proposed subdivision or land development. If the development
is residential, types of dwelling units and number of bedrooms
shall also be included. The general site description shall also
include probable socioeconomic characteristics of potential
site users to the extent that it may affect the transportation
needs of the site (i.e., number of senior citizens).
(b) The description shall also contain a full documentation of the
proposed internal transportation system. This description shall
include proposed internal vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian
circulation, all proposed ingress and egress locations, all
internal roadway widths and rights-of-way, parking conditions,
traffic channelization and any traffic signals or other
intersection-control devices within the site. The site design
shall be shown to maximize potential public transportation
usage to and from the development, such as providing
adequate turning radii at all access points to allow a bus to
enter the development. Bus shelter and sign locations shall be
designated where appropriate.
(2) Area conditions.
(a) The size of the study area shall extend 1/2 mile from all
property boundary lines of the proposed subdivision or land
development. Care should be taken to include in the study all
known congested locations that may be impacted by the
proposed development. A brief description of other existing
§ 175-17.1 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-17.1
163:464
and proposed subdivisions and land developments within the
study area shall be provided.
(b) The report shall describe the entire external roadway system
within the study area. Major intersections in the study area
shall be identified and sketched. All existing and proposed
public transportation services and facilities within a one-mile
radius of the site shall also be documented. All proposed future
highway improvements, including proposed construction and
traffic signalization, shall be noted. This information shall be
obtained from the Twelve-Year Highway Capital Program for
the Delaware Valley Region, from the East Norriton Township
Comprehensive Plan, from the Montgomery County Planning
Commission and from the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation. Any proposed roadway improvements
resulting from proposed surrounding developments shall also
be recorded.
(3) Existing traffic conditions.
(a) Existing traffic conditions shall be measured and documented
for all major streets and intersections identified in the study
area. Intersection traffic counts shall include traffic volumes
during the peak highway and peak development hours and for
average daily conditions.
(b) Intersection capacity analyses shall be conducted at all
intersections examined for existing conditions according to the
Highway Capacity Manual published by the Transportation
Research Board. Levels of service shall be determined at all
intersections. This analysis will determine the adequacy of the
existing roadway system to serve the current traffic demand.
Roadways and intersection approaches experiencing Levels of
Service E or F shall be noted as congestion locations, and
improvements shall be recommended to accommodate existing
traffic conditions.
(4) Base conditions.
(a) The selection of a horizon year for which study results are to be
characterized may be directly related to local plan horizons,
development phasing (for this and other projects) or major
transportation system changes. Table 1 sets forth the
appropriate study horizon, based on the number of trips
generated by the development during the peak hour.
§ 175-17.1 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-17.1
163:465
Table 1
Appropriate Study Horizons
Development
Characteristic Suggested Horizons
Small development (under
500 peak hour trips)
Anticipated opening year,
assuming full buildout and
occupancy.
Moderate single-phase
development (under 500 to
1,000 peak hour trips)
1. Anticipated opening year,
assuming full development
buildout and occupancy.
2. Adopted transportation plan
horizon year if the
development is significantly
larger than that included in
the adopted plan or
forecasts for the area.
Large single-phase
development (over 1,000
peak hour trips)
1. Anticipated opening year,
assuming full buildout and
occupancy.
2. Adopted transportation plan
horizon year.
Moderate or large multiplephase
development
1. Anticipated opening years
of each major phase,
assuming buildout and full
occupancy of each phase.
2. Anticipated year of
complete buildout and
occupancy.
3. Adopted transportation plan
horizon year.
4. Additional years when major
area transportation
improvement is completed.
NOTE: Peak hour trips are based on trip generation.
(b) Base conditions, that is, horizon year conditions without the
subject site being developed, shall be determined for all peak
hours examined. Base condition traffic will consist of the
existing traffic expanded to the horizon year using an annual
background growth factor and traffic generated by other
proposed developments in the study area. All sources used in
developing the background growth factor should be stated.
The traffic generated by other developments in the area should
be determined from the manual, Trip Generation, Fourth
§ 175-17.1 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-17.1
163:466
Edition, 1987, or as may be amended, an Institute of
Transportation Engineers Informational Report.
(c) Capacity analyses for the base condition peak hour volumes
should be conducted according to the Highway Capacity
Manual. Levels of service shall be determined at all
intersections. This analysis will determine the adequacy of the
horizon year roadway system to serve the base condition traffic
demand. Roadways and intersection approaches experiencing
Levels of Service E or F shall be noted as congestion locations,
and improvements will be recommended to accommodate the
horizon year traffic conditions.
(5) Transportation impact of the development.
(a) The traffic generated by the proposed development shall be
determined according to the manual, Trip Generation, Fourth
Edition, 1987, or as may be amended, an Institute of
Transportation Engineers Informational Report. Where the
appropriate date is not available for the proposed subdivision
and land development use, the developer shall provide the
rates applied and document the source of the rate applied. If
the developer requests to use significantly different rates than
those given, he/she shall submit the rates and specific
justification to the Township Engineer prior to submission of
the transportation impact study for approval or denial. Trip
generation shall be conducted for average daily traffic,
highway peak hours and the land development or subdivision
peak hours. These generated volumes shall be distributed to
the study area and assigned to the existing streets and
intersections throughout the study area. Documentation of all
assumptions used in the distribution and assignment phase
shall be provided. Traffic characteristics of the site that will
cause unusual trip generation rates and/or traffic flows shall be
noted.
(b) The total future traffic demand in the study area based on full
occupancy of the proposed development shall be calculated.
This demand shall consist of the combination of the base
condition volumes and the development-generated traffic.
(c) Pedestrian volumes shall also be calculated, if applicable. If
school crossings are to be used, pedestrian volumes shall be
assigned to each crossing.
(d) An intersection capacity analysis shall be conducted for
projected conditions. If staging of the proposed development is
anticipated, calculations for each stage of completion shall be
made. This analysis shall be performed using the peak highway
hour(s) and peak development-generated hour(s) for all
intersections examined in the study area. Levels of service
§ 175-17.1 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-17.1
163:467
shall be determined at all intersections. This analysis will
determine the adequacy of the horizon year roadway system to
serve the projected traffic demand. Roadways and intersection
approaches experiencing Levels of Service E or F shall be
noted as congestion locations and improvements shall be
recommended to accommodate the projected traffic
conditions.
(e) All pedestrian crossings and access points and unsignalized
intersection approaches operating at Levels of Service E or F
shall be examined as to the feasibility of installing traffic
signals. This evaluation shall examine the feasibility of
installing a traffic signal according to both PADOT
(Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Publication 201,
Engineering and Traffic Studies, Subchapter D, Traffic Control
Restrictions) and U.S. DOT (Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices, United States Department of Transportation, Federal
Highway Administration) standards.
(6) Conclusions and recommended improvements.
(a) All roadways or intersection approaches operating at Levels of
Service of E or F shall be considered deficient, and specific
recommendations for the elimination of these problems shall
be listed. This listing of recommended improvements shall
include but not be limited to the following elements: internal
circulation design, site access location and design, external
street and intersection design and improvements, traffic signal
installation and operation, including signal timing, and transit
design improvements.
(b) Existing and/or future public transportation shall also be
addressed. A listing of all actions to be undertaken to increase
present public transportation usage and improve service, if
applicable, shall be included.
(c) The listing of recommended improvements for both streets and
transit shall include, for such improvement, the party
responsible for the improvement, the cost and funding of the
improvement and the proposed completion date for the
improvement.
(d) The planning agencies having jurisdiction, including but not
limited to the Township Planning Commission and/or the
Montgomery County Planning Commission, shall review the
transportation impact study to determine its adequacy in
solving any traffic problems which may occur due to the land
development or subdivision and make recommendations to the
supervisors.
(e) The Township may decide that certain improvements contained
in the study on or adjacent to the site are required for
§ 175-17.1 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-17.1
163:468
§ 175-17.2. Traffic impact fee.137
application plan approval and may attach these conditions to
the preliminary approval.
(f) The improvement plans shall not be submitted to PADOT and/
or the Montgomery County Permits Office until such plans are
approved by the Township. This submittal shall be
accompanied by comments of the Township and the
Montgomery County Planning Commission.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish an impact fee
program to ensure that the transportation system is available and
adequate to support new growth and development. To advance this
objective, there is hereby created an impact fee payable to the
Township prior to building permit issuances.
B. General findings and conditions. The Board of Supervisors hereby finds
and declares that:
(1) The conditions and standards for the determination and imposition
of the impact fee set forth herein are those set forth in Act 209 of
1990,138 and any and all amendments thereto (hereinafter the
"Act"), and consist of:
(a) The recitals set forth above;
(b) The analysis, advice and recommendation of the Traffic
Advisory Committee;
(c) The Land Use Assumptions as adopted by the Board of
Supervisors;
(d) The Roadway Sufficiency Analysis as adopted by the Board of
Supervisors;
(e) The Transportation Capital Improvement Plan, as adopted by
the Board of Supervisors; and
(f) Such other conditions and standards as the Board of
Supervisors may, by resolution, identify from time to time as
being relevant and material to the imposition of an impact fee
and consistent with the provisions of the Act and any
amendments thereto.
137. Editor's Note: Ord. No. 432, adopted 5-22-2001, which added this section, provided that it
shall be retroactive to 1-18-2000, the date on which the Impact Fee Advisory Committee
was formed pursuant to Res. No. 1893. It also provided that impact fees may be imposed
on those projects involving developments, subdivisions and PRDs for which an application
has been filed on or after 2-1-2000, the first publication of notice of the Township's intent
to adopt this ordinance.
138. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10501-A.
§ 175-17.1 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-17.2
163:469
(2) The collection, distribution and accounting of impact fees shall be
administered by the office of the Township Manager or Secretary/
Treasurer, subject to review, oversight and control by the Board of
Supervisors.
(3) The time, method and procedure for payment of impact fees shall
be as set forth in this section.
(4) The procedure for credits against or refunds of impact fees shall be
as set forth in this section.
C. Definitions. The terms and definitions set forth in § 502-A of the Act139
are hereby adopted and incorporated in this section by reference.
D. Imposition. There is hereby enacted an impact fee to be imposed upon
new development for the purpose of off-site public transportation
capital improvements authorized by the Act and as described in the
program adopted by the Board of Supervisors. The impact fee shall
apply to all new developments or subdivisions within the transportation
service area identified herein and shall be a condition precedent to final
approval of a development or a subdivision plan or issuance of a
building permit.
E. Uses. Impact fees collected pursuant to this section shall be expended
for cost incurred for improvements attributable to new development
and designated in the Transportation Capital Improvement Plan
adopted by the Board of Supervisors in Resolution No. 1959 for
improvements within the transportation service area. Additionally, such
fees may be used for the acquisition of land and rights-of-way,
engineering, legal, planning costs and all other cost, including debt
service related to road improvements within the designated service
area, and including such proportionate amount of the Roadway
Sufficiency Analysis as is allowed under the provisions of the Act.
F. Documents adopted by the Board of Supervisors. The following
documents, previously adopted by the Board of Supervisors, are hereby
incorporated by reference in this section:
(1) Land Use Assumptions as adopted by Township resolution.
(2) Roadway Sufficiency Analysis as adopted by Township resolution.
(3) The Transportation Capital Improvement Plan as adopted by
Township resolution.
(4) The Impact Fee Schedule as adopted by Township resolution.
(5) Designation of Transportation Service Area as the entire Township
consisting of 6.11 square miles.
G. Special traffic studies.
139. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10502-A.
§ 175-17.2 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-17.2
163:470
(1) Where intended to assist in determining the appropriate amount of
traffic impact fees, the Township may require the preparation of
special transportation studies to determine the traffic generation
or circulation patterns in new nonresidential developments only;
provided, however, that no studies may be required where the
proposed development will not require a deviation from the land
use assumptions used to create the Plan.
(2) Any such studies required by the Township shall be submitted prior
to the imposition of the impact fee and shall be considered in the
determination of the fee.
H. Applicability of impact fee. This section shall be uniformly applicable to
all development that occurs within a designated service area.
I. Imposition of impact fee. No building permit shall be issued for a
development in a designated service area, as herein defined, unless the
applicant therefore has paid the impact fee imposed by and calculated
pursuant to this section.
J. Calculation of impact fees.
(1) The impact fee for transportation capital improvements shall be
based upon the total cost of the road improvements included in the
adopted Transportation Capital Improvement Plan within the
transportation service area attributable to and necessitated by new
development within the service area as defined, divided by the
number of anticipated peak-hour trips generated by all new
development within the service area as defined, divided by the
number of anticipated peak-hour trips generated by all new
development consistent with the adopted Land Use Assumptions
and calculated in accordance with the Trip Generation Manual
published by the Institute of Transportation Engineer, fourth or
subsequent editions, which is hereby adopted by the Township, to
equal a per-trip cost for transportation improvement within the
service area.
(2) The specific impact fee for a specific new development or
subdivision within the service area or road improvements shall be
determined as of the date of preliminary land development or
subdivision approval by multiplying the per-trip cost established for
the service as determined in the Transportation Capital
Improvement Plan by the estimated number of peak-hour trips to
be generated by the new development or subdivision using
generally accepted traffic engineering standards.
(3) The Board of Supervisors may authorize or require the preparation
of a special transportation study in order to determine traffic
generation or circulation for a new nonresidential development to
assist in the determination of the amount of the transportation fee
for such development or subdivision as required in § 175-17.1,
Transportation impact study.
§ 175-17.2 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-17.2
163:471
K. Establishment of transportation service areas.
(1) The transportation service areas shall be all of East Norriton
Township.
(2) Additional transportation district areas or combinations of
transportation district subareas may be designated by the Board of
Supervisors from time to time consistent with the procedure set
forth in this section and in consideration of the following factors:
(a) The Comprehensive Plan;
(b) Any standards for adequate public facilities incorporated in the
Plan;
(c) The projected buildout and timing of development areas;
(d) The need for and cost of unprogrammed transportation
improvements necessary to support projected development;
and
(e) Such other factors as the Board of Supervisors may deem
relevant.
L. Calculation of peak hour trip fee for transportation service area. The
amount of the per-peak-hour-trip fee for the Transportation Service
Area shall be $2,123 until and unless revised or amended in accordance
with the provisions hereof and the Act, calculated in accordance with
§§ 504-A(e)(1)(iv)(c) and 505-A(a)(1) of the Act.140 This fee was
calculated as follows: [Amended 8-28-2007 by Ord. No. 500]
(1) Total cost of road improvements included in the adopted
Transportation Capital Improvement Plan attributable to and
necessitated by new development within the Transportation
Service Area including 50% of the estimated cost of improvements
to highways, roads and streets qualifying as a state highway or
portion of the rural highway system as provided in § 102 of the
State Highway Law and also the assumption was made that 50% of
funding for county owned roads would come from other sources:
$4,368,007.
(2) Prorated share of costs of Roadway Sufficiency Analysis Report
pursuant to § 502-A(d)(5) of the Act (28% x $35,000 = $9,800).
$4,368,007
+ 9,800
$4,377,807
140. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10504-A(e)(1)(iv)(C) and 53 P.S. § 10505-A(a)(1), respectively.
§ 175-17.2 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-17.2
163:472
(3) Four million three hundred seventy-seven thousand eight hundred
seven dollars divided by 2062 total per peak hour trips = $2,123
per peak hour trip.
M. Projects not contained in the Transportation Capital Improvement Plan.
Any other provisions of this section to the contrary notwithstanding, in
accordance with the provisions of the Act, the Township may expend
transportation impact fees paid by an applicant on projects not
contained in the Transportation Capital Improvement Plan or may
provide credit against transportation impact fees for the value of any
construction projects not contained in the Transportation Capital
Improvement Plan which are performed at the applicant's expense if all
of the following criteria are met:
(1) The applicant has provided written consent for use of its collected
impact fees or provisions of such credit against the applicant's
impact fees for specific transportation projects which are not
included in the Transportation Capital Improvement Plan.
(2) The alternative transportation projects, whether highway or
multimodal, have as their purpose the reduction of traffic
congestion or the removal of vehicle trips from the roadway
network.
(3) The Township amends its Transportation Capital Improvement Plan
components required by § 504-A(e)(1)(vi) of the Act141 to provide
replacement of the collected impact fees transferred to
transportation projects outside the Transportation Capital
Improvement Plan from sources other than impact fees or
developers contributions within three years of completion of the
alternate projects to which the transferred fees were applied or for
which credit was provided. All interest earned on such funds shall
become funds of that account. The Township shall make an
accounting annually for any funds account containing impact fee
proceeds and earned interest. Such accounting shall include, but
not be limited to, the total funds collected, the source of the funds
collected, the total amount of interest accruing on such funds and
the amount of funds expended on specific transportation
improvements. Notice of the availability of the results of the
accounting shall be included and published as part of the annual
audit required of the Township. A copy of the report shall also be
provided to the Transportation Impact Fee Advisory Committee.
N. Nonbinding impact fee estimate. Prior to making an application for a
building permit, an applicant may request a nonbinding impact fee
estimate from the Township, which shall be based upon the maximum
development potential of the site pursuant to existing zoning
regulations, unless the applicant specifies a lesser use of development.
141. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10504-A(e)(1)(vi).
§ 175-17.2 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-17.2
163:473
O. Administration of impact fee.
(1) Collection of impact fee. Impact fees due pursuant to this section
shall be collected by the Township in the manner or manners
prescribed herein prior to the issuance of a building permit.
(2) Establishment of fund. Upon receipt of impact fees, the Township
Manager or Finance Director shall be responsible for the separate
and proper accounting of such fees. All such fees shall be deposited
in interest-bearing accounts in a bank authorized to receive
deposits of the Township funds. Interest earned by each account
shall be credited to that account and shall be used solely for the
purpose specified for funds of such account.
(3) Establishment and maintenance of accounts. The Township
Manager or Finance Director shall establish appropriate trust fund
accounts and shall maintain records whereby impact fees collected
can be segregated for each transportation district service area.
(4) Maintenance of records. The Township Manager or Finance
Director shall maintain and keep adequate financial records for
each such account which shall show the source and disbursement
of all revenues, which shall account for all moneys received, and
which shall ensure that the disbursement of funds from each
account shall be used solely and exclusively for the provision of
projects specified in the plan for the particular transportation
service area.
P. Method of payment. Payment of the transportation capital
improvements impact fee shall be made in cash, certified check or bank
check by the person seeking to build or develop.
Q. Credit. Any applicant who shall perform, at his own expense and with
the consent and agreement of the Board of Supervisors, off-site
improvements, as herein defined, shall be eligible for a credit from the
impact fee otherwise due in the amount of the actual cost of such offsite
improvements as defined below. Such credit shall not exceed the
amount of the impact fee.
(1) If the applicant makes such improvements, he must enter into an
agreement with the Board of Supervisors prior to the issuance of
any building permit. The agreement must establish the estimated
cost of the improvement, which shall be an amount equal to the
value of any road improvement construction which is contained in
the Transportation Capital Improvements Plan and which was
performed at the applicant's expense, the schedule for initiation
and completion of the improvement, a requirement that the
improvement be completed to Township and Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation standards and design criteria and
such other terms and conditions as deemed necessary by the Board
of Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors must review the
improvement plan, verify cost and time schedules, determine if the
§ 175-17.2 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-17.2
163:474
improvement is an eligible improvement and determine the amount
of the applicable credit for such improvement to be applied to the
otherwise applicable impact fee prior to issuance of any building
permit. In no event shall the Board of Supervisors provide a credit
which is greater than the applicable impact fee. If, however, the
amount of the credit is calculated to be greater than the amount
of the impact fee due, the applicant may use such excess credit
toward the impact fees imposed on other building permits for
development on the same site and in the same ownership.
(2) Any such applicant shall be required to supply financial security
sufficient, in the judgment of the Township, to cover the cost of any
such improvement installed by the applicant for which credit is
sought.
(3) An applicant shall be entitled to, as a credit against impact fees, an
amount equal to the fair market value of land dedicated by the
applicant and accepted by the Township for future right-of-way,
realignment or widening of existing roadways.
R. Refunds.
(1) Impact fees collected pursuant to this section shall be refunded,
together with interest earned thereon, to the payer of the fees
under the following circumstances:
(a) In the event the Township completes or terminates the capital
improvements plan and there remain undisbursed funds, the
respective payers shall be entitled to a share of the fund
balance in the same proportion as the payer's impact fee
payment plus interest earned bears to the total impact fees
collected plus interest.
(b) In the event any specific road improvement project is
completed at a cost to the Township of less than 95% of the
budgeted cost of the road project, the Township shall refund an
amount equal to the excess budgeted cost over actual cost to
the payers, pro rata, plus accumulated interest.
(c) In the event the Township fails to commence construction
within three years of the scheduled construction date of the
project as set forth in the Transportation Capital
Improvements Plan, the Township shall refund the portion of
the fee paid by a payer making written request therefor which
is attributable to said project, with accumulated interest,
provided that no refund shall be paid with respect to any
project actually begun prior to the receipt of such refund
request.
(d) In the event the development for which impact fees were paid
has not commenced prior to the expiration of the building
permit issued thereof, the impact fees paid with accumulated
§ 175-17.2 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-17.2
163:475
§ 175-18. Streets.
All new streets and culs-de-sac and widened portions of all existing rightsof-
way, intended for public use, including but not limited to state and county
roadways, shall be dedicated to the Township or other governmental body
having jurisdiction at the time of dedication, subject to final acceptance
based on compliance with the following requirements and § 175-52 of this
chapter.
interest shall be refunded to the payer. Further, if a building
permit after issuance is altered in such a way as to reduce
the indicated impact fee, the difference between the amount
indicated and the amount actually paid shall be refunded. The
payer, at his option, may roll over the impact fees attributable
to an expired building permit to cover fees incurred by a
renewal of said expired permit.
(2) With respect to refunds arising out of Subsection R(1)(a) or (b)
hereof, any funds unclaimed within one year after notice as
required by law shall be transferred to the general account of the
Township, and the payer's entitlement to said refund shall lapse. It
is the responsibility of the payer to provide the Township with the
current address of his place of business.
S. Effect of impact fee on zoning and subdivision/land development
regulations. This section shall not affect, in any manner, the permissible
use of property, density of development, previously adopted design and
improvement standards and requirements or any other aspect of the
development of land or provision of public improvements which remain
subject to applicable zoning and subdivision/land development
regulations of the Township, which shall be operative and remain in full
force and effect without limitation with respect to all such development.
T. Impact fee as additional and supplemental requirement. The impact fee
is additional and supplemental to and not in substitution of any other
requirements imposed by the Township on the development of land or
the issuance of building permits. Nothing herein contained shall be
deemed to alter or affect the Township's existing ordinances and
regulations regarding on-site improvements. In no event shall a
property owner be obligated to pay for transportation capital
improvements in an amount in excess of the amount calculated
pursuant to this section; provided, however, that a property owner may
be required to pay, pursuant to Township ordinances, regulations or
policies, for other public facilities in addition to the impact fee for
transportation improvements as provided herein.
U. Liberal construction. The provisions of this section shall be liberally
construed to effectively carry out its purposes which are hereby found
and declared to be in furtherance of the public health, safety, welfare
and convenience.
§ 175-17.2 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-18
163:476
A. Street system.
(1) Conformance with adopted plans. The proposed street pattern shall
be properly regulated to existing streets, to the Township Plan of
Streets and to such county and state road and highway plans as
have been duly adopted by the appropriate agency.
(2) Arrangement. Streets shall be arranged in a manner to meet with
the approval of the Board, considered in relation to both existing
and planned streets and located so as to allow proper development
of surrounding properties. Secondary and through highways shall
be connected with such existing streets and highways so as to form
continuations thereof. Residential streets shall be laid out to
discourage their use as secondary streets or through highways.
(3) Conformity with topography. Streets shall be adjusted to the
contour of the land so as to produce usable lots and streets of
reasonable grade, alignment and drainage.
(4) Grading. The street shall be graded to the full width of the right-ofway
and provision made for slopes beyond the right-of-way in
conformance with Township specifications.
(5) Provisions of streets for future development. Access shall be given
to all lots and portions of the tract in the subdivision and to
adjacent unsubdivided territory. Streets giving such access shall be
improved to the limits of the subdivision. Remnants, reserve strips
and landlocked areas shall not be created.
(6) New streets. New streets shall be laid out to continue existing
streets at equal or greater right-of-way and cartway width, where
such continuations are reasonable and practical.
(7) Dead-end streets. Dead-end streets are prohibited, unless designed
as culs-de-sac or designed for access exclusively to neighboring
tracts.
(8) Street names. Continuations of existing streets shall be known by
the same name. Names for new streets shall not duplicate or
closely resemble names of existing streets. All street names are
subject to the approval of the Board.
(9) Half streets. The dedication of half streets at the edges of a new
subdivision is prohibited. If circumstances render this
impracticable, adequate provision for the concurrent dedication of
the remaining half of the street must be furnished by the
subdivider, developer or builder. When there exists a half street in
an adjoining subdivision, the remaining half shall be provided by
the proposed development.
B. Street alignment.
§ 175-18 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-18
163:477
(1) Sight distance on horizontal and vertical curves. Proper sight
distance should be provided with respect to both horizontal and
vertical alignments. Measured along the center line, this should be
500 feet for major roads, 300 feet for secondary roads and 200 feet
for local residential streets, measured at the center line and at
driver's eye height of five feet.
(2) Horizontal curves shall be used at all changes in excess of 2°. Long
radius curves shall be used rather than a series of curves
connected by short tangents. Minimum radius curves at the end of
long tangents will not be approved.
(a) Curvature. The minimum radius at the center line for
horizontal curves on major streets shall be 300 feet; for
secondary streets, 200 feet; and for rural or residential streets,
150 feet.
(b) Tangents between curves. Except for local streets, there shall
be a tangent of at least 100 feet measured at the center line
between reverse curves.
(3) Vertical curves. Vertical curves shall be used at changes in grade of
more than 1%. The length of the curve shall approximate 50 feet on
secondary streets and 25 feet on residential streets for each 1% of
change in grade. Over summits or in sumps, vertical curves shall
not produce excessive flatness in grade. The high or low point on a
vertical curve must be definitely and clearly shown.
(4) Street grades.
(a) There shall be a minimum grade of at least 1% on all streets.
(b) Maximum grades. There shall be a maximum grade of 7% on
major and secondary streets and 10% on residential streets for
distances of not more than 1,500 feet. However, grades in
excess of 5% shall be avoided wherever possible. The grade
shall be measured along the center line.
(c) Curve-grade combinations. A combination of minimum radius
horizontal curves and maximum grades will not be approved.
(d) Street intersections. The grade within 50 feet of any side of an
intersection or the outer perimeter of a cul-de-sac shall not
exceed 3%. The grade will be measured along the curbline of
the street.
(e) Street grading. All streets shall be graded to the grades shown
on the street profile and cross-section plan submitted and
approved with the preliminary plan of subdivision and land
development. They shall be inspected and checked for
accuracy by the Township Engineer.
C. Right-of-way width, paving width and curbing.
§ 175-18 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-18
163:478
(1) Classification. All streets will be classified as residential,
secondary, major or cul-de-sac and shall be governed as follows:
(a) Residential streets shall be those which are used strictly to
serve residential areas and do not serve as through streets in a
development. They shall have a minimum right-of-way width of
50 feet and shall have a minimum paved width of 30 feet.
Construction of the street, curbing and sidewalk shall be in
accordance with specifications hereinafter included in these
standards.
(b) Secondary streets shall be defined in two ways:
[1] Secondary feeder streets shall be those which are used as
connecting and through streets to serve residential areas
and to connect residential streets to collector roads and
community facilities with light traffic volumes. They shall
have a minimum right-of-way of 60 feet and shall have a
minimum paved width of 36 feet. Curbing and/or sidewalk
shall be provided as required. Construction of the street
curbing and sidewalk shall be in accordance with
specifications hereinafter included in the standards.
[2] A secondary collector street shall serve to connect feeder
streets and residential streets to other feeder roads,
community facilities and major highways with medium
traffic volume. Additionally, collector streets may also
serve business or industrial areas. They shall have a
minimum right-of-way width of 80 feet and shall have a
minimum paved width of 40 feet. The construction of the
street, curbing and sidewalk shall conform to construction
specifications hereinafter included in these standards.
(c) Major streets connect district centers or communities serving
large volumes of fast-moving through traffic. They shall have a
minimum right-of-way of 100 feet and shall have a minimum
paved width of 52 feet. The street must be provided with
curbing. Construction of the street curbing and sidewalk shall
be in accordance with specifications included hereinafter in
these standards.
(d) Cul-de-sac streets shall be those residential streets with one
end open for vehicular access and the other end terminating in
a vehicular turnaround. The circular turnaround of all culs-desac
shall be constructed with the curvature starting at a
tangent point on the right-hand side of the roadway and with
the arc curving to the left.
[1] A cul-de-sac will not be approved when a through street is
practicable.
[2] A cul-de-sac shall not be more than 500 feet in length.
§ 175-18 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-18
163:479
[3] A cul-de-sac must be a side street and not be the
permanent culmination of another street to form a fourway
intersection.
[4] A cul-de-sac shall have a right-of-way of 50 feet and shall
have a circular turnaround with a minimum right-of-way
radius of 50 feet and an outer paving radius of 40 feet.
[5] A cul-de-sac permanently terminated will not be approved
when a through street is practicable. The subdivider shall
have the burden of showing the impracticability of the
through street in order to justify a cul-de-sac.
[6] A cul-de-sac permanently or temporarily exceeding 500
feet in length may be approved by the Board if conditions
of the land so warrant.
[7] Where it is proposed that a road be constructed to an
abutting property line with the intention that such a road
will be extended onto the adjoining property at a future
date, the temporarily terminated cul-de-sac shall be
constructed the same as one permanently terminated,
including the right-of-way width. Construction of the street
curbing and sidewalk shall be in accordance with
specifications hereinafter included in these standards.
(2) Street width. The minimum widths of the right-of-way and the
paving and the requirements for curbing shall not be less than
those of an existing street of which the new street is to be a
continuation nor less than the following:
Type of Street
Right-of-
Way Width
(feet)
Paving Width
(feet) Curbing
Major 100 52 (or more as
may be
required)
As may be
required
Secondary
collector
80 40 As may be
required
Secondary
feeder
60 36 As may be
required
Residential 50 30 Required
Cul-de-sac 50 30 Required
§ 175-18 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-18
163:480
NOTE: Where the subdivision fronts on an existing street, the
existing paved portion shall be extended to the required curbline.
Construction of any such widening shall be as directed by the
Township Engineer.
(a) The minimum right-of-way width for development along
existing streets will correspond with the ultimate right-of-way
for these streets.
(b) Islands and medial strips may be permitted in streets
immediately adjacent and in commercial zones. However, no
circles or circular segments shall be permitted on any street.
(c) Additional width requirements.
[1] Additional widths may be required by the Township:
[a] Where necessary for public safety and convenience.
[b] For parking in commercial or industrial areas.
[c] Where old roads do not provide the proper width, and
additional dedication is necessary.
[2] No fences, hedges, trees, shrubbery, walls, plantings or
other obstructions shall be located or permitted within the
right-of-way.
D. Street paving. All street paving must conform to the specifications
incorporated in this section of the standards and be approved by the
Township Engineer prior to acceptance by the Board. All grades,
horizontal curves intersections, sight distances and tangents shall
conform to the requirements established by this chapter and shall be
subject to the approval of the Township Engineer.
(1) Subgrade.
(a) The bottom of the excavation and the top of the fill between the
outer limits of the paving or base course, when completed, will
be known as the "subgrade" and shall conform to the lines,
grade and cross sections given. The subgrade for macadam
paving shall conform to the established line, grade and cross
section as approved by the Board. The subgrade shall be solidly
compacted to a firm and unyielding state by rolling with a
minimum of a ten-ton power roller. Unstable areas shall be
removed and replaced with suitable fill and then rerolled as
required to provide a uniform even surface.
(b) After the excavation or rough grading has been performed and
all drains have been constructed, the subgrade will be fine
graded and shaped to the proper cross section. It shall be
brought to a firm unyielding surface by rolling the entire area
with an approved three-wheel power roller having a metal
§ 175-18 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-18
163:481
weight of not less than 10 tons. Solid rock, boulders, soft
clay and all spongy materials which will not consolidate under
the roller shall be removed from the subgrade to a depth
to be determined by the Township Engineer or other person
designated by the Board. The space shall be filled with suitable
material from the excavation and the subgrade rerolled until
it presents a smooth and firm surface of the proper shape and
cross section. Crown board and straight edge shall be used
for checking road and street construction. Maximum deviation
shall not exceed 1/4 inch.
(2) Shoulder.
(a) Supporting shoulder shall be constructed on all sections of
projects where a base course or pavement is to be constructed
without other permanent support along the sides. All shoulder
shall be thoroughly compacted and graded to provide drainage
from the macadam surface.
(b) Where concrete curbing is not to be constructed, shoulders are
to be constructed adjacent to the paving of the proposed road.
The width and type of construction, grade and construction
methods of these shoulders is to be determined by or must
meet the approval of the Township Engineer or other person
designated by the Board.
(3) Paving base course. The base course shall be bituminous concrete
base course.
(a) Bituminous concrete base course. Bituminous concrete base
course shall have a compressed thickness after compaction of
six inches, except in the case of roadway construction in the
Industrial or Limited Industrial Zoning Districts, where the
bituminous concrete base course shall have a compressed
thickness after compaction of eight inches and shall be
constructed in two four-inch layers. In all cases, the bituminous
concrete base course shall be constructed on a four-inch layer
of compacted 2A modified stone. The bituminous concrete base
course shall conform to the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation Specifications Form 408, latest edition.
(b) Materials. Materials meeting the requirements as specified in
Section 305.2 of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation Specifications Form 408, latest edition, shall be
used.
(4) Bituminous surface course ID-2. This surface course shall consist of
two courses, the binder course and the wearing course, of hotmixed,
hot-laid asphaltic concrete, constructed on a prepared base
course. The bituminous surface course shall have a total thickness
after final compaction of not less than 3 1/2 inches. The binder
course shall have a minimum thickness after compaction of two
§ 175-18 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-18
163:482
inches. The wearing course shall have a minimum thickness after
compaction of 1 1/2 inches. All street pavement cross sections,
except where superelevated for curves, will be a minimum slope
from the center of the road to the gutter of 1/4 inch per foot to a
maximum of 1/2 inch per foot.
(a) Materials. The materials for the bituminous wearing course
and the bituminous binder course shall conform to the
requirements as given in Sections 420 and 421, respectively, of
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Specifications
Form 408, latest edition.
(b) Construction methods. The bituminous binder and bituminous
wearing course shall be Type ID-2 as specified in Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Specifications Form 408, latest
edition, and shall be applied in strict accordance therewith. No
visible moisture shall be present prior to the laying of each
course. Road surface temperature shall be 50° F. or greater
prior to laying of a bituminous surface. The air temperature
shall be 40° F. or greater with the temperature rising. All
bituminous surface courses shall have a total thickness after
compression of 3 1/2 inches minimum. All edges shall be kept
straight and sharp forming a clean-cut line between finished
road and gravel shoulder where shoulder construction is used.
(c) East Norriton Township will require delivery slips for all
materials used in the construction of streets.
E. Street intersections.
(1) Number of intersections. No more than two streets shall cross at
the same point. Four-way intersections are to be avoided in the
layout when three-way or T-intersections can be utilized. When
existing streets intersect at odd angles or have more than four
approaches, the subdivider, developer or builder shall be required
to make corrective changes to eliminate the odd angle or reduce
the number of approaches to the intersection by curving the lesser
street.
(2) Minimum angle of intersection. Right-angle intersections shall be
used whenever practicable, especially when local streets empty
into major or secondary streets. There shall be no intersection
angle, measured at the center line, of less than 60° minimum.
(3) Center lines. Where center lines of residential or secondary streets
open into opposite sides of a major street within 100 feet of each
other, they shall be made to coincide by curving the minor street or
streets.
(4) Primary thoroughfares. Wherever practicable, intersections with
through highways shall be kept to a minimum and shall be located
at least 1,200 feet apart.
§ 175-18 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-18
163:483
§ 175-19. Alleys, driveways and parking areas.
(5) Sight distance. Proper sight lines, as provided in § 175-18B(1) of
this chapter, shall be maintained at all intersections of streets.
There shall be measured along the center line a minimum clear
sight triangle of 75 feet from the point of intersection. No building,
trees, hedge, shrubbery or other obstruction whatsoever will be
permitted in this area. Any obstruction to sight shall be removed at
the time the street is graded or at the time a building or structure is
erected, whichever shall first occur.
(6) Maximum grade. Maximum grade within any intersection shall not
exceed 1%, and approaches to an intersection shall follow a
straight horizontal course for 100 feet.
(7) Approach grades. All approaches to an intersection shall not
exceed 3% for a distance of 50 feet measured from the nearest
right-of-way line of the intersecting street.
(8) Radii of pavement and right-of-way at intersections. Street
intersections shall be rounded with tangential arcs at the pavement
edge (curbline) and right-of-way lines as listed below. Where two
streets of different right-of-way widths intersect, the radii of
curvature for the widest street shall apply.
Type of Street
Minimum Radius
of Arc at
Intersection of
Pavement Edge
or Curbline
(feet)
Minimum Radius of
Arc at Intersection of
Right-of-Way Line
(feet)
Major 40 (or more as may
be required)
20 (or more as may be
required)
Secondary 30 20
Residential 25 15
Cul-de-sac 25 15
A. General provisions. All alleys, driveways and parking areas shall be
constructed in accordance with the following provisions:
(1) Paving.
(a) All driveways for single-family units must use the following
minimum standards:
[1] A crushed aggregate base course shall be installed to a
compacted depth of six inches.
[2] A bituminous concrete binder course (ID-2) to a
compacted depth of one inch.
§ 175-18 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-19
163:484
[3] A bituminous wearing course (ID-2) to a compacted depth
of one inch.
(b) Alleys, driveways and parking areas for uses other than singlefamily
units must use the following minimum standards:
[1] A crushed aggregate base course should be compacted to
a depth of eight inches. The base course shall be choked at
both the top and the bottom with fines.
[2] A bituminous concrete base course (ID-2) to a compacted
depth of two inches. A bituminastic tack coat shall be
applied to the binder course prior to the final paving.
[3] A bituminous wearing course (ID-2) to a compacted depth
of one inch.
(2) Intersections of right-of-way lines shall be rounded by a tangential
arc, the minimum radius of which shall be 10 feet; and the edge of
the paving at intersections shall be rounded by a tangential arc, the
minimum radius of which shall be 15 feet.
(3) Obstructions. No fences, hedges, trees, shrubbery, walls, plantings
or other obstructions shall be located within the right-of-way. Sight
distance requirements as provided in Article V, § 175-18E(5) of this
chapter shall be provided at intersections with streets.
B. Driveways.
(1) Location. Except for common or shared driveways, all driveways to
single-family lots shall be located at least five feet from any side or
rear property lot line. All driveways shall be designed and
constructed to provide sight distance in accordance with the
following minimum sight distance diagram charts:
(a) Table 1. Safe sight distance for passenger cars and single-unit
trucks exiting from driveways onto two-lane roads shall be as
follows:
Posted
Speed
(mph)
Safe Sight
Distance, Left*
(feet)
Safe Sight Distance,
Right*
(feet)
25 250 195
35 440 350
45 635 570
55 845 875
*NOTE: Measured from a vehicle 10 feet back from the
pavement edge.
§ 175-19 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-19
163:485
(b) Table 2. Safe sight distance for buses and combinations exiting
from driveways onto two-lane roads shall be as follows:
Posted
Speed
(mph)
Safe Sight
Distance, Left*
(feet)
Safe Sight
Distance, Right*
(feet)
25 400 300
35 675 625
45 1,225 1,225
55 2,050 2,050
*NOTE: Measured from a vehicle 10 feet back from the
pavement edge.
(c) Table 3. Safe sight distance for passenger cars and single-unit
trucks exiting from driveways onto four- and six-lane roads
shall be as follows:
Posted
Speed
(mph)
Safe Sight
Distance,
Left*
(feet)
Safe Sight Distance,
Right**
(feet)
25 175 195
35 300 350
45 500 570
55 785 875
NOTES:
* Measured from a vehicle 10 feet back from the pavement
edge to a vehicle approaching in the outside lane.
** Measured from a vehicle 10 feet back from the pavement
edge to a vehicle approaching in the median lane.
(d) Table 4. Safe sight distance for buses and combinations exiting
from driveways onto four- and six-lane roads shall be as
follows:
Posted
Speed
(mph)
Safe Sight
Distance, Left*
(feet)
Safe Sight
Distance, Right**
(feet)
25 300 300
35 625 625
45 1,225 1,225
§ 175-19 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-19
163:486
Posted
Speed
(mph)
Safe Sight
Distance, Left*
(feet)
Safe Sight
Distance, Right**
(feet)
55 2,050 2,050
NOTES:
* Measured from a vehicle 10 feet back from the pavement
edge to a vehicle approaching in the outside lane.
** Measured from a vehicle 10 feet back from the pavement
edge to a vehicle approaching in the median lane.
(e) Table 5. Safe sight distance for passenger cars and single-unit
trucks entering driveways by left turns shall be as follows:
Safe Distance*
(feet)
Posted
Speed
(mph)
Two-Lane
Roads
Four-Lane
Roads
Six-Lane
Roads
25 190 205 220
35 300 320 345
45 445 470 500
55 610 645 680
*NOTE: Measured from the point where a left-turning vehicle
stops to the vehicle in the outside lane.
(f) Table 6. Safe sight distance for buses and combinations
entering driveways by left turns shall be as follows:
Safe Distance*
(feet)
Posted
Speed
(mph)
Two-Lane
Roads
Four-Lane
Roads
Six-Lane
Roads
25 330 360 390
35 485 530 575
45 690 750 810
55 905 990 1,075
§ 175-19 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-19
163:487
*NOTE: Measured from the point where a left-turning vehicle
stops to a vehicle in the outside lane.
(g) In using Tables 1 through 6, the following additional
requirements shall apply:
[1] Tables 2, 4 and 6 shall be used in lieu of Tables 1, 3 and 5
only when combination traffic exceeds 5.0% of the total
traffic using the proposed driveway.
[2] Posted speeds shall be used unless operating speeds vary
from the posted speed by more than 10 miles per hour, in
which case the Township may require that operating
speeds be used.
[3] The sight distances in Tables 1 through 4 apply only when
highway grades are 0% to 3.0%, either up or down.
[a] When the highway grade in the section to be used for
acceleration, after leaving the driveway, ascends at
3.0% to 5.0%, the sight distance in the direction of
approaching ascending traffic may be increased by a
factor of 1.4.
[b] When the highway grade ascends at greater than
5.0%, the sight distance may be increased by a factor
of 1.7.
[c] When the highway grade in the section to be used for
acceleration after leaving the driveway descends at
3.0% to 5.0%, the sight distance in the direction of
approaching descending highway traffic may be
reduced by a factor of 0.6.
[d] When the road descends at greater than 5.0%, the
sight distance may be reduced by a factor of 0.5.
[4] The sight distance values in Tables 1 through 6 are
desirable for the safe operation of the driveway. Sight
distance values less than desirable will be accepted only if
it is impossible to achieve the desirable value by locating
the driveway at any point within the property frontage
boundaries. The minimum acceptable sight distance
values shall be computed from the following formula:
§ 175-19 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-19
163:488
SSSD = Minimum safe stopping sight distance
(feet)
V Velocity of vehicle (miles per hour)
T = Perception time of motorist (average = 2.5
seconds)
f = Wet friction of pavement (average = 0.30)
g = Percent grade of roadway divided by 100
(h) If sight distance requirements as specified in this chapter
cannot be met, the Township may:
[1] Prohibit left turns by exiting vehicles;
[2] Restrict turning movements to right turns in and out of a
driveway;
[3] Require the installation of a right-turn acceleration lane or
deceleration lane;
[4] Require the installation of a separate left-run standby lane;
[5] Alter the horizontal or vertical geometry of the roadway;
or
[6] Deny access to the highway.
(i) Grade of access driveway. The grade of the access driveway
shall be constructed in the following manner:
[1] All driveways shall be constructed so as not to impair
drainage within the right-of-way, alter the stability of the
improved area or change the drainage of adjacent areas.
[2] Where a drainage ditch or swale exists, the permittee shall
install adequate pipe under the driveway in accordance
with Form 408. Drainage pipe installed under driveways
shall be at least 15 inches in diameter.
[3] The side slopes for driveway embankments within the
right-of-way shall not be steeper than 10 to 1. See Figure
6.142
[4] Grade requirements in uncurbed shoulders within the
right-of-way shall conform to Figure 1.143
(2) Intersections. Driveways shall be located not less than 40 feet from
the street intersection and shall provide access to the street of a
lesser classification when there are streets of different classes
involved.
142. Editor's Note: Figure 6 appears in Subsection B(1)(f) above.
143. Editor's Note: Figure 1 appears in Subsection B(1)(a) above.
§ 175-19 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-19
163:489
(3) Pavement widths and grade. Driveway paving widths and grades
shall be as follows:
Land Use
Minimum
Paving
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Paving
Width at
Entrance
(feet)
Minimum
Radius
at Curb
(feet)
Maximum
Grade
(percent)
Maximum
of
Grade
per 10
Feet
(percent)
Singlefamily
residential
10 18 5 8 10
Multifamily
residential
12
(1-way)
15
(1-way)
10 8 10
24
(2-way)
30
(2-way)
10 8 10
Commercial
and
industrial
12
(1-way)
15
(1-way)
15 5 7
24 (2-way) 30
(2-way)
15 5 7
(4) All driveways shall be located, designed and constructed in such a
manner as not to interfere or be inconsistent with the design,
maintenance and drainage of the highway.
(5) Access driveways should be located in such a manner that they will
not cause the following:
(a) Interference to the traveling public.
(b) A hazard to the free movement of normal highway traffic.
(c) Areas of undue traffic congestion on the highway.
(6) All frontages of 200 feet or less shall be limited to one driveway. For
multifamily residential and all nonresidential driveways, not more
than two driveways shall be permitted for any single property or
business establishment except where the frontage exceeds 300 feet
in length on any one street. Exceptions to the above may be
considered if the applicant demonstrates that there is a clear need
for additional points of access and the additional driveway will not
compromise the safe and free movement of traffic within the
property or on adjacent streets.
C. Driveways for land developments.
(1) The Board shall have the authority to approve driveways intended
for the use of two or more families, apartment developments and/or
commercial and industrial projects where usage by the occupants
§ 175-19 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-19
163:490
constitutes essentially a private street. Driveways constituting
private streets are those accessways used by two or more families
daily or 10 or more workers daily for vehicular circulation.
Driveways serving as private streets shall not be dedicated to the
Township, nor does the Township assume the responsibility for
their maintenance.
(2) Construction of driveways to be used as private streets shall
conform to minimum design standards for public streets, other
than those applicable to rights-of-way, width, curbing and shoulder
grading; provided, however, that the width of the cartway shall not
be, in any event, less than 24 feet.
(3) Location and placement of driveways serving as private streets
shall comply with Subsection B, Driveways. Additionally, provisions
for drainage and stormwater runoff shall be approved by the
Township Engineer.
(4) The owner, and all successors, of any property which is to abut any
driveway serving as a private street shall be fully responsible for
the permanent improvement of the driveway(s) and for the
maintenance thereof in a good and safe condition.
(5) The Board shall evaluate the location, placement and alignment of
driveways serving as private streets based upon the ease of
accessibility to and efficient maneuverability through the
development for protective services of fire and police.
(6) Individual lots or buildings which constitute a portion of an overall
shopping center or industrial development or subdivision shall not
have direct driveway access onto any existing public street but
rather must have access to the interior driveway system of the
shopping center development or the industrial development or
must have access to an interior street to be created at the time of
subdivision and/or land development.
D. Parking area construction.
(1) Automobile parking facilities shall be provided off street in
accordance with requirements of Chapter 205, Zoning, and this
chapter.
(2) Neither angle nor perpendicular parking along the curbs of local,
public or private access roads or streets shall be permitted, except
in the case of a CR Residential District, where off-street parking is
permitted in accordance with the provisions of that article.144 All
parking lots and bays allowing any parking other than parallel shall
be physically separated from the cartway by a minimum of seven
feet and confined by barrier curbing.
144. Editor's Note: See Art. VIII of Ch. 205, Zoning.
§ 175-19 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-19
163:491
(3) (Reserved)
(4) No less than 12 feet of open space shall be provided between the
curbline of any parking area and the outside wall of any structure.
[Amended 12-12-2017 by Ord. No. 575]
(5) Parking may be permitted within side and/or rear yards when the
side and/or rear yards abut a district zoned industrial and/or
commercial. However, no parking shall be permitted within five
feet of a side or rear property line unless formal arrangements,
satisfactory to the Township, have been made for the establishment
of common parking facilities.
(6) In commercial and industrial districts, provisions for common
parking facilities are hereby encouraged in recognition of their
increased flexibility and efficiency. Subject to formal arrangements
between the proposed users of the common parking facilities,
satisfactory to the Township, the Zoning Hearing Board may reduce
the aggregate amount of required space upon determination that
greater efficiency is effected by joint use of the common parking
area. When common parking facilities are approved, side and/or
rear yard parking requirements may be waived in order to establish
unified and continuous parking areas. In such cases, access drives
and sidewalks shall be so aligned as to maximize parking efficiency
and minimize traffic congestion. Entrances and exits must have
good visibility so that, both going in and coming out, drivers can
see and cars can be seen.
(7) Parking: [Amended 2-28-2017 by Ord. No. 571]
(a) Nonresidential: Parking stall dimensions shall be not less than
nine feet in width and 18 feet in depth and shall be marked and
striped.
(b) Residential parking stalls shall consist of a reasonably level
space available for parking of one motor vehicle, not less than
10 feet wide and having an area of not less than 200 square
feet exclusive of passageways, driveways or other means of
circulation or access. The area of each parking space shall be
computed net of any required street line or, in the case of a
private street without a designated right-of-way, shall be
calculated net of an assumed street line established seven feet
behind the edge of the cartway or face of curb.
(8) (Reserved)
(9) All dead-end parking lots shall be designed to provide sufficient
backup area for the end stalls.
(10)No less than a five-foot radius of curvature shall be permitted for
all curblines in all parking areas.
§ 175-19 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-19
163:492
(11) Parking lot dimensions shall be no less than those listed in the
following table:
Parking Stall Aisle Width
Angle of
Parking
(degrees)
Depth
(feet)
Width
(feet)
1-way
(feet)
2-way
(feet)
90 18 9 25 25
60 21 10 18 20
45 19 10 15 18
(12)No more than 15 parking spaces shall be permitted in a continuous
row without being interrupted by a ten-foot-wide landscape island.
This island shall be planted with either shrubs or appropriate
buffer planting.
(13) All dead-end parking areas shall be designed to provide sufficient
area for vehicles to back up out of parking within the end stalls of
the parking area.
(14) All public parking areas shall be well-lighted during the after-dark
operating hours. All light standards shall be located on the raised
parking islands on pedestals and not on the parking surface.
(15) All artificial lighting used to illuminate any parking space or spaces
shall be arranged so that direct glare from any such light shall not
fall upon any neighboring property or streets, nor shall any highbrightness
surface of the luminaries be visible from neighboring
residential properties or from any public street.
E. Parking area landscaping. Parking lot landscaping required by this
article is intended to promote the public health, safety and welfare by
providing minimum requirements for installation of landscaped areas in
connection with parking lots and other vehicular use areas; to protect
the character and stability of residential, business, institutional and
industrial areas; and to conserve the value of land and buildings on
surrounding properties.
(1) All parking lots with 10 or more stalls shall provide at least 10% of
the internal area as planting islands or planting strips.
(2) Planting islands shall be provided at least every 15 adjacent
parking stalls.
(a) At least one canopy tree shall be planted in each required
planting island.
(b) The end of all parking rows shall be divided from drives by
planting islands.
§ 175-19 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-19
163:493
§ 175-20. Sidewalks and curbs.
(c) Islands shall be uniformly elevated with topsoil so that the
center shall be crowned at least six inches above the adjoining
top of curb elevation.
(3) Planting strips shall divide large parking lots into smaller areas
according to the following:
(a) Planting strips shall divide nonresidential parking lots into
areas of no more than 100 stalls.
(b) Planting strips shall divide residential parking lots into areas of
no more than 36 stalls.
(c) There shall be at least one canopy tree planted every 50 feet in
planting strips.
(4) Plant material shall not obstruct proper lighting, nor interfere with
clear sight triangles.
(5) Perimeters of parking lots shall follow the landscape regulations for
site element screens.
F. Alleys. Alleys are prohibited in residential developments, except as the
completion extension of one in existence. In commercial or industrial
districts without expressly designated loading areas, alleys with a
minimum width of 25 feet shall be required. Where such alleys deadend,
they shall be provided with a turnaround having a radius of not
less than 25 feet. The cartway shall be a minimum of 20 feet.
A. Sidewalks.
(1) Where required. Sidewalks shall be provided along all streets
except where, in the opinion of the Board, they are unnecessary for
the public safety and convenience.
(2) Width and thickness. Sidewalks shall not be less than four feet in
width in residential areas. A greater width may be required in areas
in which apartments or business buildings are located or as
deemed necessary at the discretion of the Board.
(3) Sidewalks shall be located between the curb and right-of-way line
five feet from the curbline. The grade and paving of the sidewalk
shall be continuous across driveways, except in certain cases
where heavy traffic volume dictates special treatment.
(4) Construction methods.
(a) Sidewalks shall be constructed so as to discharge drainage to
the street, the grade of which shall not be less than 1/4 inch
per foot. The finished grade between the outside of the
§ 175-19 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-20
163:494
sidewalk to the curbline (edge of the cartway) shall never
exceed a total vertical elevation change of one foot.
(b) Sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete to a width as
indicated for the various classifications of the street.
(c) Concrete used in sidewalk work shall be 3,300 pounds per
square inch at 28 days with certification of the mix furnished to
the Township Engineer. Concrete shall be placed in forms that
are straight and securely braced. Care shall be taken to control
the water content to prevent a separation of the aggregates.
The concrete shall have a broom finish, and the edges shall be
finished with an approved edging tool.
(d) All concrete sidewalks shall be constructed on a four-inch
crushed-stone or gravel base to ensure proper drainage. The
concrete shall be placed so that there is a separate joint every
five feet and shall be so constructed so that the five-foot
sections are completely separated from adjacent sections. Onehalf-
inch premolded expansion joints shall be placed every 20
feet and between all points where the concrete sidewalk abuts
a concrete curb.
(e) All concrete sidewalks shall have a minimum thickness of four
inches, except under driveways, where they shall have a
minimum thickness of six inches. The concrete apron in the
driveway area shall be reinforced with wire six inches by six
inches, No. 9 wire (minimum). Two layers of this wire shall be
utilized, with a minimum of two-inch spacing between layers.
The wire shall be installed so that it is not closer than 1/2 inch
from the top or bottom surfaces of the driveway.
(5) Where a sidewalk does not parallel a street, it may be constructed
of materials other than concrete, such as a pozzolan base with a
bituminous wearing surface, a bituminous base with a bituminous
wearing surface, flagstone or any similar type of material;
provided, however, that specifications for such materials must be
submitted to the Engineer for his review and be subject to his
approval.
B. Curbs.
(1) Concrete curbs shall be installed along each side of every
residential, secondary or commercial street or road. Concrete
curbs shall be 18 inches deep, seven inches wide at the top and
eight inches wide at the base. The nominal distance from the top of
the curb to the flow line of the gutter shall be eight inches on
secondary, commercial, primary and residential streets. Curbing
shall be built in ten-foot lengths, and an approved expansion joint
of one-fourth-inch minimum thickness shall be used at each joint. A
combination curb and gutter may be used at the option of the
developer when approved by the Township Engineer. Where
§ 175-20 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-20
163:495
combination curb and gutter is used, it must be placed on a
minimum of four inches of crushed stone or gravel to provide
adequate drainage beneath the curb.
(2) All concrete used in the construction of improvements shall be
certified to develop a compressive stress of at least 3,300 pounds
per square inch at 28 days with certification of the mix furnished to
the Township Engineer.
(3) Concrete shall be placed in forms that are straight and securely
braced. Care shall be taken to control the water content to prevent
separation of the aggregates. All concrete shall be thoroughly
tamped into the forms. After the concrete has set sufficiently, the
form shall be removed and the exposed surface shall be rubbed to
provide an even finish. All edges shall be finished with an approved
edging tool. To provide for driveways, depressions in the curbing
may be constructed and finished during the time of pouring.
C. Handicap requirements. In all areas where sidewalks are required,
handicap ramps will be provided wherever an accessible route crosses
a curb subject to the following requirements:
(1) The least possible slope shall be used with a maximum slope of
1:12. In areas where space limitations prohibit the use of the oneto-
twelve ramp, the following slopes are acceptable:
(a) Maximum rise of six inches: slope of 1:10 to 1:12.
(b) Maximum rise of three inches: slope of 1:8 to 1:10.
(c) Slopes greater than 1:8 are prohibited.
(2) Transitions shall be flush and free of abrupt changes.
(3) The maximum slope of adjacent surfaces shall be one-to-twenty.
(4) The minimum clear width shall be 36 inches.
(5) The surface must be firm, stable and slip-resistant.
(6) In all areas where pedestrians may walk across the ramp, the sides
of the ramp shall be flared, with a maximum slope of 1:10.
(7) If the width of the walking surface at the top of the ramp is less
than 48 inches wide, the flared sides shall have a maximum slope of
1:12.
(8) Returned curbs may be used only where pedestrians would not
normally walk across the ramp.
(9) Built-up curb ramps shall be located so they do not project into
traffic lanes.
§ 175-20 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-20
163:496
§ 175-21. Blocks.
(10) Detectable warnings are required for the full width and depth of
the ramp. The surface shall consist of raised truncated domes with
the following features:
(a) Diameter: 0.9 inch nominal.
(b) Height: 0.2 inch nominal.
(c) Center-to-center spacing: 2.35 inch nominal.
(d) The surface shall contrast visually with adjoining surfaces.
(e) The material providing contrast shall be an integral part of the
walking surface.
(11)Ramps shall be so located to prevent obstruction by parked
vehicles.
(12)Ramps located at marked crossings shall be fully contained within
the marked area excluding any flared sides.
A. Length. In general, all blocks in a subdivision shall have a minimum
length of 500 feet and a maximum length of 1,200 feet unless special
conditions warrant a variance.
B. Width. Whenever practicable, blocks shall be of such width as to
provide two tiers of lots of the minimum size permitted under the
applicable zoning classification, except in the case of lots along major
thoroughfares where the lot fronts on an interior street.
C. Through lots. Double frontage lots are to be avoided and generally will
not be permitted except where reversed frontage is desired away from
a major thoroughfare to a street of lesser traffic volume.
D. Crosswalk. Crosswalks not less than 10 feet wide, and with concrete
paving not less than four feet wide, may be required where necessary to
provide access to schools, churches, parks and commercial areas. They
shall be maintained by the abutting property owners in the same
manner as sidewalks on public streets.
E. Blocks. Blocks for commercial and industrial areas may vary from the
elements of design contained in this section if the nature of the use
requires other treatment. In such cases, off-street parking for
employees and customers may be required along with safe and
convenient limited access to the street system. Space for off-street
loading may also be required with similar access. Extension of streets,
railroad access rights-of-way and utilities shall be provided. The amount
of parking space shall be as required by the Zoning Ordinance.145
145. Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Zoning.
§ 175-20 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-22
163:497
§ 175-22. Lot requirements; grading; planting.
A. Lots in residential areas.
(1) Area. All lots shall be no smaller than the minimum lot area
requirements of the applicable zoning classification.
(2) Depth. Lots excessively deep in relation to width are to be avoided.
(3) Width. The minimum width of a lot shall be that width which is
measured along the building setback line, in feet, specified for the
applicable zoning district.
(4) Corner lots. All corner lots shall be a minimum of 1 1/2 times the
minimum width of the interior lots of the same block.
(5) Frontage. Every lot shall have frontage along the ultimate right-ofway
line of a street unless specifically not required by the East
Norriton Township Zoning Ordinance. Double frontage lots are
prohibited except along major streets. The frontage shall not be
less than the minimum requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.146
(6) Side lines. Whenever practicable, the side lines of a lot shall be set
at right angles or radial to the right-of-way line.
(7) Building lines. Building line for all lots shall be in conformance with
the minimum front, side and rear yard line requirements of the
applicable zoning district.
(8) Lot numbers. For the purpose of development, each subdivision
may have an overall system of lot numbers, the number one being
assigned to a lot in the first section to be developed. (Such systems
of lot numbers shall not be confused with the regular house or
building numbers system based on a Township-wide plan.)
(9) Building numbers. House or building numbers shall be assigned by
the Township based on an overall street plan. Numbers will be
assigned in such a way as to allow for vacant parcels and future
development.
B. Lot grading for subdivisions and land developments.
(1) Blocks and lots. Blocks and lots shall be graded to secure proper
drainage away from buildings and to prevent the collection of
stormwater in pools. Minimum slopes of 2% away from structures
shall be required.
(2) Design. All drainage provisions shall be of such design as to carry
surface waters to the nearest practical street, storm drain or
natural watercourse. Where drainage swales are used to deliver
surface waters away from buildings, they shall not be less than 1%
146. Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Zoning.
§ 175-22 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-22
163:498
nor more than 4%. The swales shall be sodded or planted as
required and shall be of such shape and size to conform to
specifications of the Township Engineer.
(3) Concentration. The concentration of storm drainage in a swale
along the rear or side of lot lines is strictly forbidden.
(4) Construction. The subdivider or developer shall construct and/or
install such drainage structures and/or pipe which are necessary to
prevent erosion damage and to satisfactorily carry off such surface
waters to the nearest practical street, storm drain or natural
watercourse.
(5) Excavation. No excavation shall be made with a cut face steeper in
slope than two horizontal to one vertical, except under one or more
of the following conditions:
(a) The excavation is located so that a line having a slope of two
horizontal to one vertical and passing through any portion of
the cut face will be entirely within the property lines of the
property on which the excavation is made.
(b) The material from which the excavation is made is sufficiently
stable to sustain a slope steeper than two horizontal to one
vertical, and a written statement from a civil engineer, licensed
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and experienced in
erosion control, to that effect is submitted to and approved by
the Township Engineer. The statement shall set forth that the
site has been inspected and that the deviation from the slope
specified hereinbefore will not result in injury to persons or
damage to property.
(c) A concrete or stone masonry wall constructed according to
present or future designs of the Township of East Norriton is
provided to support the face of the excavation.
(6) Fill. No fill shall be made which creates any exposed surface
steeper in slope than two horizontal to one vertical except under
one or more of the following conditions: of the following conditions:
(a) The fill is located so that settlement, sliding or erosion will not
result in property damage or be a hazard to adjoining property,
streets, alleys or buildings.
(b) A written statement from a civil engineer, licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and experienced in erosion
control, certifying that he has inspected the site and that the
proposed deviation from the slope specified above will not
endanger any property or result in property damage, is
submitted to and approved by the Township Engineer.
§ 175-22 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-22
163:499
(c) A concrete or stone masonry wall constructed according to
present or future designs of the Township of East Norriton is
provided to support the face of the excavation.
(7) Slopes and fences. The top or bottom edge of slopes shall be a
minimum of three feet from property right-of-way line of streets or
alleys in order to permit the normal rounding of the edge without
encroaching on the abutting property. All property lines where
walls or slopes are steeper than one horizontal to one vertical and
five feet or more in height shall be protected by a fence approved
by the Board.
(8) Cleanup. All lots must be kept free of any debris or nuisances
whatsoever.
(9) Roof drainage. Roof drainages shall be conveyed by downspouts
constructed under the sidewalk and through the curb or to a storm
sewer or natural watercourse if available. In no case shall sump
pump connection through a curb be allowed.
(10) Site grading plan. The Township Engineer shall require a site
grading plan in conjunction with a plan of subdivision or land
development in order to ensure compliance with the standards
contained in this § 175-22.
(a) In addition to the above-listed standards, it shall be the
responsibility of the applicant or developer to submit a detailed
site grading plan showing at least the following information:
[1] An area plan or plans describing existing and proposed
features of the 100 feet surrounding the site of the work,
including topography, existing vegetation, watercourses,
man-made features and the effects of watersheds and
other important natural features.
[2] A topographic survey of the site at a suitable scale of no
less than one inch equals 40 feet and a contour interval of
no more than two feet, prepared by a registered surveyor
or engineer, including a boundary line survey, the location
and a description of vegetative cover, including trees over
10 inches in diameter, two feet above the ground, and
other natural and man-made features. This plan shall be a
minimum size of 8 1/2 inches by 11 inches.
[3] An improvement plan of the same size and scale as set
forth in Subsection B(10)(a)[2] above, showing and
describing all proposed changes to the site, including but
not limited to cuts, fills, structures, paving, a description of
all trees to be removed and utilities (this may be combined
with a topographical survey for simple projects upon
request to and approval by the Township).
§ 175-22 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-22
163:500
[4] A grading plan of the same scale as Subsection B(10)(a)[2]
above, showing and describing all proposed changes to the
site, including but not limited to cuts, fills, structures,
paving, utilities and rights-of-way of easements.
[5] A time schedule stating the anticipated starting and
completion dates of the development sequence and the
expected date of the completion of construction of each of
the activities referred to in this § 175-22.
(b) The Township Engineer shall inspect grading activities.
Inspections shall be carried out on a random basis, except as
stated hereafter. A final inspection shall be conducted by the
Township Engineer to certify compliance with this chapter. The
applicant or developer shall notify the Township Engineer and
submit an as-built grading plan, showing all changes in the
final grading plan, within 14 days of the completion of all
activities for which a permit was issued thereunder. The
Township Engineer shall then conduct an inspection to ensure
that satisfactory compliance with requirements has been
accomplished. If the subject property, as finally graded and
constructed, does not satisfactorily conform to the final
grading plan filed with the permit applications hereunder, then
the Township Engineer shall note changes required on the asbuilt
grading plan. The applicant or developer shall correct all
noted deficiencies and submit a revised as-built grading plan
for reinspection. When the Township Engineer is satisfied that
the finally graded parcel of real property complies with all
Township requirements, he shall notify the Township Zoning
Officer, or such other authorized personnel as the Township
shall from time to time designate, that the subject lot is in
compliance with this section. No occupancy permit (temporary
or permanent) shall be issued until such time as the Township
Engineer certifies that all grading and/or stabilization has been
completed in accordance with the final grading plan.
(11) Sump pumps. Sump pumps shall be installed in all below grade
basements unless the basement area is drained by a gravity line. All
sump pumps must discharge into the underground storm drainage
system.
C. Lot siting, planting and beautification for subdivision and land
developments. In the interest of providing for the protection and
preservation of natural resources, the provisions of this article are
intended to preserve the natural amenities of the Township; protect the
public health and welfare by helping to control soil erosion and reduce
sedimentation, by providing shade from the summer sun and by
providing wind breaks from the winter winds; and encourage
landowners to develop their properties in such a way as to minimize
destruction of existing trees.
§ 175-22 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-22
163:501
(1) Limit of contract. Where the applicant is offering for dedication or
is required by ordinance to establish a reservation of open space or
preserve an area of scenic or historic importance, a limit of
contract, which will confine excavation, earthmoving procedures
and other changes to the landscape, may be required to ensure
preservation and prevent despoliation of the character of the area
in open space.
(2) Tree preservation. The plan shall minimize the loss of trees over six
inches in caliper, tree masses and woodlands to buildings, clearing
and/or grading.
(3) Topsoil preservation. No topsoil shall be removed from the site or
used as spoil. Topsoil must be removed from the areas of
construction and stored separately. Upon completion of the
construction, the topsoil must be redistributed on the site
uniformly. All areas of the site shall be stabilized by seeding or
planting on slopes of less than 10% and shall be stabilized by
sodding on slopes 10% or more and planted in ground cover on
slopes 20%, provided that riprap shall be utilized for banks
exceeding 25%.
(4) (Reserved)
(5) (Reserved)
(6) Preserved landscaping. Trees of six inches caliper or greater, tree
masses and woodlands preserved and protected in a living
condition may be used to fulfill the other landscape planting
requirements of this section, i.e., buffering and parking lot
landscaping and street trees, thereby reducing the amount of new
plant material required, as determined by the Township.
(7) Preservation of existing vegetation. Each mature tree over six
inches in caliper, tree mass or woodland on the site shall be
designated "to remain" or "to be removed" depending on the
following criteria:
(a) A mature tree over six inches in caliper, tree mass or woodland
shall be considered to remain only if it meets the following
criteria:
[1] The outermost branches of the tree(s) are at least two feet
from any proposed buildings, structures, paving, parking
areas or utilities (above the ground or underground).
[2] The outermost branches of the tree(s) are at least two feet
from any proposed changes in grade or drainage such as
excavations, mounding or impoundments.
§ 175-22 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-22
163:502
[3] The tree(s) are clear of any proposed sight triangles and
do not, by their location or health, pose any undue threat
to the health, safety and welfare of the community.
[4] When approved by the Board of Supervisors, trees which
have a ground area protected from any disturbance or
regrading equal to 70% of the existing canopy measured in
plan view. Roots exposed during construction must be
backfilled with clean topsoil within 24 hours.
[5] When approved by the Board of Supervisors, trees which
are transplanted using direct planting methods including a
root ball of not less than 60 inches in diameter and
installation and guying techniques in accordance with
American Association of Nurserymen (AAN) standards and
the following schedule:
Type Season
Oaks Spring only
Maples Spring or fall
Sweet gums Spring only
Pines/spruces Spring, fall or winter
(b) A mature tree over six inches in caliper, tree mass or woodland
which does not fit the above criteria shall be designated to be
removed according to the following standards:
[1] The plan shall minimize removal of existing vegetation.
[2] It shall be incumbent on the applicant to prove that
vegetation loss is minimized by showing that no
alternative layouts are possible and that no alternative
clearing or grading plan would reduce the loss of mature
trees over six inches in caliper, tree masses and
woodlands.
[3] Trees designated to be removed shall not receive credit for
trees to remain but need not be removed if it is determined
by the applicant that special precautions/alterations to
plans can be taken during construction to save the trees.
(8) Preservation of existing vegetation during construction. Existing
vegetation shown to remain as part of the landscape plan for a land
development shall be identified in the field prior to any clearing of
the tract and physically protected throughout the construction
process. A temporary physical barrier, such as a snow fence, shall
be erected a minimum of one foot from the dripline or 15 feet from
the trunk(s), whichever is greater, on all sides of stands of
vegetation, individual mature trees over six inches in caliper and/or
woodlands shown to remain prior to major clearing or construction.
§ 175-22 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-22
163:503
§ 175-22.1. Buffers and screens.
No disturbance, such as grading, dumping, storage, parking or
traffic, shall be allowed within the fence line, and the fence shall
remain until construction is complete. The specific method of
preserving existing vegetation shall be noted on the landscape
plan.
(9) Post construction impact. The existing natural drainage pattern,
lighting or other environmental factors shall not be altered to
seriously damage the remaining trees as determined by the
Township Engineer, Arborist or Landscape Architect.
A. Intent. The planting requirements in this section are intended to
promote the public health, safety and welfare by providing certain
minimum standards for installation of landscaped areas in connection
with new construction or reconstruction; to conserve the value of land
and buildings on surrounding properties and neighborhoods by
mitigating the visual impact of structures and other site elements; to
protect the character and stability of residential, business, institutional
and industrial areas; and to improve the microclimate of built areas.
B. General requirements.
(1) Any plantings required herein shall have two components:
(a) Property line buffers which act to integrate new development
with the surroundings.
(b) Site element screens which act to minimize or eliminate views
to certain site elements located within 100 feet of property
lines or road rights-of-way (either public or private).
(2) An on-site investigation by the applicant shall determine the
adjacent land uses along each property boundary or road
classification for each existing right-of-way. In the case of vacant
land, the existing zoning district shall be used. These existing or
zoned uses shall be noted on the plan.
(3) Property line buffers shall be required on the applicant's property
for all nonresidential and single-family attached or multifamily
(including high-rise) residential land developments. The amount
and type of plant material required shall be determined by the
intensity of the proposed land use and the existing adjacent land
use (or adjacent zoning district for vacant land). Subsection C
below shall apply.
(4) Screening of site elements shall be required in all proposed land
developments around certain site elements as specified in this
section which are located partially or fully within 100 feet of the
property line or existing road right-of-way. The type of site element
screen shall be determined by the site element and the adjacent
§ 175-22 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-22.1
163:504
land use(s) or zoning district for vacant land. Subsection C below
shall apply.
(5) Existing healthy trees, shrubs or woodlands shall be inventoried
and noted on the landscape plan and may be substituted for part or
all of the required property line buffers or site element screens at
the discretion of the Township Supervisors upon the
recommendation of the Township Landscape Architect, Engineer or
Arborist. The minimum quantity and visual effect of the existing
vegetation shall be equal to or exceed that of the required buffer or
screen. If the effect of the existing vegetation does not equal or
exceed that of the required buffer or screen, additional plantings
shall be required according to the provisions of this section.
(6) Existing topographic conditions, such as cliffs or berms, may be
substituted for part or all of the required property line buffers or
site element screens with the approval of the Township Supervisors
upon the recommendation of the Township Landscape Architect,
Engineer or Arborist. The minimum visual effect of the existing
topographical conditions shall be equal to or exceed that of the
required buffers or screens. If the effect of the existing
topographical conditions does not equal or exceed that of the
required buffer or screen, additional plantings shall be required
according to the provisions of this section.
C. Property line buffers.
(1) Buffer yard location and dimensions.
(a) A buffer yard shall be established along all property lines of not
less than 25 feet nor more than 50 feet in width. In zoning
districts where the required setback is less than 25 feet, the
buffer yard shall be the entire width of the required setback
yard.
(b) The buffer yard shall be a continuous pervious planting bed
consisting of grass, ground cover, trees and/or shrubs.
(c) Parking is not allowed in the buffer yard, except in the case of
joint or common parking areas between two adjacent lots.
(d) Site element screens are allowed within the buffer yard.
(e) Stormwater basins are allowed within the buffer yard.
(f) Buffer yards may be included in the front, side or rear yard
setback areas.
(2) Nonresidential property line buffer requirements. Proposed
developments shall have property line buffers determined by
adjacent land uses in accordance with the following charts. For
vacant land, the adjacent zoning district shall determine the
§ 175-22.1 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-22.1
163:505
category of use. In the case of several permitted uses the most
restrictive shall apply.
(a) Proposed office or institutional uses.
Uses Abutting Property Line Required Buffer Type
All nonresidential Low
Multifamily or attached
residential
Medium
Single-family detached residential High
(b) Proposed commercial, industrial, laboratory and all other
nonresidential uses.
Uses Abutting Property Line Required Buffer Type
Office or institutional,
nonresidential
Medium
Other nonresidential Low
All residential High
(3) Residential property line buffer requirements. All developments
with multifamily and/or single-family attached dwellings shall have
property line buffers according to the following requirements (no
buffers are required for single-family detached proposals):
Uses Abutting Property Line Required Buffer Type
Office or institutional, nonresidential Low
All other nonresidential Medium
Multifamily or attached residential Low
Single-family detached Medium
(4) Plant material quantities and types. For every 100 linear feet of
property line to be buffered, the following minimum quantities and
types of plant material shall be required:
Buffer Type Plant Requirements
Low intensity 1 canopy tree,
2 ornamental trees
Medium intensity 1 canopy tree,
2 ornamental trees,
2 evergreen trees
High intensity 5 evergreen trees,
2 ornamental trees,
1 canopy tree
§ 175-22.1 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-22.1
163:506
(5) Property line buffers design criteria.
(a) The required plant material shall be distributed over the entire
length and width of the buffer yard.
(b) Plant material may be grouped to form clusters within open
grassed areas. Plant materials shall not be concentrated but
shall be evenly distributed along each property boundary.
(c) Buffer plant material may be arranged symmetrically
(formally) or asymmetrically (informally). However, linear or
repetitive arrangements are discouraged.
(d) A range of plant species is required, according to the following
table:
Trees and/or
Large Shrubs
Minimum Tree
Species
Maximum of Any
One Species
0 to 5 1 100%
6 to 15 2 50%
16 to 30 3 40%
31 to 50 4 30%
51 and over 6 20%
(e) Plant material shall be spaced to provide optimum growing
conditions for each plant.
D. Site element screens.
(1) Site elements.
(a) Screens shall be required in all proposed land developments
around the following site elements, when these elements are
located partially or fully within 100 feet of any property line or
existing road right-of-way. Screens shall be selected based on
the adjoining property's land use or, in the case of vacant land,
its zoning district.
[1] Parking lots.
[2] Dumpsters, trash or recycling areas.
[3] Service or loading docks.
[4] Outdoor storage or sales yards.
[5] Vehicle storage or sales areas.
[6] Single-family attached dwellings' rear yards.
[7] Multifamily (including high-rise) dwellings' rear yards.
[8] Active recreation facilities.
§ 175-22.1 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-22.1
163:507
[9] Fenced detention basins.
[10] Sewage treatment plants or pump stations.
(b) Site elements not included in the above list but of a similar
character, use or visual impact shall be screened according to
the requirements for the most similar elements, as determined
by the Township.
(2) Screen location. The site element screen shall be placed between
the site element and the property line and shall be designed to
block views to the maximum extent possible. The screen shall be
located as close as possible to the site element and shall surround
the element without impeding function or encroaching on sight
triangles.
(3) Screening material specifications and design criteria. The following
specifications and criteria define the required Screen Type Nos. 1
through 8 as indicated in Chart 1, Site Element Screening.147
(a) Screen Type No. 1: evergreen or deciduous shrubs. Shrubs
shall be placed three feet on center in a minimum five-foot
wide bed surrounding the site element and arranged to provide
a continuous hedge-like screen with a minimum height of 3 1/2
feet and a maximum height of five feet at maturity. Shrubs may
be clipped to form a hedge or left in natural habit.
(b) Screen Type No. 2: double row of evergreen trees. A double
row of evergreen trees having a minimum height of six feet at
planting shall be placed 10 feet on center and offset 10 feet to
provide a continuous screen with a minimum height of 12 feet
at maturity.
(c) Screen Type No. 3: opaque fence. An opaque fence with a
minimum height of six feet surrounding the site element on at
least three sides. Finished side shall face out toward perimeter
of property.
(d) Screen Type No. 4: opaque fence with ornamental trees and
shrubs. An opaque fence with a minimum height of six feet
surrounding the site element on at least three sides, with
plantings at the minimum rate of three shrubs with a minimum
height of 2 1/2 feet at planting and two ornamental trees
having a minimum height of eight feet at planting or large
shrubs having a minimum height of 3 1/2 feet at planting for
each 10 linear feet of proposed fence, arranged formally or
informally along the exterior side of the fence.
(e) Screen Type No. 5: architectural extension of the building. An
architectural extension of the building (such as a wing wall)
147. Editor's Note: Chart 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 175-22.1 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-22.1
163:508
with a minimum height of eight feet shall screen the site
element. The extension shall be consistent in building
materials and style with the main building.
(f) Screen Type No. 6: berm with ornamental trees. A continuous
curvilinear berm with a minimum height of two feet to three
feet, plus ornamental trees having a minimum height of eight
feet at planting at the minimum rate of one tree for every 20
linear feet, clustered or arranged informally. The maximum
slope shall be 3:1.
(g) Screen Type No. 7: berm. A continuous curvilinear berm with a
minimum height of 3 1/2 feet to four feet, with grass alone. The
maximum slope shall be 3:1.
(h) Screen Type No. 8: evergreen hedge. An evergreen hedge
(such as arborvitae, chionanthus, etc.) with a minimum height
at planting of six feet, planted three feet on center maximum.
E. Specifications, maintenance and guaranty.
(1) Plant specifications.
(a) All plants shall meet the minimum standards for health form
and root condition as outlined in the American Association of
Nurserymen (AAN) standards.
(b) All plant material shall be hardy within the USDA Hardiness
Zone 6 applicable to East Norriton Township.
(c) Canopy trees shall reach a minimum height and spread of 30
feet at maturity as determined by the AAN standards and shall
be deciduous. New trees shall have a minimum caliper of 2 1/2
inches at planting.
(d) Ornamental trees or large shrubs shall reach a typical
minimum height of 10 feet at maturity based on AAN standards
and may be deciduous or evergreen. They shall have a
distinctive ornamental character, such as showy flowers, fruit,
habit, foliage or bark. New ornamental trees shall have a
minimum height of six feet or one-and-one-half-inch caliper.
New large shrubs shall have a minimum size of 2 1/2 feet to
three feet.
(e) Small shrubs may be evergreen or deciduous and shall have a
minimum height at maturity of four feet based on AAN
standards for that species. New shrubs shall have a minimum
size of 18 inches at time of planting.
(f) Evergreen trees shall reach a typical minimum height of 20
feet at maturity based on AAN standards for that species and
shall remain evergreen throughout the year. New evergreens
shall have a minimum height at planting of six feet.
§ 175-22.1 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-22.1
163:509
§ 175-23. Community assets; park areas.
(g) Plant materials shall be selected from the Recommended Plant
Material List,148 which may be adopted by resolution of the
Board and amended from time to time.
(2) Maintenance.
(a) Required plant material shall be maintained for the life of the
project to achieve the required visual effect of the buffer or
screen. It shall be the ultimate responsibility of successive
property owners to ensure that the required plantings are
properly maintained.
(b) Required plant material shall not be removed without
replacement except in the case of dead, diseased or hazardous
plant material. Dead, diseased or hazardous plant material
shall be removed promptly by the property owner and replaced
at the next growing season.
(c) Maintenance guidelines for the plantings are encouraged to be
published by the planting plan designer to be used by grounds
maintenance personnel to ensure that the design's visual
buffering and screening concepts are continued.
A. Community assets. In commercial, industrial and business/professional
areas, provisions shall be made for suitable areas for walkways
(connecting parking facilities with the respective structures, malls,
sitting areas, bus stops and other amenities). Due consideration shall be
given to the preservation of natural features, including large trees,
graves, waterways, scenic points, historical spots and other community
assets.
B. Dedication of land suitable for park and recreational use to the
Township or payment of fees in lieu thereof.
(1) The applicant shall dedicate land suitable for park or recreational
use to East Norriton Township, unless one of the alternatives set
forth in § 175-23B(5) is agreed to by the Township and the
applicant. The land shall be dedicated to the Township as a
condition of final plan approval, and no lots shall be sold or built
upon until and unless the actual transfer of title has been
completed or guaranteed to the satisfaction of the Board.
(2) The amount and location of land to be dedicated to the Township
shall be 10% of the total lot area of a proposed subdivision or land
development.
(a) The land dedicated to the Township for park and recreation
purposes need not be a part of the land development or
148. Editor's Note: Said list is on file in the Township offices.
§ 175-22.1 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-23
163:510
subdivision. It may be located on a separate parcel of land,
provided that, in the sole discretion of the Board of
Supervisors, it is convenient to the future inhabitants of the
subdivision or land development. In addition, the applicant,
with the approval of the Township, may dedicate land or
construct park and recreation facilities at the Township
facilities, a public school situated within East Norriton
Township, county-owned parkland or the facilities of another
developer to satisfy the requirements of this section.
(b) No more than 25% of the minimum land area required for park
and recreation land may consist of floodplain areas, wetlands
or areas with slopes in excess of 8%. Floodplains, wetlands and
steep slopes may not be used for active recreation.
(c) The minimum land area required for park and recreation shall
not include land designed for retention/detention basins in
connection with required stormwater management nor contain
fuel, power or other transmission lines, whether underground
or overhead.
(d) The land to be dedicated must be suitable for active or passive
recreation by reason of its size, shape, location and topography
and shall be provided with safe and direct access, either by
adjoining public road frontage or public easements, which
shall be no less than 25 feet in width.
(e) Areas shall comprise a single parcel of land except where the
Board shall determine that two or more parcels would be in the
public interest.
(f) The area dedicated may not be used in calculating density.
(3) Any land dedicated to the Township shall be used only for the
purpose of providing park and recreational facilities.
(4) When land is dedicated, acceptance by the Township shall be by
means of a signed resolution to which a property description of the
dedicated recreational area shall be attached. All changes and
agreements should eventually be listed directly on the signed
drawing linens of the final plans. A fee simple warranty deed
conveying the property shall be delivered to the Township with title
free and clear of all liens and encumbrances except for public
utility easements. In no event shall the Township be required to
accept dedication of park and recreational areas.
(5) Alternatives to dedication of land.
(a) Fee in lieu of dedication.
[1] The Board of Supervisors and the applicant may agree to
the payment of a fee in lieu of dedication of land.
§ 175-23 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-23
163:511
[2] Where the Board and the applicant agree that a fee is to be
contributed in lieu of the dedication of land, the amount of
the fee shall be equal to the fair market value of the raw
undeveloped land that otherwise would have been
required to be dedicated.
[3] Fair market value of the land in lieu of which the fee is paid
shall be determined by agreement of the Board and the
applicant. In the event that the Board and applicant cannot
agree upon the fair market value of the land, then an
appraisal shall be supplied and paid for by the applicant
and reviewed by the Board. The appraisal required by this
subsection shall be prepared by a recognized, competent
real estate appraiser with no interest, financial or
otherwise, in the affected property or application.
[4] The Board shall reserve the right to obtain its own
appraisal, and, in the event that the Township appraisal is
valued at less than 10% greater than the applicant's
appraisal, the value shall be the difference between the
two appraisals; in the event that the Township appraisal is
valued 10% greater than that of the applicant, then a third
appraiser shall be selected by agreement of both the Board
and applicant to be paid for by the applicant to resolve the
difference.
[5] Any fee in lieu of dedication which is collected by the
Township shall be used only for the purpose of providing
park and recreational facilities within East Norriton
Township.
[6] A fee authorized under this subsection shall, upon its
receipt by the Township, be deposited in an interestbearing
account, designated as the East Norriton
Township Parks and Recreation Fund. Interest earned on
such accounts shall become funds of that account. Funds
from such accounts shall be expended only on the design,
construction or acquisition of specific recreation facilities
approved by the Board of Supervisors.
[7] Upon request of any person who paid fees under this
subsection, the Township shall refund such fee, plus
interest accumulated thereon from the date of payment, if
the Township had failed to utilize the fee paid for
recreation purposes within three years from the date such
fee was paid unless return of the fee has been waived by
agreement between the applicant and the Township.
(b) Use of land and fees. The types of recreational facilities shall
be designed and constructed as provided in the Township Park
§ 175-23 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-23
163:512
§ 175-24. Reserve strips; rights-of-way; easements.
and Recreation Plan and be deemed to include but not be
limited to:
[1] Playground equipment and surfaces.
[2] Playfields (baseball fields, football fields, soccer fields or
the like, designed for active recreation).
[3] Tennis courts.
[4] Tot lots (small playgrounds especially designed for young
children).
[5] Basketball courts.
[6] Paddle tennis courts.
[7] Jogging paths with exercise stations.
[8] Bicycle and walking trails.
[9] Parking lot facilities.
[10] Utility services (electric water fountains and toilet
facilities).
[11] Landscaping, earth shaping and plant materials.
[12] Picnic facilities and benches.
[13] Swimming pools.
[14] Lighting facilities related to park and recreation facilities.
(c) Combination.
[1] Where the applicant and the Township agree, the applicant
may utilize any combination of the aforementioned
techniques to satisfy the applicant's park and recreation
obligation.
[2] Credit for the cost of construction of any park and
recreation facility shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Township Engineer as determined by
prevailing costs for labor, structures and materials
associated with the facility.
(6) Parks and recreation plan. The Board of Supervisors shall adopt a
formal parks and recreation plan for East Norriton Township by
resolution. Future park and recreational facilities proposed within
East Norriton Township shall be in accordance with principles and
standards contained in the plan. The plan may be amended from
time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 175-23 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-24
163:513
A. Reserve strips controlling access to streets, alleys, subdivisions or
adjacent areas are prohibited.
B. Rights-of-way and/or easements for sanitary utilities, road construction
or maintenance or for drainage purposes or public utilities or for any
specific purpose shall be required by the Board as needed. The location
and width in each case shall be as determined by that body.
(1) Nothing shall be permitted to be placed, planted, set or put within
the area of an easement.
(2) The owner of any lot, upon written request by the Township and at
the owner's sole expense, shall remove anything placed, planted,
set or put (with or without knowledge for this regulation) within the
area of any easement.
(3) To the fullest extent possible, easements shall be adjacent to rear
or side lot lines.
C. No right-of-way or easements, for any purpose whatsoever, shall be
recited or described in any deed unless the same has been shown on the
approved plan. Any error found in a deed shall be immediately
corrected and rerecorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds for
Montgomery County at Norristown, Pennsylvania, at the sole expense
of the subdivider or developer.
D. Easements.
(1) Utility. Easements with a minimum width of 20 feet shall be
provided for common utilities and drainage when provided in
undedicated land. Nothing shall be permitted to be placed, planted,
set or put within the area of an easement.
(2) Drainage. Drainage easements shall be required along natural
watercourses to a minimum width of 25 feet from the center line
and may be used for storm and sanitary sewers and as open space.
Where conditions warrant, such as in floodplains, additional width
shall be required in such cases where runoff treatment requires a
wider easement. Runoff studies must prove such requirements
beyond the floodplain.
(3) Dedication. Where stormwater or surface water will be gathered
within the subdivision or land development and discharged or
drained in volume over lands within or beyond the boundaries of
the subdivision or land development, the subdivider, developer or
builder shall reserve or obtain easements over all lands affected.
The easements shall be adequate for such discharge of drainage
and for carrying off of such water and for the maintenance, repair
and reconstruction of the same, including the right of passage over,
including vehicles, machinery and other equipment for such
purposes, and such easements shall be sufficient width for such
§ 175-24 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-24
163:514
§ 175-25. Monuments.
§ 175-25.1. through § 175-25.2. (Reserved)149
§ 175-26. Stormwater management. [Amended 8-26-2014 by Ord.
No. 556]
See Chapter 166.
§ 175-27. Bridges and culverts.
passage and work. The subdivider, developer or builder shall
convey, at no cost, the easement to the Township upon demand.
A. Monuments shall be of stone or concrete and located on the right-ofway
lines at corners, angle points, beginning and end of curves and as
otherwise required. Monuments shall be indicated on all plans. They
shall be placed after a new street has been completed. The center line
of all new streets shall be marked with spikes and referenced to
permanent monuments or structures. A certified copy of this reference
information shall be given to the Township Engineer. Permanent
reference monuments of case concrete or durable stone 20 inches by
four inches by four inches, with forty-five-degree beveled edges, shall
be set by the subdivider, developer or builder at all corners and angle
points of the boundaries of the original tract to be subdivided or
developed and at intermediate points as may be required.
B. Bench marks. The Township elevations are based on the Township
sanitary sewer system datum. Location and elevation is available to all
engineers and surveyors upon request to the Engineer's office. All
contours and elevations shown on plans must be based on this system.
C. Staking requirements. All lots shall be staked by the registered
engineer or surveyor for the subdivider or developer when final grading
has been completed. This stakeout shall be visible and completed
before an owner or occupant moves into the property. All lot corner
markers shall be permanently located and shall be at least a fiveeighths-
inch metal pin with a minimum length of 24 inches, located in
the ground to existing grade.
A. Bridges and culverts shall be designed to meet current Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation standards to support expected loads and
to carry expected flows. They shall be constructed to the full width of
the right-of-way.
B. Approval of the Water and Power Resources Board of the
Commonwealth, or its successor, is required when the area drained
149. Editor's Note: Former § 175-25.1, Mapping of stormwater management districts, and
former § 175-25.2, Stormwater management district implementation provisions, were
repealed 8-26-2014 by Ord. No. 556. See now Ch. 166, Stormwater Management.
§ 175-24 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-27
163:515
§ 175-28. Sanitary sewers.
upstream of the point under consideration exceeds an area of 1/2
square mile.
A. Sewers. Wherever practicable, sanitary sewers shall be installed and
connected to the Township sanitary sewer system. In areas not
presently served by public sanitary sewers, the Township shall require,
according to Act No. 537 passed by the General Assembly of
Pennsylvania (1965),150 in addition to installation of temporary
individual on-site sewage disposal facilities, the installation and
capping of sanitary sewer mains and house connections, if studies by
the Board indicate that extension of public sanitary sewer trunks or
lateral to serve the property subdivided appears probable or necessary
to protect public health.
(1) When a feasibility analysis, conducted by the Township Engineer,
local engineer and District Sanitarian, has ascertained that
sanitary sewers are practicable, then sanitary sewers, with
connection to each building in a subdivision or land development,
shall be installed at the expense of the applicant or subdivider and
connected to the Township sanitary sewer system.
(2) If outfall sewers are not available in the vicinity but are considered
reasonably necessary in the near future by the Township or
Pennsylvania Department of Health or other appropriate state
agency for the area in question, a system of sewers, together with
all necessary laterals extending from mains to the street right-ofway
line, shall be installed at the expense of the subdivider or
applicant. The sewer lines shall be suitably capped at the limits of
the subdivision or land development, and the laterals shall be
capped at the right-of-way. The sewer installations shall include the
construction within rights-of-way or easements to bring the sewer
to the future connection with the Township sanitary sewer system.
(3) If sanitary sewers are not to be installed at the time of subdivision
and development, subdividers shall grant, reserve and set aside
easements in streets and roads for installation and maintenance of
sewer lines at such time that the subdivision or land development
shall be a part of the Township sanitary sewer system.
(4) A sewer shall be considered to be planned for extension to a given
area any time after preliminary engineering and related studies
have been completed and the construction of facilities adequate to
serve the area containing the subdivision has been programmed for
completion within a reasonable time.
(5) When capped sewers are provided, on-site disposal facilities shall
also be provided.
150. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 175-27 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-28
163:516
(6) Sanitary sewers shall have a minimum inside diameter of eight
inches and a minimum grade of 0.5% (1/2 of 1%).
(7) Manholes shall be located at intervals of 250 feet and at each
change of line or grade. In exceptional cases, the interval may be
extended to not more than 300 feet. Manhole appurtenances shall
conform to current Township standards.
(8) Lateral connections to each lot shown on the final plan shall be
installed to the right-of-way line of the street prior to paving. Each
building shall have a separate connection to the Township sewer.
The lowest fixture tying into the sanitary sewer line shall be at an
elevation no less than one foot above the street level and/or the top
of sanitary sewer manhole elevation.
(9) This section shall be applicable to all subdivisions and land
developments, whether utilizing public or private streets or
driveways serving as private streets, and, in the case of a
subdivision or land development utilizing private streets, the
subdivider or the applicant shall execute recordable covenants with
the Township and/or Township authority that, for the purposes of
sewer connections, assessments and rentals, the rights and
liabilities of himself and his grantees, heirs, successors and assigns
shall be the same as if his property abutted a public street.
(10) The specifications for the installation of a sanitary sewer and
appurtenances required by this chapter shall be those set forth in
Chapter 162, Sewers, Article III, Sewer Connection Regulations,
§ 162-31B(4), Materials and installation.
B. On-lot disposal system. If public sewage disposal is not available and
the sewage treatment is on a project or individual-lot basis, such private
facilities must be installed by the subdivider, developer or builder under
the direct supervision of the Sewage Enforcement Officer, the
Department of Environmental Resources or other appropriate official.
(1) Necessary tests and inspections. Such officer shall require
percolation tests, soil samples and other data to determine the size
and extent of facilities needed. During installation of such facilities,
and before final coverage, the State Health Officer or other
appropriate officer shall make inspections and checks to assure
that all requirements and specifications have been met. He shall be
granted free access to the development area at all times during this
period.
(2) Certificate of approval. After assuring that all requirements and
specifications have been met, the appropriate Board will then issue
a certificate of approval to the Secretary of the Township as a
requirement to final plan approval.
(a) The type of on-site sewage disposal system to be installed shall
be determined on the basis of location, topography, available
§ 175-28 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-28
163:517
§ 175-29. Public utilities.
area, soil characteristics, permeability and groundwater
elevation. The disposal area to be provided shall be determined
by the results of percolation tests, soil classification and depth
of water table and such other tests as may be deemed
necessary. Proof of the adequacy of such facilities shall be
furnished by a registered professional engineer or other
person qualified to the satisfaction of the Board. The reports
of such tests shall be required at each disposal area. One
percolation test per lot shall be required when the subdivider
is dividing ground into lots and is not building immediately.
(b) All percolation tests shall conform to the standards of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(c) The usable area for sewage disposal shall be shown on the
preliminary plan for each lot. The usable area shall be suitably
situated beyond the radius of the water-supply well and shall
conform to all rules and regulations or future amendments
thereto of the Pennsylvania Department of Health of other
appropriate agency and the Township of East Norriton.
(d) Proximity of wells. In no instance shall a tile field or other
effluent-disseminating system be located uphill from a drilled
well and shall not be closer to it than 100 feet and 10 feet from
any dwelling or property line. The septic tank shall be a
minimum of 50 feet from any well and a minimum of 10 feet
from any dwelling or property line.
A. All water and gas mains and other underground facilities shall be
installed prior to the street paving at locations approved by the
Township for the full width of the right-of-way.
B. All water and gas mains shall be installed underground. All electric,
telephone and communication services, both main and service lines,
shall be provided by underground cable, installed in accordance with
the prevailing standards and practices of the utility or other companies
providing such services, except where it is demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the Board that underground installations herein required
are not feasible because of physical conditions of the lands involved. All
main underground cables which are within the right-of-way of a street
shall be located as specified by the Board.
(1) In order to promote and facilitate the undergrounding of utility
distribution lines, a letter of endorsement shall be required from
the suppliers of utility service (not limited to electrical, telephone
or cable television) of the developer's choice, wherein the applicant
acknowledges that underground utility service shall be placed on
the final plan as a prerequisite to final approval of such plan.
§ 175-28 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-29
163:518
§ 175-30. Street trees.
The provisions of this section are intended to provide shade from the
summer sun, to promote energy conservation by reducing the need for
cooling and to enhance the aesthetic appearance of the community.
(2) The provisions in this chapter shall not be construed as to limit or
interfere with the construction, installation, operation and
maintenance of public utility structures or facilities which may
hereafter be located with public easements or rights-of-way
designated for such purposes.
(3) Streetlighting.
(a) Streetlighting shall be installed along each street in each
subdivision and along each street front abutting a public street
in each land development by the applicant and at the expense
of the applicant, unless specifically waived by the Board of
Supervisors. The applicant shall submit a plan showing the
type and location of each streetlight to be installed also
specifying the supplier and installer of the lights. The plan
shall be submitted for review and approval by the Township,
and no streetlights shall be installed prior to review and
approval by the Township. Installation of streetlighting shall
include installation of all necessary lines, wires, conduits,
electrical connections and lighting facilities. The applicant
shall supply the Township with a plan and map showing
completed locations of all wires and electrical facilities. The
applicant shall arrange for the nighttime operation of
streetlighting within the subdivision or land development when
25% of the houses or construction in that specific phase shall
be occupied or constructed, as the case may be.
(b) Upon final approval of construction and dedication of all public
improvements, the applicant shall dedicate the streetlights to
the Township and shall assign all applicable warranties to the
Township. The requirements for dedication provided elsewhere
in this chapter and in the Municipalities Planning Code151 shall
apply.
(c) All streetlights shall be mounted on metal streetlight standards
or poles designed for such purposes and shall be constructed
in accordance with the Township streetlighting specifications
as may be adopted, from time to time, by resolution of the
Board.
(4) Along arterial roads and major highways, all new electric service
should be placed underground.
151. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 175-29 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-30
163:519
§ 175-31. Improvement specifications.
The minimum requirements for improvement shall be contained in the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Specifications Form 408 as last
revised.
§ 175-32. Water supply.
A. Street trees shall be required:
(1) Along all existing streets when they abut or lie within the proposed
subdivision or land development.
(2) Along all proposed streets.
(3) Along access driveways which serve five or more residential
dwelling units.
B. The street tree requirement may be waived by the Township Board of
Supervisors where existing vegetation is considered sufficient or to
maintain scenic views of open space, farmland or natural features.
C. Street trees shall be provided by the applicant according to the
following standards:
(1) Trees shall be planted a minimum distance of five feet and a
maximum distance of 15 feet from all ultimate right-of-way lines.
(2) In nonresidential developments, trees shall be located within the
front yard setback in a planting bed at least 10 feet in width,
planted in grass or ground cover.
(3) Trees shall be located so as not to interfere with the installation
and maintenance of sidewalks and utilities. Trees shall be planted a
minimum distance of three feet from curbs and sidewalks, 15 feet
from overhead utilities and six feet from underground utilities.
(4) Trees shall be planted at a ratio of one tree per 50 linear feet of
frontage or fraction thereof.
(5) Trees shall be distributed along the entire frontage of the property,
although they need not be evenly spaced.
(6) Trees shall be selected from the Recommended Plant Material List
which may be adopted by resolution of the Board and amended
from time to time,152 and shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in
caliper at planting.
A. The subdivider or developer shall provide public water service to
provide adequate supply to each lot in a subdivision or, as required, to a
building in a development.
152. Editor's Note: The list is on file in the Township offices.
§ 175-30 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-32
163:520
B. Where no public water service is available and it would be an undue
hardship for the subdivider or developer to have the public water
service extended, the subdivider or developer may, on approval of the
Supervisors, be permitted to construct a well on each lot. All wells shall
be constructed according to present rules and regulations, or any
future amendments thereto, of the State Department of Environmental
Resources or other appropriate state agency and the Township of East
Norriton.
C. The proposed location of the wells shall be shown on the preliminary
plan for each lot. Where there are existing wells on the property or
adjoining lots, they must also be shown.
D. A circular area with a radius conforming to the rules and regulations, or
future amendments thereto, of the state Department of Environmental
Resources or other appropriate state agency and the Township of East
Norriton shall be shown around each well to denote clear space in
which no sewage system is to be located.
E. Where public water service is furnished, the circles are not necessary,
with the exception of those wells lying immediately adjacent to the
subdivision. However, the usable area is limited by a clear zone
surrounding the water-service line to each house as required by the
state Department of Environmental Resources or other appropriate
state agency and the Township of East Norriton.
F. If water is to be provided by means other than by private wells owned
and maintained by the individual owners of lots within the subdivision
or development, applicants shall present evidence to the Township, that
the subdivision or development is to be supplied by a certificated public
utility, a bona fide cooperative association of lot owners or by a
municipal corporation, authority or utility. A copy of a certificate of
public convenience from the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or
an application for such certificate, a cooperative agreement or a
commitment or agreement to serve the area in question, whichever is
appropriate, shall be acceptable evidence.
G. Fire hydrants are to be installed at the expense of the subdivider or
developer in accordance with the following:
(1) All fire hydrants shall be placed at intervals of 800 linear feet or
less on any waterline on any public street and not less than 400 feet
from any proposed structure or as deemed necessary by the Fire
Marshal.
(2) All fire hydrant installations shall be provided with two two-andone-
half-inch male outlets National Standard Thread with covers,
in addition to a four-and-one-half-inch National Standard Thread
(outside diameter male thread 5.7609 inches, four threads per
inch) steamer connection.
(3) All fire hydrants shall be of the safety flange protection type.
§ 175-32 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-32
163:521
§ 175-33. Flood-prone areas.
(4) Required fire hydrants shall be installed prior to the framing of any
structure which is to be protected by that hydrant.
A. The regulations contained herein shall apply in those areas identified as
flood-prone in the Flood Insurance Study, Township of East Norriton
prepared by the Federal Insurance Administration of the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development. The Flood Boundary -
Floodway Map shall be available in the East Norriton Township Office
for inspection. In regard to the adopted Floodplain Conservation
District, the regulations contained herein shall apply to those areas
defined and established as flood-prone.
B. The regulations contained herein are intended to conform to the
requirements of Section 1910.3d of the National Flood Insurance
Program, P.L. 93-234. Furthermore, it is the purpose of these
regulations to:
(1) Regulate the subdivision and development of flood-prone land
areas in order to promote the general health, welfare and safety of
the community.
(2) Require that each subdivision lot or development site in floodprone
areas be provided with a safe building site with adequate
access and that public facilities which serve such sites be designed
and installed to preclude flood damage at the time of initial
construction.
(3) Protect individuals from buying lands which are unsuitable for use
because of flood hazards by prohibiting the subdivision and
development of unprotected flood-prone areas.
(4) Maintain the certification of East Norriton Township and the
eligibility of the property owners in the Township for the benefits of
the National Flood Insurance Program, P.L. 92-234.
C. Prospective developers shall consult with the Zoning Officer to make a
determination as to whether or not the proposed subdivision or land
development is located within an identified flood-prone area.
D. Where not prohibited by this or any other codes or ordinances, land
located in flood-prone area(s) may be subdivided or developed with the
provision that the developer construct all buildings and structures to
preclude flood damage in accordance with this and any other codes or
ordinances regulating such development.
E. The Township Supervisors may, when it is deemed necessary for the
health, comfort, safety or welfare of the present and future population
of the area and necessary facilities, restrict subdivision or development
of any portion of the property which lies within the floodplain of any
stream or drainage course.
§ 175-32 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-33
163:522
F. The finished elevation of proposed streets within flood-prone areas shall
be no more than two feet below the base flood elevation. Drainage
openings shall be sufficient to discharge flood flows without unduly
increasing flood heights.
G. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow of surface
waters without risk to persons or property. The drainage system shall
ensure drainage at all points along streets and ensure conveyance of
drainage away from buildings. The Township Supervisors may require
an underground system to accommodate a one-hundred-year flood and
a secondary surface system to accommodate larger, less frequent
floods. Drainage plans shall be consistent with local and regional
drainage plans. The facilities shall be designed to prevent the discharge
of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
H. All new or replacement sanitary sewer systems, whether public or
private, located in flood-prone areas shall be floodproofed up to a point
1 1/2 feet above the base flood elevation.
I. All new or replacement water systems, whether public or private, in
flood-prone areas shall be floodproofed to a point 1 1/2 feet above the
base flood elevation.
J. All other new or replacement public or private utilities and facilities in
flood-prone areas shall be elevated or floodproofed to a point 1 1/2 feet
above the base flood elevation.
K. Waivers. Guidelines for relaxation from the requirements set forth in
this section are as follows:
(1) A waiver shall not be issued within any designated regulatory
floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood
discharge would result.
(2) A waiver shall only be issued if there is:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause.
(b) A determination that failure to relax the requirements would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant.
(c) A determination that the relaxing of a requirement will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public
safety or extraordinary public expense; create nuisances;
cause fraud on or victimization of the public; or conflict with
existing local laws or ordinances.
(3) A waiver shall only be issued upon a determination that the waiver
is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
§ 175-33 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-33
163:523
§ 175-34. Wetlands.
The federal government has adopted legislation regulating construction
in and about areas known as "wetlands." This legislation is enforced
concurrently by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the
Environmental Protection Agency and the Department of Environmental
Resources. The Township of East Norriton will not review any plans with
respect to their compliance with the federal legislation, and the individual
landowner should assure himself that his plans comply with the federal
legislation.
(4) The Township shall maintain a record of all waivers, including
justification for their issuance, and report such decisions issued in
its annual report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administrator.
(5) If granted relief, it shall involve only the least modification.
§ 175-33 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-34
163:524
ARTICLE VI
Subdivision and Land Development Plans
§ 175-35. Preliminary plan.
The plan shall show or be accompanied by the following information:
A. Drafting standards.
(1) No plan shall be smaller than that provided by a scale of 100 feet to
the inch and shall be accurate to within one part in 300.
(2) Dimensions shall be in feet and decimals and bearings in degrees,
minutes and seconds.
(3) The plan shall show the courses and dimensions of the boundary
line survey of the entire land to be subdivided or developed. The
survey shall not have an error of closure greater than one part in
2,500.
(4) The sheet or sheets shall be one of the following sizes: 15 inches by
18 inches, 18 inches by 30 inches or 24 inches by 36 inches. If more
than one sheet is necessary, each sheet shall be the same size and
numbered to show its relation to the total number of sheets in the
plan, as "Sheet No. 1 of 5 sheets."
B. Location and identification.
(1) A title consisting of the name and address of the subdivider,
developer or builder and the registered engineer or surveyor or
qualified planner.
(2) The name of the Township and subdivision or development.
(3) The date, scale and North point.
(4) The entire tract boundary with bearings and distances.
(5) A key map relating the subdivision to at least three existing
intersections of Township roads.
C. Existing features.
(1) Existing features within 400 feet of any part of the land being
subdivided or developed: the location, names, widths, radii and
surface conditions of existing streets and alleys, and those shown
on the Township Official Plan of streets and alleys, the location of
watercourses, floodplains, sanitary sewers, storm drains, utilities
above or below the ground and other similar features.
(2) Existing features within the land to be subdivided or developed: the
location, names, widths and other dimensions, including center-line
courses, distances and curve data, paving widths, curblines, rightof-
way and curbline radii at intersections and street location tie-ins
§ 175-35 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-35
163:525
by courses and distances to the nearest intersection of existing and
planned streets and alleys, and the location and size of existing
sanitary sewers and storm drains, watercourses and drainage
flows, floodplains, location and size of utilities above or below the
ground and recreational areas.
(3) Contours at vertical intervals of five feet or, in the case of relatively
level tracts, at such lesser intervals as may be necessary for study
as determined by the Planning Commission or Township Engineer.
In no case shall the contour interval exceed 100 feet horizontally.
Where reasonably practicable, data shall refer to known,
established elevations or to United States Coast and Geodetic
Survey datum. Steep slopes, over 15%, as delineated in the soil
survey, shall be plotted.
(4) Location and character of existing buildings: the location, species
and size of trees standing alone (over six inches in caliper
measured at breast height); outer limits of tree masses; the
location of quarries, marshland and land subject to inundation; and
other topographical features which may affect the location of
proposed streets or buildings.
(5) Measured distances from the center line of streets to buildings,
large trees standing alone.
(6) The depth of the water table, noted on the plan or in a separate
report along with the location of the test borings. When percolation
tests are required, the location of the test holes shall be indicated.
(7) Zoning requirements or requirements of any Township ordinance
or resolution on and adjacent to the land to be subdivided or
developed.153
D. Proposed street and lot layout.
(1) The layout of streets, alleys and crosswalks, including names and
widths of cartway and ultimate right-of-way.
(2) The layout and dimensions of lots and net area.
(3) A reference to any land to be dedicated for public use.
(4) Tentative grades to an existing street or to a point 400 feet beyond
the boundaries of the subdivision or development.
(5) The location and size of sanitary sewers and storm drains.
(6) All building setback lines with distances from the ultimate right-ofway
line.
153. Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Zoning.
§ 175-35 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-35
163:526
(7) Indication of any lots in which a use of other than residential is
intended.
(8) When there are existing buildings located on the land being
subdivided or developed, the buildings that are to be demolished
shall be indicated.
(9) A statement on the plan shall show the number of acres being
subdivided or developed, the number of lots, the type of buildings,
the character of buildings, linear feet of new streets, linear feet of
streets to be widened and average lot size.
E. Proposed improvements.
(1) Tentative cross sections and center-line profiles for each proposed
or widened street shown on preliminary plan, including profiles for
proposed sanitary sewers and storm drains, showing manholes,
inlets and catch basins.
(2) Preliminary design of any bridges, culverts or other structures and
appurtenances which may be required.
F. Flood-prone areas. Where the subdivision or land development lies
partially or completely in a flood-prone area or where the subdivision or
land development borders on a flood-prone area, the plan shall include
detailed information identifying the following:
(1) The location and elevation of existing and proposed streets, water
supply and sanitary facilities, building sites, structures, soil types
and proposed floodproofing measures.
(2) The boundaries of the flood-prone area and the base flood elevation
as defined in Article XVII, Floodplain Conservation District, of the
East Norriton Township Zoning Ordinance.154
G. Certificates. When approved, the preliminary plan must show:
(1) The signature of the subdivider, developer or builder certifying his
adoption of the plan.
(2) The signature of the Township Secretary certifying that the Board
approved the plan on the date shown.
H. Haul route and responsibility for damage to Township roads. The
applicant shall show on the preliminary plan the designated haul route
to be used for the delivery of all supplies and materials to the job site.
This haul route must be approved by the Township, and any violations
during the course of construction will be considered to be a violation of
this chapter. At the time of the start of construction, the Township
Engineer shall evaluate the Township road system which is part of the
haul route and shall again evaluate the haul route at the time of
154. Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Zoning.
§ 175-35 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-35
163:527
§ 175-36. Final plan.
acceptance of dedication of the development public improvements. Any
damages caused to the Township roads that are part of the haul route
shall be paid by the applicant to the Township. The decision of the
Township Engineer shall be final with respect to the damage caused
and the estimated cost of repair.
I. Proposed recreational open space.
(1) The shape, size and dimensions of all land areas offered for
dedication or proposed to be preserved for active or passive
recreational facilities shall be delineated. The type and nature of all
recreational improvements shall be detailed, including proposed
grading, paving, structures, fences, utilities, landscaping and
significant natural features to be saved.
(2) The method of dedication to the Township shall be stated as well as
any deed restrictions or easements that may apply.
(3) Phasing of the construction of recreational facilities, if proposed,
shall be identified.
(4) Whenever the Board of Supervisors and the applicant agree to
payment of a fee in lieu of otherwise required land dedication, a
note shall be placed on the plan specifying the amount of the fee
and the method used to determine the fee as well as the manner to
be used to secure and pay that amount.
J. Preliminary landscape plan. A preliminary landscape plan shall be
submitted and, at a minimum, shall contain the following:
(1) Existing features: the location and character of existing buildings,
mature trees over six inches in caliper standing alone, outer limits
of tree masses and other existing vegetation, the location of
floodplains, wetlands and other natural features which may affect
the location of proposed streets, buildings and landscape plantings.
(2) Proposed improvements.
(a) Approximate location of all proposed landscaping materials
required under this article.
(b) Demarcation of existing vegetation to remain or to be removed
and the means of protecting existing vegetation during
construction.
(c) Approximate location of proposed buildings, paving, utilities or
other improvements.
A. Construction improvement plan.
§ 175-35 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-36
163:528
(1) Drafting standards. The same standards shall be required for an
improvement construction plan as for a preliminary plan, except
that the horizontal scale of the plan and profile shall be 40 feet to
the inch and the vertical scale of the profile shall be four feet to the
inch.
(2) Information to be shown. The plan shall contain sufficient
information to provide working plans for the construction of the
proposed streets or any portion thereof, including all
appurtenances, sewers and utilities shown on the approved
preliminary plan, from one existing or approved street to another
or, in the case of a cul-de-sac, to its turnaround, and shall include:
(a) Horizontal plan. The horizontal plan shall show details of the
horizontal layout as follows:
[1] Information shown on the preliminary plan pertaining to
the street to be constructed.
[2] The beginning and end of the proposed immediate
construction.
[3] Stations corresponding to those shown on the profile.
[4] The elevation of the curb at tangent points on horizontal
curves at street or alley intersections and at the projected
intersections of the curblines.
[5] The location and size of sanitary sewers and lateral
connections, with distances between manholes, of water,
gas, electric and other utility pipes or conduits and of
storm drains, inlets and manholes.
[6] The location, type and size of curbs and widths of paving.
[7] The location and species of street shade trees and location
and type of fire hydrants and streetlights.
(b) Profile. The profile shall be a vertical section of the street with
details of vertical alignment as follows:
[1] Profiles and elevations of the ground along the center lines
of proposed streets.
[2] A profile of sanitary sewers with a profile over the sewer of
the present and finished ground surface showing manhole
locations with stations beginning at the lowest manhole.
[3] A profile of the storm drain showing manhole locations.
(c) Cross section. The cross section shall comply with Township
standards and specifications as minimum requirements. It
shall show a typical cross section across the street or alley with
details of grading and construction as follows:
§ 175-36 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-36
163:529
[1] The ultimate right-of-way width and the location and width
of paving within the ultimate right-of-way.
[2] The type, depth and crown of paving.
[3] The type and size of curb.
[4] When sidewalks are required, grading of sidewalks area
should be carried to the full width of the ultimate right-ofway
and slope cut or fill extended beyond the ultimate
right-of-way.
[5] The location, width, type and depth of sidewalks, when
required.
[6] Typical location, size and depth of sewers and utilities.
B. Record plan.
(1) Drafting standards. The same standards shall be required for a
record plan as for preliminary plan, and in addition, for recording
purposes the plans shall be placed on sheet sizes of 25 inches by 36
inches inches, 18 inches by 30 inches or 15 inches by 18 inches. All
lettering and lines should be so drawn as to be legible if the plan
should be reduced to half size.
(2) Information to be shown. The plan, which may constitute a portion
only of an approved preliminary plan, shall show:
(a) A title, as required for a preliminary plan.
(b) Courses and distances sufficient for the legal description of all
the lines shown on the plan. The error of closure shall not be
greater than one part in 2,500.
(c) The names of abutting owners, names, locations, widths and
other dimensions of streets, including center-line courses,
distances and curve data, descriptive data of ultimate right-ofway
lines not parallel with or concentric with a center line and
location tie-ins by courses and distances to the nearest
intersections of all existing, planned and approved streets,
alleys and easements, recreational areas and other public
improvements, within the land to be subdivided or developed.
(d) All lots are to be deeded to the side of public ultimate right-ofway
so that a single deed may be drawn to the governing body
for the dedication of streets by the subdivider, developer or
builder.
(e) Evidence that the plans are in conformity with zoning,
building, sanitation and other applicable Township ordinances
and regulations. In any instance where such plans do not
§ 175-36 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-36
163:530
conform, evidence shall be presented that an exception has
been officially authorized.
(f) The location, material and size of monuments with reference to
them.
(g) Building setback lines with distances from the ultimate rightof-
way lines.
(h) Restrictions in the deed affecting the subdivision or
development of the property.
(i) Recreational facilities.
[1] The shape, size and dimensions of all land areas offered for
dedication or proposed to be preserved for active or
passive recreational facilities shall be delineated. The type
and nature of all recreational improvements shall be
detailed, including proposed grading, paving, structures,
fences, utilities, landscaping and significant natural
features to be saved.
[2] The method of dedication to the Township shall be stated,
as well as any deed restrictions or easements that may
apply.
[3] Phasing of the construction of recreational facilities, if
proposed, shall be identified.
[4] Whenever the Board of Supervisors and applicant agree to
payment of a fee in lieu of otherwise required land
dedication, a note shall be placed on the plan specifying
the amount of the fee and the method used to determine
the fee, as well as the manner to be used to secure and pay
that amount.
(3) Certificates. When approved, the record plan must show the
following acknowledgment as applicable:
State of Pennsylvania
County of Montgomery
On the ____ day of ___________________ 20___, before me the
subscriber, a notary public of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
residing in ___________________________, personally appeared
____________________________ who acknowledged this plan to be the
official plan of the highways and property shown thereon situate in
the Township of East Norriton, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania,
and desired that this plan be recorded according to law.
Witness my hand and notarial seal the day and year aforesaid.
Notary Public
§ 175-36 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-36
163:531
My commission expires
Recorded this ____ day of _________________ 20___, in the office for
the recording of deeds, etc., in and for the County of Montgomery
in Norristown, Pennsylvania, in Plan Book No. _______, Page _______
Recorder
I hereby certify that this plan represents a survey made by me,
that the monuments shown hereon exist as located and that all
dimensional and geodetic details are correct.
_____
Dated Registered Surveyor
I hereby certify that _______________________ is the registered
owner of the land herein subdivided or developed and that I do
hereby adopt this plan.
(Title)
Submitted herewith are a complete set of construction
improvement plans marked sheet ________ through ________ which
form a part of this application, being dated __________ and last
revised _________
Owner
Approved by the Board of Supervisors of East Norriton Township
this _____ day of __________________ 20___.
Chairman
Secretary
C. Minor subdivision final plan and development requirements. Set forth
below are requirements and standards to be complied with and shown
on final plans for minor subdivisions. All other design criteria provisions
set forth in this Chapter 175, Subdivision and Land Development, are
not applicable to minor subdivision unless the Board of Supervisors
otherwise directs, based upon the unique location and/or physical
conditions of the property for which the minor subdivision plan is
submitted.
(1) Drafting standards. The plans shall be drawn at a scale of one inch
equals 50 feet.
(2) Dimensions shall be set forth in feet and decimal parts thereof as
well as bearings, degrees, minutes and seconds.
§ 175-36 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-36
163:532
(3) Each sheet shall be numbered and shall show its relationship to the
total number of sheets.
(4) Where any revisions are made or when the plan is a revision of a
previously approved plan, the necessary revisions shall be shown.
(5) The plans shall be so prepared and bear an adequate legend to
indicate clearly which features are existing and which are
proposed.
(6) The boundary of the subdivision shall be shown as a solid, heavy
line.
(7) The plans shall be on sheet sizes either 24 inches by 36 inches or 36
inches by 42 inches. All lettering shall be so drawn as to the legible
if the plan were to be reduced to half size.
(8) The name of the subdivision and/or land development shall be
provided.
(9) The name and address and telephone number of the owner of
record and the applicant shall be provided.
(10) The name and address of the engineer and/or surveyor responsible
for the plan shall be provided.
(11) Tax parcel numbers and deed book with page numbers of property
to be developed, including any deed restrictions to the property,
shall be provided.
(12) Zoning requirements, including applicable districts, maximum
density permitted, lot size and yard requirements, as well as any
variances or special exceptions granted, shall be provided.
(13) A location map showing the relation of the site to adjoining
properties and streets within 1,000 feet at a scale of one inch
equals 800 feet.
(14) North point shall be shown.
(15)Written and graphic scales, including the scale of the location map,
shall be provided.
(16) Total acreage of the site shall be provided.
(17) A complete boundary survey of the property to be subdivided or
developed showing all courses, distances and tie-ins to the nearest
street intersections shall be provided. Such surveys shall be
certified by a registered professional engineer or a registered
professional land surveyor licensed in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(18) The location of all existing and proposed property monuments shall
be shown.
§ 175-36 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-36
163:533
(19) The boundaries of all adjacent properties with tax parcel numbers
and the names of the landowners shall be shown.
(20) Streets on and adjacent to the site with legal and ultimate rights-ofway
shall be shown.
(21) The buildable site area shall be shown.
(22) The layout of the proposed lots, indicating the exact dimensions,
area and uses of the lots, shall be shown.
(23) Building setback lines, front, rear and side yard lines shall be
shown.
(24) Rights-of-way and/or existing easements for all drainage, utilities
or other purposes shall be shown.
(25) Concrete monuments, existing and proposed, shall be shown.
(26) The number of units proposed shall be provided.
(27) Soil types based on maps contained in the soil survey of
Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, United States Department of
Agricultural Soil Conservation Service, as last revised, shall be
provided.
(28) Contour lines measured at vertical intervals of five feet shall be
shown. Such contours shall be based upon United States Geological
Survey contour mapping.
(29) Floodplain areas based upon applicable Township plans of record
shall be shown.
(30) Sedimentation and erosion control pursuant to the Clean Streams
Act and in accordance with standards and specifications found in
the Erosion and Sedimentation Control Handbook available
through the Montgomery County Conservation District shall be
shown. Such erosion and sedimentation control shall be used
during the course of construction for the project to prevent damage
to downstream property owners.
(31) A copy of all restrictions, covenants, declarations or other title
restrictions and encumbrances, etc., if any, under which the lots
are to be sold shall be provided.
(32) A development schedule indicating the approximate date when the
construction can be expected to begin and to be completed shall be
provided.
D. Final landscape plan. A final landscape plan shall be submitted and, at a
minimum, shall contain the following:
(1) Drafting standards. The same standards shall be required as for a
preliminary plan.
§ 175-36 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-36
163:534
(2) Information to be shown:
(a) Plan scale, date, North arrow and location map with zoning
district designations for the site and adjacent properties.
(b) Location of all existing and proposed buildings and structures.
(c) Location of all existing and proposed roads, parking areas,
service areas and other paved areas.
(d) Location of all outside storage and trash receptacle areas.
(e) Sidewalks, berms, fences, walls, freestanding signs and site
lighting.
(f) Existing and proposed underground and aboveground utilities,
including but not limited to site lighting, transformers,
hydrants, manholes and valve boxes.
(g) All existing and proposed contours at two-foot intervals; in
order to determine the relationship of planting and grading,
areas with slopes in excess of 3:1 shall be indicated on the
plan.
(h) Existing mature trees over six inches in caliper, woodlands and
tree masses to remain.
(i) Existing mature trees over six inches in caliper, woodlands and
tree masses to be removed.
(j) Location of all proposed landscaping, including required street
trees, stormwater basin landscaping, parking lot landscaping,
property line buffer and site element screen landscaping.
(k) A planting schedule listing proposed plant material, species,
size, quantity and root condition.
(l) A schedule showing all landscape requirements and plantings
proposed for each category.
(m) Planting details, including method of protecting existing
vegetation during construction and planting methods.
(n) Information in the form of notes or specifications concerning
seeding, sodding, ground cover, mulching and other
installation or maintenance activities.
(o) A detailed cost estimate shall be submitted with the public
improvement escrow, showing the value of all proposed
landscaping, including all labor, materials and guaranties.
(3) Certificates. When approved, the landscape plan must show:
§ 175-36 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-36
163:535
§ 175-37. Land development plans.
(a) The signature and seal of the registered landscape architect,
engineer or other qualified person or other qualified person
responsible for preparing the landscape plan and details.
(b) The signature of the applicant, subdivider, developer or
builder.
(c) The signatures of the Township Supervisors.
E. Final plans shall be provided in CADD format on a PC-compatible
3.5-inch high-density diskette. The diskette shall be formatted for use
with a Microsoft Dos operating system. The file shall be in a standard
DXF format.
A. A preliminary and final plan of a plat of land development shall be
required and shall be presented in conformance with the drafting
standards, existing features of the land to be set forth and information
to be shown as enumerated in §§ 175-35 and 175-36, including the
acknowledgments of this article as they are applicable to land
development plans.
B. In addition, a land development plan shall include the following:
(1) All covenants relating to use.
(2) Man-made features for the use of two or more prospective
occupants.
(3) The lot size.
(4) Zoning classification and applicable standards with which
compliance is necessary for granting final approval.
(5) The type of dwelling.
(6) The density and/or intensity of use.
(7) The lot coverage.
(8) The use of the development.
(9) The location and placement of accessory structures and facilities.
(10) Streets, pedestrianways and parking facilities.
(11) Common open space.
(12) Public facilities.
(13) A site utilization scheme.
(14) Specifications for required improvements and changes to be
affected upon the existing terrain or existing structures thereon.
§ 175-36 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-37
163:536
C. Final plans shall be provided in CADD format on a PC-compatible
3.5-inch high-density diskette. The diskette shall be formatted for use
with a Microsoft Dos operating system. The file shall be in a standard
DXF format.
§ 175-37 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-37
163:537

ARTICLE VII
Mobile Home Parks
§ 175-38. Site drainage.
A. Surface water. The ground surface in all parts of the development shall
be graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe, efficient
manner. The velocity of runoff during and after development shall not
exceed 1.5 feet per second as required by Chapter 102, Section
102.22(c), of the Erosion Control Rules and Regulations published by
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources, July 1, 1973,
and as subsequently amended.
B. Ponds and retention structures. Surface water collectors and other
bodies of standing water capable of breeding mosquitoes and other
insects shall be eliminated or controlled in a manner approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources.
C. Wastewater. Wastewater from any plumbing fixture or sanitary sewer
line shall not be deposited upon the ground surface in any part of a
mobile home development or the surrounding properties.
D. Fees.
(1) An initial deposit of $250 shall be required at the time of
submission of preliminary subdivision and/or land development
plans, which fee will be applied against the engineering and legal
fees incurred.
(2) The owner shall pay to the Township reasonable and necessary fees
incurred by the Township for the services of the Township's
professional consultants, including but not limited to its solicitor
and engineer to review and report on such plans and other reviews
and examinations and preparation of documents incidental to the
application and installation of improvements. The review fees of
East Norriton Township's professional consultants or engineer
shall be based on a schedule established and revised from time to
time by ordinance or resolution.
(3) Periodic billings shall be made based upon the actual cost of review,
and these bills must be paid within 30 days of submittal.
(4) In the event that the owner disputes the amount of any such review
fees, the owner shall, within 10 days of the billing date, notify the
Township that such fees are disputed in which case the Township
shall not delay or disapprove a subdivision or land development
application due to the owner's request over disputed fees.
(5) In the event that the Township and the owner cannot agree on the
amount of review fees which are reasonable and necessary, then
the owner and the Township shall follow the procedure for dispute
resolution set forth in § 175-53.1D.
§ 175-38 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-38
163:539
§ 175-39. Soil and ground cover requirements.
Park grounds shall be maintained free of vegetative growth which may
harbor rodents or insects or other pests harmful to man.
§ 175-40. Mobile home pad.
§ 175-41. Skirting.
The area between ground level and the perimeter of the mobile home shall
be enclosed by means of a skirting of wood, aluminum or other similar
material.
§ 175-42. Street system.
(6) In the event that any bill for engineering, legal or other services is
rendered and not paid within 30 days, whether before or after the
final approval of a subdivision, interest shall be added to said bill at
the rate of 1.5% per month.
A. No mobile home shall be erected in a mobile home lot except upon a
mobile home pad.
B. Each mobile home pad shall have a minimum dimension of 60 feet by 12
feet.
C. Each mobile home pad shall have a paved access to a street in the
mobile home park.
D. The pad shall be constructed from either concrete, asphalt concrete or
other material sufficient to adequately support the mobile home to
prevent abnormal settling or heaving under the weight of the home. The
corners of the mobile home shall be anchored to prevent wind overturn
and rocking, with tie-downs such as concrete dead men, screw augers,
arrowhead anchors or other devices suitable to withstand a tension of
at least 2,800 pounds.
E. In any event, minimum installation shall be as contained in the National
Fire Protection Association, publication No. 501A, Standards for the
Installaton of Mobile Homes.
A. General requirements. A safe and convenient vehicular access shall be
provided for abutting public streets or roads. Gridiron layouts and
street patterns unrelated to the topography of the site are to be
avoided.
B. Access and internal streets. Access to internal streets of mobile home
parks shall be designed to minimize congestion and hazards at the
entrance or exit and allow free movement of traffic on adjacent streets.
Internal streets not intended to be dedicated shall have a minimum
road pavement width of 20 feet with a four-foot shoulder, provided that
parking is prohibited on both sides.
§ 175-38 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-42
163:540
§ 175-43. Pedestrian walkways.
§ 175-44. Off-street parking.
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Article XVIII of the
Zoning Ordinance155 and the construction requirements for parking areas
as stipulated in this Subdivision and Land Development Chapter.
§ 175-45. Sewage disposal.
C. Intersections. Within 50 feet of an intersection, streets shall be at
approximately right angles. A distance of at least 200 feet shall be
maintained between center lines of offset intersecting streets.
Intersections of more than two streets at one point shall be avoided.
D. Unless otherwise provided in this Article VII, streets shall be in
conformance with the standards for public streets of Article V of this
chapter.
A. General requirements. All mobile home developments shall provide
safe, convenient, all-season pedestrian walkways of adequate width for
intended use, durable and convenient to maintain, between individual
mobile homes, mobile home development streets, all community
facilities provided for the residents and off-site pedestrian traffic
generators, such as schools, bus stops, commercial centers, etc. These
pedestrian walkways may parallel vehicular roadways, where they shall
only be required on one side, or they may from a separate but
coordinated system away from streets. Walkways must be provided
wherever pedestrian traffic is concentrated and where school children
congregate but may be waived elsewhere if the applicant successfully
demonstrates a lack of need.
B. Common walk system. Where a common walk system is provided and
maintained between locations, such common walks shall have a
minimum width of four feet. Where these walks parallel roadways, they
shall be separated from the road pavement by a distance of at least four
feet.
C. Individual walks. All dwellings shall be connected to common walks or
to streets or to driveways or parking spaces connecting to a paved
street. Such individual walks shall have a minimum width of two feet.
A. Public sewerage shall be required in all mobile home parks and shall be
approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources
and the Department of Health and be consistent with the Township
Sewerage Facilities Plan.
B. Each mobile home lot shall be provided with a sewer riser pipe at least
four inches in diameter. The sewer riser pipe shall be so located on each
155. Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Zoning.
§ 175-42 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-45
163:541
§ 175-46. Electrical system.
§ 175-47. Liquefied petroleum gas system; fuel oil system.
mobile home pad that the sewer connection to the mobile home drain
will be in an approximate rational position. A sewer riser pipe is that
portion of the sewer lateral which extends vertically from the ground
elevation to the mobile home site.
C. The sewer connection shall be in accordance with the East Norriton
Township Plumbing Code.
D. Provisions shall be made for plugging the sewer riser pipe when a
mobile home does not occupy the lot. Surface drainage shall be diverted
from the riser. The rim of the riser pipe shall extend at least six inches
above ground elevation.
A. Every mobile home park shall contain an electrical wiring system
consisting of wiring, fixtures, equipment and appurtenances with local
electric power company specifications regulating such systems.
B. Power distribution lines.
(1) All utility lines shall be installed underground.
(2) All direct burial conductors or cable shall be buried at least 18
inches below the ground surface and shall be insulated and
specifically designed for the purpose, as required by the
Philadelphia Electric Company and the Middle Department
Underwriters.
C. Individual electrical connections. Each mobile home lot shall be
provided with an approved disconnecting device and overcurrent
protective equipment. The minimum service per outlet shall be 120/240
volts AC, 100 amperes.
D. Ground required. All exposed non-current-carrying metal parts of
mobile homes and all other equipment shall be grounded by means of
an approved grounding conductor, run with branch circuit conductors
and other approved methods of grounded metallic wiring. The neutral
conductor shall not be used as an equipment ground for mobile homes
or other equipment.
A. Liquefied petroleum gas systems. Liquefied petroleum gas systems
provided for mobile homes and mobile home parks, service buildings or
other structures, when installed in mobile home parks, shall be
maintained in conformity with the standards for the Storage and
Handling of Liquefied Petroleum Gases (National Fire Protection
Association, NFPA No. 58 and American National Standards Institute,
ANSI No. 2106.01) and to NFPA No. 501A, Standards for Mobile Home
Parks.
§ 175-45 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-47
163:542
§ 175-48. Lighting facilities.
Adequate provisions shall be made in the mobile home park for lighting
of the streets. Lighting facilities for parking areas and any other deemed
necessary for the safety and convenience to the mobile home park residents
shall be required. All lighting facilities shall be so designed and arranged
in a manner which will protect the highway and neighboring properties,
whether contiguous or not, from unreasonable glare or hazardous
interference of any kind.
§ 175-49. Applicability of other provisions; compliance.
All provisions, regulations and procedures provided in this East Norriton
Township Subdivision and Land Development Chapter shall apply to mobile
(1) The systems shall be provided with safety devices to relieve
excessive pressures and shall be arranged so that the discharge
terminates at a safe location.
(2) The systems shall have at least one accessible means for shutting
off gas. Such means shall be located outside the mobile home and
shall be maintained in an effective operating condition.
(3) All liquefied petroleum gas piping outside the mobile home shall be
well supported and protected against mechanical injury. Undiluted
liquefied petroleum gas in liquid form shall not be conveyed
through piping equipment and systems in the mobile home.
(4) Vessels of more than 12 United States gallons' gross capacity must
be secured, but not permanently fastened, to prevent accidental
overturning.
(5) No liquefied petroleum gas vessel shall be stored or located inside
or beneath any mobile home or other structure.
B. Fuel oil supply systems.
(1) All fuel oil supply systems provided for mobile homes shall be
installed and maintained in conformity with the rules and
regulations of the National Fire Protection Association Standard,
NFPA No. 31.
(2) All piping from outside fuel storage tanks or cylinders to mobile
homes shall be securely, but not permanently, fastened in place.
(3) All fuel oil supply systems provided for mobile homes shall have
shutoff valves located within five inches of storage tanks.
(4) All fuel storage tanks or cylinders shall be securely placed and shall
be not less than five feet from any mobile home exit.
(5) Storage tanks located in areas subject to traffic shall be protected
against physical damage.
§ 175-47 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-49
163:543
home parks, and no such park shall be opened or constructed without full
compliance with same. In addition thereto, the following regulations shall
apply:
A. Site design.
(1) Arrangement of structures and facilities. The tract, including
mobile home stands, patios, other dwellings and structures, and all
tract improvements shall be organized in relation to topography,
the shape of the plot and the shape, size and position of structures
and common facilities. Special attention shall be given to new
mobile home designs and to common appurtenances that are
available.
(2) Adaptation to tract assets. Each mobile home unit or other dwelling
or structure shall be fitted to the terrain with a minimum
disturbance of the land and a minimum elevation difference
between the floor level of the unit and the ground elevation under
it. Existing trees and shrubs, rock formations, streams, floodplains,
steep slopes and other natural features of the tract shall be
preserved to the maximum extent practical. Favorable views shall
be emphasized by the plan.
(3) Courts and spaces. Groups or clusters of units so placed as to
create interior spaces and courtyards shall be incorporated
whenever feasible.
(4) Orientation. Mobile homes are encouraged to be arranged in a
variety of orientations and are strongly encouraged to have many
units with their long sides facing the street rather than their ends,
in order to provide variety and interest. Site layout shall be
designed to ensure that mobile home units are offset to block long
uninterrupted vistas between the units.
B. Common open space. In addition to the requirements of the East
Norriton Township Zoning Ordinance,156 the following regulations shall
also apply:
(1) Arrangement. The common space shall be designed as a contiguous
area unless the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the
East Norriton Township Board of Supervisors that two or more
separate areas would be preferable. The open space shall also have
easily identifiable pedestrian and visual accessibility to all
residents of the mobile home development, although all units do
not have to abut the common open space.
C. Buffers.
(1) General requirements. Along all exterior property boundary lines
except those which abut another mobile home development, there
156. Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Zoning.
§ 175-49 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-49
163:544
shall be a permanent buffer at least 10 feet in depth, unless this
is waived pursuant to Subsection C(4) below. A screen buffer (as
defined herein) shall be provided wherever the mobile home
development abuts existing residential uses, with the exception
of high-rise structures, and where abutting other types of uses
when deemed necessary by the East Norriton Township Board
of Supervisors to provide sufficient buffering and transition. A
softening buffer (as defined herein) shall be provided wherever
the mobile home development abuts existing high-rise residential
uses, existing commercial, office, industrial and institutional uses;
any existing street [as modified by Subsection C(3) below], drive
or parking area; or open (not wooded) undeveloped land. An open
buffer shall be provided wherever the mobile home development
abuts wooded, undeveloped land or where more extensive buffers
are deemed unnecessary by the East Norriton Township Board of
Supervisors.
(2) Components. The minimum component of each type of buffer shall
be as follows:
(a) Screen buffer. The primary components of a screen buffer shall
be a row of evergreen trees, at a height of not less than six feet
when planted, spaced not more than 10 feet apart on center,
and these trees shall be of such species to attain a height of
maturity of not less than 20 feet. Also required as a secondary
component of the buffer is one of the following: mounding (the
use of which is encouraged), provided that the slopes shall be a
maximum of three-to-one, visually opaque fencing not greater
than six feet in height and coniferous shrubbery. Any
combination of evergreen trees, coniferous shrubs, mounding,
fencing or other natural vegetation or man-made materials is
allowable, provided that an effective visual screen at least 15
feet in height above the adjacent ground elevation in the
mobile home development is achieved within a reasonable
time. But whenever only vegetation is used, there shall be at
least a double row of evergreen trees, with the trees in one row
offset five feet from the trees in the other row and the rows at
least five feet apart.
(b) Softening buffer. The primary component of a softening buffer
shall be a row of trees, spaced not more than 25 feet apart on
center, at least 25% of which shall be evergreens. The
evergreen trees shall be at least six feet in height when planted
and shall attain at least 20 feet in height at maturity. Any
deciduous trees shall be at least 1 1/2 inches in caliper and
eight feet in height when planted and shall attain a height of
not less than 20 feet at maturity. These trees shall be
interspersed with other allowable components, including any
other type of trees, shrubs, mounding, fencing and/or similar
§ 175-49 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-49
163:545
§ 175-50. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANCHORING — The fastening of the mobile home to its mobile home stand
in order to prevent upset or damage due to wind, erosion, flooding or other
natural forces.
HITCH — A device which is part of the frame or attaches to the frame
of a mobile home and connects it to a power source for the purpose of
transporting the unit.
MOBILE HOME STAND — That part of an individual lot which has been
reserved and prepared for the placement of the mobile home.
natural or man-made elements having a visible vertical
dimension, or any combination thereof.
(c) Open buffer. The open buffer shall, as a minimum, consist of
grass, ground cover and/or similar vegetative material and
may include trees, shrubs or other natural or man-made
landscaping materials, but it shall be mostly vegetative with
minimal paved areas, if any.
(3) Street boundaries. Rather than the extensive buffers described in
Subsection C(2) above, the use of a single row of deciduous trees at
least eight feet in height when planted and at least 20 feet in height
at maturity, with a spacing of not more than 40 feet on center, may
be provided along all property boundaries which abut a street,
wherever necessary for adequate sight distance or where the East
Norriton Township Board of Supervisors determines this to be a
sufficient buffer to protect the welfare and safety of the community.
(4) Existing buffers. In cases where an edge(s) of a development
occurs along natural features which function as buffers, including
but not limited to mature vegetation, significant grade changes or
stream valleys, which are likely to be permanently preserved,
buffering may be waived along that edge(s) upon approval of the
East Norriton Township Board of Supervisors.
(5) Maintenance. All vegetation shall be maintained permanently and,
in the event of death or other destruction, shall be replaced within
one year by the persons responsible for maintenance when death or
destruction occurred.
(6) Buffer landscape plan. A landscaping plan shall be submitted with
the final plans, showing all pertinent information, including the
location, size and species of all individual trees and shrubs to be
preserved or planted or, alternately, the general characteristics of
existing vegetation masses which are to be preserved.
§ 175-49 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-50
163:546
ARTICLE VIII
Fees; Conditions of Acceptance; Approval
§ 175-51. Fees.
A. The owner shall pay to the Township reasonable and necessary
engineering fees incurred by the Township for the services of the
Township Engineer and/or the Township Engineer's staff incidental to
the review, examination and inspection of lands, plans and of the
construction of improvements and such other necessary reviews,
examinations and inspections. Inspection by the Township Engineer's
office may be required on a full-time basis during all periods when
construction on the required improvements is taking place. By way of
example and not of limitation, the owner shall pay to the Township all
costs for testing concrete materials used in the construction of required
improvements, including but not limited to concrete curb and concrete
sidewalk.
(1) The tests shall be made for each day's pour or 50 cubic yards of
concrete pour, whichever occurs first. Each series of tests will
include:
(a) Slump test.
(b) Air meter tests for air entrainment.
(c) Four test cylinders [two cylinders for seven-day strength test;
two cylinders for twenty-eight-day strength test].
(2) The owner shall also pay to the Township reasonable legal fees
incurred by the Township for legal services incidental to the review
and approval of plans for each subdivision or land development or
section thereof, including but not limited to the drafting and review
of the development agreements, the escrow agreements and any
other documents required by this chapter. These costs for
engineering and legal services shall also include any services
incidental to the final acceptance by the Township all or any portion
of the required improvements, as well as all costs of inspections by
Township employees not otherwise covered by permit fees.
(3) The review fees of East Norriton Township's professional
consultants, including but not limited to its solicitor and engineer,
shall be based upon a schedule established and revised from time
to time by ordinance or resolution.
(4) In the event that the owner disputes the amount of any such review
fees, the owner shall, within 10 days of the billing date, notify the
Township that such fees are disputed in which case the Township
shall not delay or disapprove a subdivision or land development
application due to the owner's request over disputed fees.
§ 175-51 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-51
163:547
(5) In the event that the Township and the owner cannot agree on the
amount of review fees which are reasonable and necessary, then
the owner and the Township shall follow the procedure for dispute
resolution set forth in § 175-53.1D.
B. The engineering, legal fees and other fees required to be paid by this
article shall be promptly paid to the Township by the owner upon the
submission of bills thereof to the owner by the Township from time to
time, as such fees are billed to the Township by its Engineer or Solicitor
or as determined by the Township in the case of Township employees.
Failure to promptly pay any such fee shall result in revocation of the
building permit.
C. To the engineering and legal fees required to be paid to the Township by
this article, there shall be added the sum of 5%, which the owner shall
pay to the Township as reimbursement to the Township of the costs
incurred by the Township for the collection of such fees and the
disbursement of the same to the Township Engineer and Township
Solicitor.
D. At the time of submission of preliminary plans, the applicant or
developer shall deposit a cash escrow with the Township to cover costs,
fees and expenses (for purposes of this section, "review fees"),
including but not limited to engineering and legal fees incurred during
the review and approval process of subdivision and land development
plans and through the final completion of the subdivision or land
development and expiration of the improvements' maintenance period.
The amount of such escrow shall be as set forth and established by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors and as amended from time to
time. Failure to post the cash escrow at the time of application for
preliminary plan review shall result in rejection of the application as
being incomplete. The Township may draw upon the cash escrow as
necessary to reimburse itself for review fees of the Township related to
the review and approval of subdivision or land development plans. A
copy of the invoice for review fees shall be sent by the Township to the
applicant/developer, and such invoice shall be paid by the Township
from the cash escrow unless the applicant disputes the amount of the
review fees and notifies the Township of such dispute within 10 days of
the billing date. In case of a dispute over review fees, the precision set
forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code157 shall be
applied. Upon each draw on the cash escrow by the Township, the
Township shall send the developer an invoice marked "Paid" for the
amount drawn, specifying the particular review fee for which the
Township has drawn payment or reimbursement. Within 10 days of the
developer's receipt of notice from the Township that the balance of the
escrow required by this section is inadequate to cover the reasonable
costs and expenses likely to be incurred by the Township in review and
approval of the land development or subdivision plans, the developer
157. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 175-51 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-51
163:548
§ 175-52. Conditions of acceptance; guaranty.
§ 175-53. Requirements prior to approval.
shall post such additional moneys as have been specified in the notice,
subject to dispute resolution set forth in § 175-53.1D. In the event that
the developer or applicant shall fail to make payment within 10 days of
receipt of notice from the Township and that such failure shall result
in insufficient funds in escrow to pay any bill for engineering, legal or
other services related to the review and approval procedure within 30
days of its due date, whether before or after the final approval of the
subdivision or land development, interest shall be added to the bill of
the applicant/developer at the rate of 1 1/2% per month until paid.
A. Conditions. The Township shall have no obligation to take over and
make public any street or other improvement unless:
(1) The required improvements, utility mains and laterals and
monuments shown on an approved plan or plans have been
constructed to all requirements of this chapter.
(2) It is established to the satisfaction of the governing body that there
is need for the improvements to be taken over and made public.
B. Acceptance. The Township shall have no responsibility with respect to
any street or other improvement, notwithstanding the use of the same
by the public, unless the street or other improvement is accepted by
ordinance or resolution of the governing body.
C. Guaranty. The applicants will guarantee, for a period of 18 months from
the date of the resolution accepting dedication, to maintain the stability
of all materials and work, to promptly make good and replace all poor
or inferior materials and work and to remedy all defects in materials or
workmanship, all shrinkage, settlement or other faults of any kind
whatsoever arising therefrom necessary for the structural integrity of
said improvements as well as the functioning of said improvements in
accordance with the design and specifications as depicted on the final
plan at his own expense and to the satisfaction of the Township
Engineer, when notified in writing to do so by the Township Engineer;
and, in order to secure the guaranty as herein required, the Township
shall be assured by means of a proper financial security not exceeding
15% of the actual cost of installation of said improvements to be posted
by the owner with the Township.
A. Financial security.
(1) No plan shall be finally approved unless the streets shown on such
plan have been improved to a mud-free or otherwise permanently
passable condition or improved as may be required by this
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, and any walkways,
curbs, gutters, streetlights, traffic signals, traffic control signs, fire
§ 175-51 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-53
163:549
hydrants, shade trees, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers
and other improvements as may be required by this Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance have been installed in
accordance with this article. In lieu of the completion of any
improvements or fees required as a condition for the final approval
of a plan, the subdivider or developer may provide for the deposit
with the Township of financial security in an amount sufficient
to cover the costs of such improvements or common amenities,
including but not limited to roads, stormwater detention and/or
retention basins and other related drainage facilities, recreational
facilities, open space improvements or buffer or screen plantings
which may be required.
(2) When requested by the developer, in order to facilitate financing,
the Board of Supervisors shall furnish the developer with a signed
copy of a resolution indicating approval of the final plat contingent
upon the developer obtaining satisfactory financial security. The
final plat or record plan shall not be signed nor recorded until the
financial improvements agreement (in form and substance
satisfactory to the Township Solicitor) is executed. The resolution
or letter of contingent approval shall expire and be deemed to be
revoked if the financial security agreement is not executed within
90 days of the date of the resolution of contingent approval unless a
written extension is granted by the Board of Supervisors; such
extension shall not be unreasonably withheld and shall be placed in
writing at the request of the developer.
(3) Without limitation as to other types of financial security which the
Township may approve, federal or commonwealth chartered
lending institution irrevocable letters of credit and restrictive or
escrow accounts in such lending institutions shall be deemed
acceptable financial security for the purposes of this section.
(4) Such financial security shall be posted with a federal or
commonwealth chartered lending institution chosen by the party
posting the financial security, provided that said lending institution
is authorized to conduct such business within the commonwealth.
[Amended 10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 567]
(5) Such guaranty shall provide for and secure to the public the
completion of any improvements which may be required on or
before the date fixed in the formal action of approval or
accompanying agreement for completion of the improvements.
[Amended 10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 567]
(6) The amount of financial security to be posted for the completion of
the required improvements shall be equal to 110% of the cost of
completion estimated as of 90 days following the date scheduled for
completion by the developer. Annually the Township may adjust the
amount of the financial security by comparing the actual cost of the
improvements which have been completed and the estimated cost
§ 175-53 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-53
163:550
for the completion of the remaining improvements as of the
expiration of the 90th day after either the original date scheduled
for completion or a rescheduled date of completion. Subsequent to
said adjustment, the Township may require the developer to post
additional security in order to assure that the financial security
equals said 110%. Any additional security shall be posted by the
developer in accordance with this subsection.
(7) The amount of financial security required shall be based upon an
estimate of the cost of completion of the required improvements,
submitted by the applicant or developer and prepared by a
professional engineer licensed as such in this commonwealth and
certified by such engineer to be a fair and reasonable estimate of
such cost. The Township, upon the recommendation of the
Township Engineer, may refuse to accept such estimate for good
cause shown. If the applicant or developer and the Township are
unable to agree upon an estimate, then the estimate shall be
recalculated and recertified by another professional engineer
licensed as such in this commonwealth and chosen mutually by the
Township and the applicant or developer. The estimate certified by
the third engineer shall be presumed fair and reasonable and shall
be the final estimate. In the event that a third engineer is so
chosen, fees for the services of said engineer shall be paid equally
by the Township and the applicant or developer.
(8) If the party posting the financial security requires more than one
year from the date of posting of the financial security to complete
the required improvements, the amount of financial security may
be increased by an additional 10% for each one-year period beyond
the first anniversary date from posting of financial security or to an
amount not exceeding 110% of the cost of completing the required
improvements as reestablished on or about the expiration of the
preceding one-year period by using the above bidding procedure.
(9) In the case where development is projected over a period of years,
the Township may authorize submission of final plans by section or
stages of development subject to such requirements or guarantees
as to improvements in future sections or stages of development as
it finds essential for the protection of any finally approved section
of the development.
(10) As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the
party posting the financial security may request the Board of
Supervisors to release or authorize the release, from time to time,
of such portions of the financial security necessary for payment to
the contractor or contractors performing the work. Any such
requests shall be in writing addressed to the Board of Supervisors,
and the Board of Supervisors shall have 45 days from receipt of
such request within which to allow the Township Engineer to
certify, in writing, to the Board of Supervisors that such portion of
the work upon the improvements has been completed in
§ 175-53 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-53
163:551
accordance with the approved plat. Upon such certification, the
Board of Supervisors shall authorize release by the lending
institution of an amount as estimated by the Township Engineer
fairly representing the value of the improvements completed or,
if the Board of Supervisors fails to act within said forty-five-day
period, the Board of Supervisors shall be deemed to have approved
the release of funds as requested. The Board of Supervisors may,
prior to final release at the time of completion and certification
by its Engineer, require retention of 10% of the estimated cost of
the aforesaid improvements. [Amended 10-27-2015 by Ord. No.
567]
(11) If water mains or sanitary sewer lines, or both, along with
apparatus or facilities related thereto, are to be installed under the
jurisdiction and pursuant to the rules and regulations of a public
utility or municipal authority separate and distinct from the
Township, financial security to assure proper completion and
maintenance thereof shall be posted in accordance with the
regulations of the controlling public utility or municipal authority
and shall not be included within the financial security as otherwise
required by this section.
(12) If financial security has been provided in lieu of the completion of
improvements required as a condition for the final approval of a
plat as set forth in this section, the Township shall not condition the
issuance of building, grading or other permits relating to the
erection or placement of improvements, including buildings, upon
the lots or land as depicted upon the approved final plan. If
financial security has been provided, occupancy permits for any
building or buildings to be erected shall not be withheld following:
the improvement of the streets providing access to and from
existing public roads to such building or buildings to a mud-free or
otherwise permanently passable condition, as well as the
completion of all other improvements as depicted upon the
approved plan, either upon the lot or lots or beyond the lot or lots in
question if such improvements are necessary for the reasonable
use of or occupancy of the building or buildings.
(13)No plan shall be finally approved until the applicant or developer
shall have deposited a cash escrow with the Township to be drawn
upon by the Township to reimburse the Township for fees, costs and
expenses which the Township may incur in connection with the
applicant's or developer's subdivision or land development. The
amount to be deposited in escrow with the Township shall be 10%
of the total construction cost of the required improvements as
determined in § 175-53A(7) or elsewhere in the Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance unless, in the judgment of the
Township Engineer, a greater or lesser amount is necessary to
secure the payment of the expenses which the Township is likely to
incur in connection with the subdivision or land development. Upon
§ 175-53 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-53
163:552
each withdrawal from the escrow by the Township, the Township
shall send the developer or applicant an invoice marked "Paid" for
the amount drawn, specifying the particular fee, cost or expense
for which the Township has drawn payment or reimbursement.
Within 10 days of the developer's receipt of notice from the
Township that the balance of the escrow required by this section
is inadequate to cover the reasonable costs and expenses likely to
be incurred by the Township with regard to the subdivision or land
development, the developer or applicant shall post such additional
moneys as have been specified in the notice, subject to dispute
resolution set forth in § 175-53.1D. In the event that the developer
or applicant shall fail to make such payment within 10 days of
receipt of notice from the Township and that such failure shall
result in insufficient funds in escrow to pay any bill for engineering,
legal or other services related to the land development or
subdivision within 30 days of its due date, interest shall be added to
the bill of the applicant/developer at the rate of 1 1/2% per month
until paid.
B. The subdivider or developer shall carry out the construction and
installation of street improvements, to include grading the full width of
right-of-way to the specified cross section, including the side slopes,
sanitary sewers, storm drains, water and gas mains, curb, sidewalks,
fire hydrants, streetlights, street name signs, shade trees, paving the
cartway in strict accordance with the approved improvement
construction plans with strict adherence to the standards and
specifications of the Township and the erection of approved barricades
when streets terminate temporarily at property boundary lines.
C. Forty-eight hours prior to the commencement of any operation in the
construction or installation of streets, curbs, sidewalks, drainage of
streets, curbs, sidewalks, drainage facilities, water and sewer facilities,
street signs, monuments or capped sewers, the owner shall notify the
Township Engineer who shall inspect the work, materials, construction
and installations as to Township requirements. No work requiring a
permit from the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation shall be
started until such permit has been received by the Township. Fortyeight
hours prior to the commencement of any operations within the
existing public right-of-way, notice shall be given to the East Norriton
Township Police Department.
D. The Township Engineer shall be authorized to have such tests of
materials made as he deems proper in order to have proper control of
materials. The owner shall pay to the Township the cost of such tests
plus 5% to reimburse the Township for the collection of such fees and
disbursements of the same to Township Engineer.
E. All required improvements shall be completed within one year from the
date of final plan approval except as otherwise provided for pursuant to
the terms of the Municipalities Planning Code. The date of
commencement of construction shall be determined to be the date upon
§ 175-53 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-53
163:553
§ 175-53.1. Inspection; payment of expenses.
which a building permit has been granted. In no event shall a building
permit be granted after the expiration of one year from the date of final
approval under this chapter without a resubmission by the subdivider
or developer to the Township Engineer for a determination of any
increase in the estimated cost of completion of required improvements.
Provided that the Township is satisfied that sufficient escrow remains,
extensions to complete the construction of public improvements shall
be automatically granted until such time as the Township shall
determine that the subdivision has been substantially completed. At
that time, the Township shall provide to the owner a written notice
that the public improvements must be completed within six months of
the date of that notice. If the public improvements are not completed
as provided therein, the Township shall be entitled to all remedies
pursuant to this chapter and the land development agreement.
F. Premises identification. Prior to the issuance of any use and occupancy
permit for any new building, street signs identifying the names of any
streets on which the property exists and all streets leading thereto shall
be installed. Further, premises identification signs as required by
Section 623.0 of the East Norriton Township BOCA Building Code
(1984), as amended, shall be installed on the property.
G. No construction of buildings or work involved in the construction or
installation of public or other improvements shall be done before 6:00
a.m. or after 8:00 p.m.
H. The owner shall be responsible to prevent the accumulation of debris or
mud on existing Township roads. The owner shall follow the directions
of the Township to prevent such an accumulation, and, in the event that
any accumulation occurs, such accumulation shall be removed promptly
upon direction of the Township. Failure to promptly remove any such
accumulation shall entitle the Township, through its own forces or
through subcontractors, to remove the debris and bill the owner for the
work.
A. When the developer has completed all of the necessary, appropriate and
required improvements, the developer shall notify the Board of
Supervisors, in writing, by certified or registered mail, of the
completion of the aforesaid improvements and shall send a copy thereof
to the Township Engineer. The Board of Supervisors shall, within 10
days after receipt of such notice, direct and authorize the Township
Engineer to inspect all of the aforesaid improvements. The Township
Engineer shall, thereupon, file a report, in writing, with the Board of
Supervisors, and shall promptly mail a copy of the same to the
developer by certified or registered mail. The report shall be made and
mailed within 30 days after receipt by the Township Engineer of the
authorization from the Board of Supervisors; the report shall be
detailed and shall indicate approval or rejection of the improvements,
either in whole or in part, and if the improvements, or any portion
§ 175-53 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-53.1
163:554
thereof, shall not be approved or shall be rejected by the Township
Engineer, the Engineer's report shall contain a statement of reasons for
such nonapproval or rejection.
B. The Board of Supervisors shall notify the developer, within 15 days of
receipt of the Engineer's report, in writing by certified or registered
mail, of the action of the Board of Supervisors with relation thereto.
C. If any portion of the required improvements shall not be approved or
shall be rejected by the Board of Supervisors, the developer shall
proceed to complete the same and, upon completion, the same
procedure of notification, as outlined herein, shall be followed.
D. The developer shall reimburse the Township for the reasonable and
necessary expense incurred for the inspection of improvements. Such
reimbursement shall be based upon a schedule established by
ordinance or resolution. Such expense shall be reasonable and in
accordance with the ordinary and customary fees charged by the
Township Engineer or consultant for work performed for similar
services in the community, but in no event shall the fees exceed the rate
or cost charged by the Engineer or consultant to the Township when
fees are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on developers.
(1) In the event that the developer disputes the amount of any such
expense in connection with the inspection of improvements, the
developer shall, within 10 working days of the date of billing, notify
the Township that such expenses are disputed as unreasonable or
unnecessary, in which case the Township shall not delay or
disapprove a subdivision or land development application or any
approval or permit related to development due to the developer's
request over disputed expenses.
(2) If, within 20 days from the date of billing, the Township and the
developer cannot agree on the amount of expenses which are
reasonable and necessary, then the developer and Township shall
jointly, by mutual agreement, appoint another professional
engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to
review said expenses and make a determination as to the amount
thereof which is reasonable and necessary.
(3) The professional engineer so appointed shall hear such evidence
and review such documentation as the professional engineer in his
or her sole opinion deems necessary and render a decision within
50 days of the billing date. The applicant shall be required to pay
the entire amount determined in the decision immediately.
(4) In the event that the Township and developer cannot agree upon
the professional engineer to be appointed within 20 days of the
billing date, then upon application of either party, the President
Judge of the Court of Common Pleas of Montgomery County (or if at
the time there shall be no President Judge, then the senior active
judge then sitting) shall appoint such engineer, who, in that case,
§ 175-53.1 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-53.1
163:555
shall be neither the Township Engineer nor any professional
engineer who has been retained by or performed services for the
Township or the developer within the preceding five years.
(5) The fee of the appointed professional engineer for determining the
reasonable and necessary expenses shall be paid by the developer
if the amount of payment required in the decision is equal to or
greater than the original bill. If the amount of payment required in
the decision is less than the original bill by $1,000 or more, the
Township shall pay the fee of the professional engineer, but
otherwise the Township and the applicant shall each pay 1/2 of the
fee of the appointed professional engineer.
§ 175-53.1 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-53.1
163:556
ARTICLE IX
Penalties; Amendments; Additional Provisions
§ 175-54. Violations and penalties.
§ 175-55. Amendments.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the
provisions of the Township's Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by the Township, pay a judgment of not more
than $500 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees
incurred by the Township as a result thereof. No judgment shall
commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of the
determination of a violation by the District Justice. If the defendant
neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may
enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil
procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation, unless the district justice determining that there has
been a violation further determines that there was a good faith basis for
the person, partnership or corporation violating the ordinance to have
believed that there was no such violation, in which event there shall be
deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day
following the date of the determination of a violation by the District
Justice and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation.
B. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the Township the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
A. The Board of Supervisors may, from time to time, amend, supplement,
change, modify or repeal this chapter by proceeding in the following
manner and as otherwise required by the law.
B. Amendment procedure. The Board of Supervisors, by resolution
adopted at a regular or special meeting, shall fix the time and place of a
public hearing on the proposed amendment and cause public notice
thereof to be given as follows:
(1) Publishing a notice thereof in one newspaper of general circulation
in the Township once every week for two successive weeks, not
more than 30 days and not less than seven days in advance of the
hearing.
(2) The notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the
particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing.
(3) The notice shall also state that all interested persons may appear
and be heard.
§ 175-54 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-55
163:557
§ 175-56. (Reserved)
C. Referral to Planning Commission. All proposed amendments prior to
adoption shall be referred to the Township Planning Commission at
least 30 days prior to the date of the public hearing, for
recommendation and report, unless such proposed amendment has
been initiated by the Township Planning Commission.
D. At least 30 days prior to the public hearing on the amendment, the
Township shall submit the proposed amendment to the Montgomery
County Planning Commission for recommendations.
E. Within 30 days after adoption, the Board of Supervisors shall forward a
certified copy of any amendment to the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance to the Montgomery County Planning
Commission.
F. Public notice.
(1) Notice of the proposed enactment of subdivision and land
development ordinances and amendments shall be given in the
manner set forth in this section, and shall include the time and
place of the meeting at which passage will be considered, a
reference to a place within the Township where copies of the
proposed ordinance or amendment may be examined without
charge or obtained for a charge not greater than the cost thereof.
The Township shall publish the proposed ordinance or amendment
once in one newspaper of general circulation in the Township not
more than 60 days nor less than seven days prior to passage.
Publication of the proposed ordinance or amendment shall include
either the full text thereof or the title and a brief summary,
prepared by the Township Solicitor and setting forth all the
provisions in reasonable detail. If the full text is not included:
(a) A copy thereof shall be supplied to a newspaper of general
circulation in the Township at the time the public notice is
published.
(b) An attested copy of the proposed ordinance shall be filed in the
county law library.
(2) In the event that substantial amendments are made in the proposed
ordinance or amendment, before voting upon enactment, the Board
of Supervisors shall, at least 10 days prior to enactment,
readvertise in one newspaper of general circulation in the
Township, a brief summary setting forth all the provisions in
reasonable detail, together with a summary of the amendments.
(3) Subdivision and land development ordinances and amendments
may be incorporated into official ordinance books by reference with
the same force and effect as if duly recorded therein.
§ 175-55 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-57
163:558
§ 175-57. Additional mobile home park provisions.
A. "Mobile home park" is hereby defined to mean a parcel of land under
single ownership which has been planned and approved for the
placement of mobile homes for nontransient use, consisting of two or
more mobile home lots.
B. The provisions of Articles I through IX are hereby stated to be the
conditions under which any land development involving mobile home
parks shall be processed and constructed.
§ 175-57 SHOPPING CARTS § 175-57
163:559

ARTICLE X
(Reserved)158
158. Editor's Note: Former Art. X, Stormwater Management, was repealed 8-26-2014 by Ord.
No. 556. See now Ch. 166, Stormwater Management.
SHOPPING CARTS § 175-57
163:561
Chapter 178
(RESERVED)
Chapter 182
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tax Collector — See Ch. 46.
§ 175-57 EAST NORRITON CODE § 175-57
163:562
ARTICLE I
Amusement Tax
[Adopted 3-3-1966 by Ord. No. 45]
§ 182-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Amusement Tax
Ordinance of East Norriton Township."
§ 182-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, except where the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning:
ADMISSIONS — The established price or regular monetary charge of any
character whatever, including donations, contributions and dues or
membership fees (periodical or otherwise), fixed and exacted or in any
manner received by producers, as herein defined, from the general public,
or a limited or selected number thereof, directly or indirectly, for the
privilege of attending or engaging in any entertainment or amusement,
provided that when such entertainment or amusement is conducted in
any roof garden, nightclub, cabaret or other place where the charge for
admission is wholly or in part included in the price paid for refreshments,
service or merchandise, the amount paid for admissions to such may, at
the option of the producer, be deemed to be 50% of the amount paid for
the refreshments, service or merchandise, or the producer may submit a
return supported by evidence satisfactory to said Township of the actual
expenditures paid out of the total admissions charged for amusements and
pay a tax in accordance with this article upon the actual expenditures made
for such amusements.
AMUSEMENT — All manner and form of entertainment, including, among
others, a theatrical performance, operatic performance, motion-picture
exhibition, sound motion-picture exhibition, carnival, circus, show, concert,
lecture, sports event, vaudeville show, side show, amusement park and all
forms of entertainment therein, dancing, golf course, bowling alley, billiard
game, athletic contest and any other form of diversion, sport, pastime or
recreation for which admission as herein defined is charged or paid by any
person for the privilege of attending or engaging therein.
PAYMENT — The act of paying or giving the established price or monetary
charge, made, exacted or accepted before or after the event of the
amusement.
PERSON — Includes every natural person, copartnership, firm, association,
fiduciary or corporation and, when applied to partnerships, shall refer to the
partners; and, when applied to an association, shall refer to the members;
and, when applied to corporations, shall refer to the officers.
PLACE OF AMUSEMENT — Any place, indoors or outdoors, within the
Township of East Norriton where the general public, or a limited or selected
§ 182-1 SHOPPING CARTS § 182-2
163:563
number thereof, may, upon payment of an admission, attend or engage in
any amusement as herein defined.
PRODUCER — Any person, as herein defined, conducting any place of
amusement, as herein defined, where the general public, or a limited or
selected number thereof, may, upon the payment of an admission, attend or
engage in any amusement.
§ 182-3. Imposition of tax; exceptions.
§ 182-4. Permit required.
On and after the effective date of this article, it shall be unlawful for any
producer to continue to conduct or thereafter to begin to conduct any form
A. A tax is hereby imposed upon the sales of admissions or on the privilege
of attending or engaging in amusements at the rate of 10% of the sales
of admissions or established price charged the general public, or a
limited or selected group thereof, by any producer for such privilege,
which shall be paid by the person acquiring such privilege, provided
that, where no fixed admission or established price is charged or in the
event that the rate of admission or established price is based upon a
unit or frame and the spectator or participant partakes of a series of
units or frames at each event, the tax shall be based upon the gross
sales of such admissions charged but not in excess of 10% thereof.
B. In the case of persons admitted free or at reduced rates to any place of
amusement at a time when under circumstances where an admission
fee is charged to other persons, the tax imposed by this article shall be
computed on the established price charged to such other persons of the
same class for the same or similar accommodations, to be paid by the
person so admitted.
C. No tax shall be imposed or collected on admissions to amusements
conducted, supervised or controlled by any church or any
denomination, provided that such amusement is conducted and held
wholly within the confines of the church property.
D. No tax shall be imposed or collected on admissions to amusements,
athletic contests or entertainments conducted, supervised or controlled
by the School District of East Norriton Township, or any of its duly
authorized schools, departments or agencies, as a public school
function.
E. On admission to golf courses, the tax base upon which the tax shall be
levied shall not exceed 40% of the greens fee; said fee shall include all
costs of admission to the golf course. On admission to bowling alleys,
the tax base upon which the tax shall be levied shall not exceed 40% of
the fees charged per frame; said fee shall include all costs of admission
to the bowling alley. On admission to all other amusements, the tax base
upon which the tax shall be levied shall not exceed 40% of the
admission charge. [Added 1-6-1986 by Ord. No. 223]
§ 182-2 EAST NORRITON CODE § 182-4
163:564
of amusement at any permanent or temporary place of amusement within
the Township of East Norriton, unless an amusement permit or permits
shall have been issued to him as hereinafter prescribed and the tax herein
imposed paid in accordance with the provisions herein made.
§ 182-5. Application. [Amended 11-17-1986 by Ord. No. 239]
A. Every producer desiring to continue to conduct or hereafter to begin to
conduct any amusement within the Township of East Norriton shall file
an application for a permanent or temporary permit or permits, as the
case may be, with the Director of the Department of Finance of the
Township of East Norriton and/or any Township-designated Tax
Collector. Every application for such permit or permits shall be made
upon a form prescribed, prepared and furnished by the Director of the
Department of Finance of the Township of East Norriton and/or any
Township-designated Tax Collector and shall set forth the name under
which the applicant conducts or intends to conduct an amusement,
whether the applicant conducts or intends to conduct a permanent or
temporary place of amusement and such other information as the
Director of the Department of Finance of the Township of East Norriton
and/or any Township-designated Tax Collector may require. If the
applicant has or intends to have more than one place of amusement
within the Township of East Norriton, the application shall state the
location of each place of amusement. In the case of an application for a
permit for a temporary place of amusement, the application shall state
the name and address of the owner, lessee or custodian of the premises
upon which such amusement is to be conducted. If the applicant is an
association or a corporation, the names and addresses of the principal
officers thereof shall be stated and, any other information prescribed by
the Director of the Department of Finance of the Township of East
Norriton and/or any Township-designated Tax Collector for purposes of
identification. The application shall be signed and verified by oath or
affirmation by a member or partner thereof, and in the case of a
corporation, by an executive officer thereof or some other person
specifically authorized by the corporation to sign the application, to
which shall be attached the written evidence of his authority.
B. At the time of making such application, the applicant shall pay to the
Director of the Department of Finance of the Township of East Norriton
and/or any Township-designated Tax Collector a permit fee of $5 for
each temporary permit, which shall be good for no longer than 10 days,
or a permit fee of $10 for an annual permit, good for the remainder of
the calendar year.
C. Upon approval of the application and the payment of any permit fee or
fees herein required, the Director of the Department of Finance of the
Township of East Norriton and/or any Township-designated Tax
Collector shall grant and issue to each applicant an annual or
temporary amusement permit for each place of amusement within the
Township of East Norriton as set forth in his application. Amusement
§ 182-4 SHOPPING CARTS § 182-5
163:565
§ 182-6. Issuance of duplicate permit. [Amended 11-17-1986 by
Ord. No. 239]
Whenever any permit issued under the provisions of this article is defaced,
destroyed or lost, the Director of the Department of Finance of the
Township of East Norriton and/or any Township-designated Tax Collector
may issue a duplicate permit to the holder of the defaced, destroyed or lost
permit upon the payment of a fee of $10.
§ 182-7. Suspension and revocation of permit.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of East Norriton may suspend
or, after hearing, revoke any amusement permit wherever it finds that
the holder thereof has failed to comply with any of the provisions of this
article. Upon suspending or revoking any amusement permit, the Board of
Supervisors shall require the holder to surrender immediately all permits or
duplicates thereof issued to him, and the holder shall surrender promptly all
such permits to the Board of Supervisors as required. Whenever the Board
of Supervisors suspends an amusement permit, it shall notify the holder
immediately and afford him a hearing, if desired, if the hearing has not
already been afforded. After such a hearing, the Board of Supervisors shall
continue the suspension or revoke the permit.
§ 182-8. Collection of tax.
permits shall not be assignable and shall be valid only for the person
in whose names issued and for the conduct of amusement at the places
designated therein and shall, at all times, be conspicuously displayed
at the places for which issued. All permits for permanent places of
amusement shall expire at the end of the calendar year, unless sooner
suspended, surrendered or revoked for cause by the proper authorities
of the Township of East Norriton. Permits for temporary places of
amusement shall expire at the time specified therein.
A. Producers shall collect the tax imposed by this article and shall be liable
to the Supervisors of the Township of East Norriton as agents thereof
for the payment of the same into the Treasury of the Township of East
Norriton, through the Director of the Department of Finance of the
Township of East Norriton and/or any Township-designated Tax
Collector as hereinafter provided in this article. [Amended
11-17-1986 by Ord. No. 239]
B. Where permits are obtained for conducting temporary amusements by
persons who are not the owners, lessees or custodians of any place
where the temporary amusement is to be conducted, the tax imposed by
this article shall be paid by the owner, lessee or custodian of such place
where such temporary amusement is to be held or conducted unless
paid by the producer conducting the amusement.
§ 182-5 EAST NORRITON CODE § 182-9
163:566
§ 182-9. Reports to be submitted. [Amended 11-17-1986 by Ord. No.
239]
§ 182-10. Penalty for overdue tax.
If any tax levied in pursuance of this article shall not be paid when due, a
penalty of 10% of the amount of tax due and unpaid shall be added thereto.
§ 182-11. Examination of records. [Amended 11-17-1986 by Ord.
No. 239]
If the Director of the Department of Finance of the Township of East
Norriton and/or any Township-designated Tax Collector is not satisfied with
the report and payment of tax made by any producer under the provisions
of this article, he is hereby authorized and empowered to make a
A. Every holder of a permanent permit shall, on or before the 10th day of
each month, transmit to the Director of the Department of Finance of
the Township of East Norriton and/or any Township-designated Tax
Collector a report, in duplicate, under oath or affirmation, of the total
admissions, as herein defined, charged or collected and the total
amount of tax due from persons upon such admissions under this article
and, at the same time, shall pay over to the Director of the Department
of Finance of the Township of East Norriton and/or any Townshipdesignated
Tax Collector the entire amount of tax due.
B. Every holder of a temporary permit shall, promptly after each day's
performance, pay over to the Director of the Department of Finance of
the Township of East Norriton and/or any Township-designated Tax
Collector the amount of tax due from such person under this article
upon admissions, as herein defined, for such day and, at the same time,
shall submit to the Director of the Department of Finance of the
Township of East Norriton and/or any Township-designated Tax
Collector a report, in duplicate, of the total admissions, as herein
defined, charged or collected on such day and the total amount of tax
due on such admissions. On the day of expiration of such temporary
permit, the person to whom such permit is issued shall, in addition,
submit a report, under oath or affirmation, of all admissions, as herein
defined, charged or collected during the period in which such
temporary permit was in effect and of all taxes due and paid, provided
that the Director of the Department of Finance of the Township of East
Norriton and/or any Township-designated Tax Collector may, in any
case, direct the police or any constable or deputy to receive any tax due
under this article and to pay over such moneys to the Director of the
Department of Finance of the Township of East Norriton and/or any
Township-designated Tax Collector at the earliest opportunity, provided
that, in every case, the Director of the Department of Finance of the
Township of East Norriton and/or any Township-designated Tax
Collector shall furnish to the person paying any tax levied under this
article a receipt for the payment of such a tax.
§ 182-9 SHOPPING CARTS § 182-11
163:567
determination of the tax due by such producer, based upon the facts
contained in the report or upon any information within his possession or
that shall come into his possession, and for this purpose, the Director of
the Department of Finance of the Township of East Norriton and/or any
Township-designated Tax Collector is authorized to examine the books,
papers, tickets, ticket stubs and records of any producer taxable under this
article to verify the accuracy of any report or payment made under the
provisions thereof or to ascertain whether the taxes imposed by this article
have been paid.
§ 182-12. Information to be confidential. [Amended 11-17-1986 by
Ord. No. 239]
Any information gained by the Director of the Department of Finance of the
Township of East Norriton and/or any Township-designated Tax Collector as
a result of any returns, investigations or verifications required or authorized
by this article shall be confidential, except for official purposes, and except
in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by law.
Any disclosure of any information, contrary to the provisions of this section,
shall constitute a violation of this article.
§ 182-13. Recovery of taxes.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with all penalties, shall be
recoverable by the Township of East Norriton as other debts of like amount
are recovered, or the Township may direct its Solicitor to file a municipal
claim against the producer responsible to collect said tax.
§ 182-14. Estimation of tax due. [Amended 11-17-1986 by Ord. No.
239]
If any producer shall neglect or refuse to make any report and payment
of tax required by this article or if, as a result of any investigation by the
Director of the Department of Finance of the Township of East Norriton and/
or any Township-designated Tax Collector, a report is found to be incorrect,
the Director of the Department of Finance of the Township of East Norriton
and/or any Township-designated Tax Collector shall estimate the tax due by
such producer and determine the amount due by him for taxes, penalties
and interest thereon.
§ 182-15. Taxes payable to Treasury.
All taxes, interest and penalties received, collected or recovered under the
provisions of this article shall be paid into the Treasury of the Township of
East Norriton for the use and benefit of the Township of East Norriton.
§ 182-16. Administration and enforcement. [Amended 11-17-1986
by Ord. No. 239]
The Director of the Department of Finance of the Township of East Norriton
and/or any Township-designated Tax Collector is authorized and empowered
§ 182-11 EAST NORRITON CODE § 182-16
163:568
to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating
to any matter or thing pertaining to the administration and enforcement of
the provisions of this article.
§ 182-17. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-17-1986 by Ord.
No. 239; 12-19-1988 by Ord. No. 274]
Any person or any officer, agent, servant or employee thereof who should
fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the terms or provisions of
this article shall, upon conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $600 and costs of prosecution for each
offense, to be collected as other fines and costs are now by law collectible,
or imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, if the amount of said fine and costs
shall not be paid. The fine imposed by this section shall be in addition to
any other penalty imposed by any other section of this article. Each day
on which such person violated the article will be considered as a separate
offense and punishable as provided herein.
§ 182-16 SHOPPING CARTS § 182-17
163:569

ARTICLE II
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 5-25-1970 by Res. No. 701]
§ 182-18. Definitions; word usage.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other
unincorporated group of two or more persons.
BUSINESS — An enterprise, activity, profession or any other
undertaking of an unincorporated nature conducted for profit or
ordinarily conducted for profit whether by a person, partnership,
association or any other entity.
CORPORATION — A corporation or joint-stock association organized
under the laws of the United States, the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or any other state, territory, foreign country or
dependency.
CURRENT YEAR — The calendar year for which the tax is levied.
DOMICILE — The place where one lives and has his permanent home
and to which he has the intention of returning whenever he is absent.
Actual residence is not necessarily domicile, for domicile is the fixed
place of abode which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent
rather than transitory. Domicile is the place in which a man has
voluntarily fixed the habitation of himself and his family, not for a mere
special or limited purpose, but with the present intention of making a
permanent home, until some event occurs to induce him to adopt some
other permanent home. In the case of businesses or associations, the
domicile is that place considered as the center of business affairs and
the place where its functions are discharged.
EARNED INCOME — Salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses, incentive
payments, fees, tips and other compensation received by a person or
his personal representative for services rendered, whether directly or
through an agent and whether in cash or in property; not including,
however, wages or compensations paid to persons on active military
service, periodic payments for sickness and disability other than
regular wages received during a period of sickness, disability or
retirement or payments arising under workmen's compensation acts,
occupational disease acts and similar legislation, or payments
commonly recognized as old age benefits, retirement pay or pensions
paid to persons retired from service after reaching a specific age or
after a stated period of employment, or payments commonly known
as public assistance, or unemployment compensation payments made
by any governmental agency, or payments to reimburse expenses, or
payments made by employers or labor unions for wage and salary
supplemental programs, including but not limited to programs covering
§ 182-18 SHOPPING CARTS § 182-18
163:571
§ 182-19. Imposition of tax.
hospitalization, sickness, disability or death, supplemental
unemployment benefits, strike benefits, social security and retirement.
EARNED INCOME TAX COLLECTOR — A person, public employee
or private agency designated by the Supervisors of East Norriton
Township to collect and administer the tax on earned income and net
profits.
EMPLOYER — A person, partnership, association, corporation,
institution, governmental body or unit or agency or any other entity
employing one or more persons for salary, wage, commission or other
compensation.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of the business,
profession or other activity, except corporations, after provision for all
costs and expenses incurred in the conduct thereof, determined either
on a cash or accrual basis, in accordance with the accounting system
used in such business, profession or other activity, without deduction of
taxes based on income.
NONRESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity
domiciled outside of the Township of East Norriton.
PERSON or INDIVIDUAL — A natural person.
PRECEDING YEAR — The calendar year before this current year.
RESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity
domiciled in the Township of East Norriton.
SUCCEEDING YEAR — The calendar year following the current year.
TAXPAYER — A person, partnership, association or other entity
required hereunder to file a return of earned income or net profits or to
pay a tax thereon.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural, and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
A. A tax for general purposes shall be imposed on:
(1) One percent of all earned income earned on and after July 1, 1970,
by residents and nonresidents of the Township of East Norriton.
(2) One percent of the net profits earned on and after July 1, 1970, of
businesses, professions and other activities conducted by residents
and nonresidents of the Township of East Norriton.
B. The tax levied under this article shall be applicable to earned income
received and to net profits earned by residents in the period beginning
July 1 of the current year and ending December 31 of the current year
or for the taxpayer fiscal year beginning in the current year, and the tax
shall continue in force on a calendar-year basis or taxpayer-fiscal-year
basis without annual reenactment, unless the rate of the tax is
§ 182-18 EAST NORRITON CODE § 182-19
163:572
§ 182-20. Declaration and payment of tax.
subsequently changed. The Township of East Norriton may, be
resolution, change the rate. Such change shall become effective on the
date specified in the resolution.
A. Tax on net profits.
(1) Every taxpayer making net profits shall file on or before October
31, 1970, a declaration of his estimated net profit during the period
beginning July 1, 1970, and ending December 31, 1970. The
Income Tax Collector appointed by the Supervisors of East Norriton
Township shall supply the required declaration forms, and the
taxpayer, upon filing the same, shall pay to the Tax Collector 1/2 of
the tax estimated to be due in accordance with the estimate which
will be paid no later than October 31, 1970. The balance of any tax
due for the above period July 1, 1970, to December 31, 1970, shall
be paid to the Tax Collector between January 1, 1971, and April 15,
1971. At the time of making the final payment, the taxpayer shall
file with the Income Tax Collector, on a form prescribed by the
Income Tax Collector, a final tax return showing the total amount of
the net profits earned during the period July 1, 1970, and ending
December 31, 1970; the total amount of the tax due thereon; the
total amount of tax paid with the estimate; and the balance of the
tax due. At the time of filing the return, the taxpayer shall pay the
balance of any tax due and owing to the Earned Income Tax
Collector or shall make a demand for refund or credit in the case of
any overpayment.
(2) Beginning with the calendar year January 1, 1971, every taxpayer
who makes any net profits shall, on or before April 30 of the then
current year and each year thereafter, make and file with the Tax
Collector a declaration of his estimated net profits during the
period beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of the then
current year. The taxpayer shall pay to the Tax Collector the total
amount of tax determined to be due under the estimate as follows:
(a) First payment: on or before April 30, with declaration.
(b) Second payment: on or before July 31.
(c) Third payment: on or before October 31.
(d) Final payment: with final return, between January 1 and April
15.
(3) If a taxpayer after the calendar year 1970 anticipates net profits
after April 30 of the calendar year, then he shall make and file a
declaration on or before July 31, October 31 and April 15 of the
then current year, whichever of these dates next follows the date on
which the taxpayer first anticipates such net profits. The taxpayer
shall pay to the Tax Collector in equal installments the amount of
§ 182-19 SHOPPING CARTS § 182-20
163:573
tax due thereon on or before the quarterly payment dates which
remain after the filing of his first declaration.
(4) On April 15 of each calendar year, every taxpayer shall file with the
Tax Collector a final income tax return showing the amount of the
net profits earned during the period beginning (after 1970) January
1 of the preceding year and ending December 31 of the preceding
year, the total amount of tax due thereon and the total amount of
tax heretofore paid with the estimated return. At the time of filing a
final return, the taxpayer shall pay to the Earned Income Tax
Collector the balance of tax due or shall make demand for a refund
or credit in the case of any overpayment. [Amended 10-2-1970 by
Ord. No. 702]
(5) The Township of East Norriton shall provide, by resolution,
regulations for the making and filing of adjusted declarations of
estimated net profits for the payments of the estimated tax in cases
where a taxpayer who has filed the declaration hereinabove
required anticipates additional net profits not previously declared
or finds that he has overestimated his anticipated net profits.
(6) Discontinuance of business. If a taxpayer discontinues his business
before December 31 of the current year, he shall, within 30 days
after the discontinuance of the business, file his final return as
hereinabove required and pay the tax due or make demand for the
refund or credit in the case of an overpayment. [Amended
10-2-1970 by Ord. No. 702]
B. Earned income.
(1) Annual earned income tax return. Every taxpayer shall, on or
before April 15 of the succeeding year, make and file with the
Earned Income Tax Collector, on a form prescribed, prepared and
supplied by the Earned Income Tax Collector, a final return
showing the total amount of earned income received during the
period beginning July 1, 1970, and ending December 31, 1970, for
the current year and for each year thereafter for the period
beginning January 1 and ending December 31, the total amount of
tax due thereon, the amount of the tax paid thereon and the amount
of the tax thereon that has been withheld in the event that the
provisions relating to withholding hereinafter set forth have been
invoked by the Township of East Norriton and the balance of the tax
due. At the time of the filing of the final return, the taxpayer shall
pay the balance of the tax due or may make a demand for refund or
credit in the case of an overpayment.
(2) Earned income not subject to withholding. Every taxpayer who is
employed for a salary, a wage, commission or other compensation
and who has received any earned income not subject to the
provisions relating to collection at the source shall make and file
with the Earned Income Tax Collector, on a form prescribed or
§ 182-20 EAST NORRITON CODE § 182-20
163:574
§ 182-21. Tax to be withheld; registration.
approved by the Earned Income Tax Collector, a quarterly return
on or before October 31, 1970, setting forth the aggregate amount
of earned income not subject to withholding earned by him during
the period July 1, 1970, to and including September 30, 1970,
together with such other information as shall be required on the
form supplied by the Earned Income Tax Collector. Every taxpayer
who files a return at this time shall also pay to the Earned Income
Tax Collector the amount of tax estimated to be due thereon.
(3) After the calendar year 1970 every taxpayer who is employed for
salary, wage, commission or other compensation who received any
earned income not subject to the provisions relating to collection at
the source shall make and file with the Earned Income Tax
Collector, on a form prepared, supplied and prescribed by the
Earned Income Tax Collector, a quarterly return on or before April
30 of the current year, July 31 of the current year, October 31 of the
current year and April 15 of the succeeding year setting forth the
aggregate amount of earned income not subject to withholding by
him during the three-month periods ending March 31 of the
current year, June 30 of the current year, September 30 of the
current year and December 31 of the current year respectively and
subject to the tax, together with such other information as the
Earned Income Tax Collector shall require. Every taxpayer who
makes such a return shall, at the time of the filing of the return with
the Earned Income Tax Collector, pay to the collector the amount of
the tax shown as due thereon. [Amended 10-2-1970 by Ord. No.
702]
A. Every employer, as hereinbefore described and defined, shall be
obligated, from July 1, 1970, and thereafter so long as this article is in
effect, to withhold from wages of employees subject to the tax imposed
by this article the amount of tax due in accordance with the withholding
procedure set forth hereinafter.
B. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse
or other place of business within the Township of East Norriton who
employs one or more persons, other than domestic servants, for salary,
wage, commission or other compensation, who has not previously
registered, shall, within 15 days after becoming an employer, register
with the Earned Income Tax Collector his name and address and such
other information as the officer may require.
C. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse
or other place of business within the Township of East Norriton who
employs one or more persons, other than domestic servants, for salary,
wage, commission or other compensation, shall deduct, at the time of
payment thereof, the tax imposed by this article on the earned income
due to his employee or employees and shall, on or before April 30 of the
current year, July 31 of the current year, October 31 of the current year
§ 182-20 SHOPPING CARTS § 182-21
163:575
and January 31 of the succeeding year, file a return and pay to the
Earned Income Tax Collector the amount of taxes deducted during
the preceding three-month periods ending March 31 of the current
year, June 30 of the current year, September 30 of the current year
and December 31 of the current year respectively. Such return, unless
otherwise agreed upon between the Earned Income Tax Collector and
employer, shall show the name and social security number or
identification number supplied by the Tax Collector of each such
employee, the earned income of such employee during such preceding
three-month period, the tax deducted therefrom, the political
subdivisions imposing the tax, the total earned income of all such
employees during such preceding three-month period and the total tax
deducted therefrom and paid with the return.
D. Monthly reporting. Any employer who, for two of the preceding four
quarterly periods, has failed to deduct the proper tax, or any part
thereof, or has failed to pay over the proper amount of tax to the
Township of East Norriton may be required by the Earned Income Tax
Collector to file his return and pay the tax monthly. In such cases,
payments of tax shall be made to the Earned Income Tax Collector on or
before the last day of the month succeeding the month for which the tax
was withheld.
E. On or before February 28 of the succeeding year, every employer shall
file with the Earned Income Tax Collector:
(1) An annual return showing the total amount of earned income paid,
the total amount of tax deducted and the total amount of tax paid to
the Earned Income Tax Collector for the period beginning January
1 of the current year and ending December 31 of the current year
(July 1, 1970, to December 31, 1970 for the first year).
(2) A return withholding statement for each employee employed
during all or any part of the period beginning January 1 of the
current year and ending December 31 of the current year, setting
forth the employee's name, address, social security number or
identification number supplied by the Tax Collector, the amount of
earned income paid to the employee during said period, the amount
of tax deducted, the political subdivisions imposing the tax upon
such employee and the amount of tax paid to the Earned Income
Tax Collector. Every employer shall furnish two copies of the
individual return to the employee for whom it is filed.
F. Termination of business. Every employer who discontinues business for
any reason prior to December 31 of the current year shall, within 30
days after the discontinuance of business, file the returns and
withholding statements hereinabove required and pay the tax due.
G. Every employer who willfully or negligently fails to or omits to make the
deductions required by this section shall be liable for the payments of
§ 182-21 EAST NORRITON CODE § 182-21
163:576
§ 182-22. Tax Collector, duties; penalties for divulging confidential
information.
the taxes which he was required to withhold to the extent that such
taxes have not been recovered from the employee.
H. The failure or omission of any employer to make the deductions
required by this section shall not relieve any employee from the
payment of the tax or from complying with the requirements of this
article as to the filing of declarations and returns.
A. The office of Earned Income Tax Collector is hereby created by this
article, and the Township of East Norriton shall, from time to time, by
separate resolution, appoint a person or company to administer the
provisions of this taxing resolution, who will be designated the "Earned
Income Tax Collector."
B. The Earned Income Tax Collector shall be bonded as the Supervisors of
East Norriton Township may determine, said bond to cover all moneys
coming into his hands on behalf of the Township of East Norriton, the
costs of the bond to be paid by the Township of East Norriton. Before
entering upon his official duties, the Earned Income Tax Collector shall
give and acknowledge the bond to the Township appointing him. Said
bond shall be in compliance with Act 511159 in all respects and subject
to the approval of the Township Solicitor.
C. The Earned Income Tax Collector shall collect and receive all such
taxes, shall furnish a receipt for payment when requested to do so by a
taxpayer and shall keep a record showing the amount received by him
for each taxpayer under this article, together with the date of the
receipt of such payment.
D. The Earned Income Tax Collector is hereby empowered to prescribe
rules and regulations relating to any matter or thing pertaining to the
administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article;
subject, however, to the approval of the Supervisors of East Norriton
Township. Such rules and regulations shall be inscribed by the Earned
Income Tax Collector into a book kept for that purpose and open to the
inspection of the public and thereupon shall have the same force and
effect as if it had been incorporated into this article.
E. The Earned Income Tax Collector, or any other person designated by
the Township of East Norriton, is hereby authorized to examine any of
the books, papers and records of any employer, supposed employer,
taxpayer or supposed taxpayer in order to verify the accuracy of any
return made or, if no return is made, to ascertain the amount of tax due
by any person under this article. Every such employer, supposed
employer, taxpayer or supposed taxpayer shall give to the Earned
Income Tax Collector or such other authorized person the means,
159. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6913.
§ 182-21 SHOPPING CARTS § 182-22
163:577
§ 182-23. Suit for collection of tax.
facilities and opportunities for such examination and investigations
hereby authorized.
F. The Earned Income Tax Collector is authorized to examine any person
under oath concerning any income which was or should have been
returned for taxation and shall have the power and is hereby authorized
to issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of persons whom he
deems necessary to examine as witnesses and to compel the production
of books, records and papers relating to any account being examined.
G. The Earned Income Tax Collector, or any other official or agent so
designated by the Township of East Norriton, shall have the power to
reexamine returns, correct erroneous returns, consent to make refunds
and authorize the refunding of taxes erroneously or improperly
collected from or paid by the taxpayers for any period of time not to
exceed six years subsequent to the date of payment of the sum involved.
H. Any information gained by the Earned Income Tax Collector or any
other official or agent of the Township of East Norriton as a result of any
return, investigation, hearing or examination required or authorized by
this article shall become confidential, except for official purposes or
except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise
provided by law. Any disclosure of any such information, contrary to the
provisions of this section, shall constitute a violation of this article.
I. Any person who, except as permitted by the provisions of the foregoing
Subsection H of this article, divulges any information which is
confidential under the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof before any District Justice or court of competent jurisdiction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 for each offense and costs
and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to be imprisoned for a
period not exceeding 30 days. [Amended 12-19-1988 by Ord. No.
274]
A. The Earned Income Tax Collector may sue in the name of East Norriton
Township for the recovery of taxes due and unpaid under this article.
B. Any suit brought to recover the tax imposed by this article shall be
begun within three years after such tax is due or within three years
after the declaration or return has been filed, whichever date is later;
provided, however, that this limitation shall not prevent the institution
of a suit for the collection of any tax due or determined to be due in the
following cases:
(1) Where no declaration or return was filed by any person although a
declaration or return was required to be filed by him under
provisions of this article, there shall be no limitation.
(2) Where an examination of the declaration or return filed by any
person or of other evidence relating to such declaration or return in
§ 182-22 EAST NORRITON CODE § 182-23
163:578
§ 182-24. Interest on unpaid tax.
If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
per annum on the amount of said tax and an additional penalty of 1/2 of 1%
of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction thereof during
which the tax remains unpaid shall be added and collected. Where suit is
brought for the recovery of any such tax, the person liable therefor shall, in
addition, be liable for legal costs of collection and for interest and penalties
herein imposed.
§ 182-25. Violations and penalties.
the possession of the Earned Income Tax Collector reveals a
fraudulent evasion of taxes, there shall be no limitation.
(3) In the case of substantial understatement of tax liability, 25% or
more, and no fraud, suit shall be begun within six years.
(4) Where any person has deducted taxes under the provisions of this
article and has failed to pay the amount so deducted to the Earned
Income Tax Collector or where any person has willfully failed or
omitted to make the deductions required by this article, there shall
be no limitation.
(5) This article shall not be construed to limit the Township of East
Norriton from recovering the delinquent taxes by any other means
provided in the Local Tax Enabling Act.160
C. The Earned Income Tax Collector may sue for recovery of an erroneous
refund, provided that such suit is begun two years after making such
refund, except that the suit may be brought within five years if it
appears that any part of the refund was induced by fraud or
misrepresentation of material fact.
A. Any person who fails, neglects or refuses to make any declaration or
return required by this article any employer who fails, neglects or
refuses to register or to pay the taxes deducted from his employees or
fails, neglects or refuses to deduct withholding taxes from his
employees, any person who refuses to permit the Earned Income Tax
Collector or any agent designated by him to examine his books, records
and papers and any person who knowingly makes any incomplete, false
or fraudulent return or to do anything whatsoever to avoid the full
disclosure of the amount of his net profits of earned income in order to
avoid the payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed by this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, before any District or magistrate
or court of competent jurisdiction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $600 for each offense and costs, and, in default of payment of
such fine and costs, to be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 30
days. [Amended 12-19-1988 by Ord. No. 274]
160. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 182-23 SHOPPING CARTS § 182-25
163:579
§ 182-26. Applicability.
This article shall not apply to personal property or persons to whom or
which is beyond the legal power of the Township of East Norriton to impose
the tax herein provided or the net profits of any institution, organization,
trust, association or foundation operated for public, religious, educational
or charitable purposes, provided that this section shall not operate to
relieve or exempt any such entity from collection at the source of earned
income of its employees and remittance of such collections to the Earned
Income Tax Collector.
B. The penalties imposed under this section shall be in addition to any
other penalty imposed by any other section of this article.
C. The failure of any person to receive or procure forms required for
making the declaration or returns required by this article shall not
excuse him from making such declaration or return.
§ 182-25 EAST NORRITON CODE § 182-26
163:580
ARTICLE III
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 12-30-1975 by Ord. No. 121; amended in its entirety
10-23-2007 by Ord. No. 499161]
§ 182-27. Definitions; word usage.
§ 182-28. Imposition of tax.
For police, fire or emergency services, road maintenance or real estate tax
reduction purposes, a tax is hereby levied upon the privilege of engaging in
an occupation within the corporate limits of the Township. Each individual
who exercises such privileges for any length of time during any year
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, except where the context or language clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
ADMINISTRATOR — The Manager of the Township of East Norriton
under whose direction this tax shall be enforced.
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, corporation,
governmental body, agency or other entity employing one or more
persons on a salary, commission or other compensation basis, including
a self-employed person.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, who attains or is over the
age of 18 years after the effective date of this article, engaged in any
occupation, trade or profession of any nature, type or kind whatsoever
within the corporate limits of the Township of East Norriton, whether in
the employ of another or self-employed during any Township year.
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, carried
on or performed within the corporate limits of the Township of East
Norriton for which compensation is charged or received, whether by
means of salary, wages, commissions or fees for services rendered.
TAX — The local services tax levied by this article.
TAX RECEIVER — The Director of the Department of Finance of the
Township of East Norriton and/or any Township-designated tax
collector.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of East Norriton, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania.
YEAR — The fiscal year beginning January 1 and ending December 31
of each calendar year.
B. Word usage. The words "he," "his" or "him" shall mean and indicate the
singular and plural number as well as male, female and neuter gender.
161. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall be effective 1-1-2008.
§ 182-27 SHOPPING CARTS § 182-28
163:581
wherein he has earned income and/or net profits of $12,000 or more shall
pay a tax in the amount of $52 in accordance with the provisions of this
article. This tax is in addition to all other taxes of any kind or nature levied
by the Township. It shall be the obligation of each such person so engaged
in an occupation to pay or cause to be paid the tax herein imposed by the
due date for the quarter in which he earns the annual required minimum of
$12,000. The adoption of this article shall constitute notice and demand for
payment of this tax.
§ 182-28.1. Use of tax funds.
At least 25% of the funds collected from the tax shall be used to fund
emergency services within East Norriton Township.
§ 182-28.2. Exemptions.
The following persons shall be exempt from the tax:
§ 182-29. Payment of tax.
Said tax shall be paid to the tax receiver of the Township.
A. Any person who served in any war or armed conflict in which the United
States was engaged and is honorably discharged or released under
honorable circumstances from active service if, as a result of military
service, the person is blind, paraplegic, or a double or quadruple
amputee or has a service-connected disability declared by the United
States Veterans’ Administration or its successor to be a total, onehundred-
percent permanent disability.
B. Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the taxable
year.
C. Any person with earned income and/or net profits of less than $12,000.
Any person claiming an exemption on this ground must annually file an
exemption certificate with East Norriton Township and with his
employer. If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar
year becomes subject to the tax, his employer shall withhold the tax for
the remainder of the calendar year, including a lump sum payment
equal to the amount of tax that was not collected. The exemption
certificate shall be prescribed by the Pennsylvania Department of
Community and Economic Development and will be made available to
all taxpayers and employers. Employers shall ensure that the exemption
certificates are readily available to employees at all times and shall
furnish each new employee with a form certificate at the time of hire.
§ 182-28 EAST NORRITON CODE § 182-30
163:582
§ 182-30. Delinquency.
Hereinafter a penalty of 1/2% per month or fraction thereof of the amount of
the tax, together with interest computed at 6% per annum until paid, shall
be added to the tax and collected.
§ 182-31. Employers to collect tax from employees.
Each employer within the Township, as well as those employers situated
outside the Township but who engage in business within the Township,
is hereby charged with the duty of collecting from each of his employees
engaged by him and performing for him within East Norriton Township said
tax of $52 per year and making a return and payment thereof to the tax
receiver. Each employee subject to the tax shall be assessed a pro rata
share of the tax for each payroll period in which the employee is engaged
in East Norriton Township. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on an
employee for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the $52 rate
of the tax by the number of payroll periods established by the employer for
a calendar year. Each employer is hereby authorized to deduct this tax from
each employee who has not otherwise claimed an exemption from paying
the tax, whether said employee is paid by salary, wages or commission. Each
employer shall be required to remit the tax within 30 days after the end of
each quarter of a calendar year. The employer will provide the employee
with evidence of deduction on a from to be furnished to the employer by the
administrator.
§ 182-32. Preparation and filing of returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a quarterly return showing the
employee payer and a computation of the tax on forms to be supplied to him
by the administrator. It is further provided that if the employer fails to file
said return and pay said tax, whether or not he makes collection thereof
from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him to said employee, the
employer shall be responsible for the payment of the tax in full without
deducting a commission and as though the tax had originally been levied
against him.
§ 182-33. Employers to determine number of employees.
Each employer shall use his employment records as of the first day of
February 1976 and January 1 of each succeeding year through March 31
of each year for determining the number of employees from whom said
tax shall be deducted and paid over to the tax receiver by April 30 of
each year. Supplemental reports and the tax due thereon shall be made by
each employer as follows: by July 31 of each year covering all employee
payments for the period April 1 through June 30, by October 31 of each year
covering all employee payments for the period July 1 through September 30
by January 31 of each year covering all employee payments for the period
of October 1 through December 31.
§ 182-30 SHOPPING CARTS § 182-34
163:583
§ 182-34. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation.
Each individual who shall have more than one occupation within the
Township shall be subject to the payment of this tax on his principal
occupation, and his principal employer shall deduct this tax and deliver to
him evidence of deduction on a form to be furnished to the employer by
the administrator, which form shall be evidence of deduction having been
made and, when presented to any other employer shall be authority for such
employer to not deduct this tax from the employee's wages but to include
such employee on his return by setting forth his name, address and the
name and account number of the employer who deducted this tax.
§ 182-35. Self-employed individuals.
All self-employed individuals who perform services of any type or kind
or engage in any occupation or profession within the Township shall be
required to comply with this article and pay the tax to the tax receiver by
April 30 of each year, unless he has otherwise claimed an exemption from
the tax.
§ 182-35.1. Recapture of unpaid taxes.
If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year from the
tax becomes subject to the tax for that calendar year, the employer shall
withhold the tax for the remainder of the calendar year. The employer shall
withhold from the employee, for the first payroll period after receipt of
notification that the employee is subject to the tax, a lump sum equal to
the amount of tax that was not withheld from the employee due to the
exemption claimed, plus the per-payroll amount due for that first payroll
period. The amount of tax withheld per payroll period for the remaining
payroll periods in that calendar year shall be the same amount withheld
from other employees. In the event employment of the employee is
terminated during that calendar year, the former employee shall be liable
for any outstanding balance due on the tax.
§ 182-36. Employers and self-employed individuals residing outside
Township.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places
of business outside of the Township but who perform services of any type
or kind or engage in any occupation or profession within the Township
do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject themselves to the
provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under this article with
the same force and effect as though they were residents of the Township.
Further, any individual engaged in an occupation within the Township and
an employee of a nonresident employer may, for the purpose of this article,
be considered a self-employed person, and in the event that this tax is
not paid, the administrator shall have the option of proceeding against
either the employer or employee for the collection of this tax as hereinafter
provided. Provided, however, no person shall be subject to the payment of
§ 182-34 EAST NORRITON CODE § 182-36
163:584
the local services tax to more than one political subdivision during each
payroll period.
§ 182-36.1. Receipt of payment.
The tax receiver shall provide a receipt of payment of the tax upon request
by a taxpayer.
§ 182-37. Administration and enforcement.
§ 182-38. Suit for collection.
A. It shall be the duty of the tax receiver to accept and receive payments of
this tax and to keep a record thereof, showing the amount received by
him from each employer or self-employed person, together with the
date the tax was received.
B. The administrator is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby charged and empowered to
prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules and regulations relating to any
matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this article,
including provisions for the examination of the payroll records of any
employer subject to this article, the examination and correction of any
return made in compliance with this article and any payment alleged or
found to be incorrect or as to which overpayment is claimed or found to
have occurred. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the
administrator shall have the right to appeal to the Court of Common
Pleas of Montgomery County as in other cases provided.
C. The administrator is hereby authorized to examine the books and
payroll records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any
return made by an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the
tax due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the
administrator the means, facilities and opportunity for such
examination.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due date above set forth, the administrator may sue for
the recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article, together
with interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
on the amount of said tax, calculated beginning with the due date of
said tax, and a penalty of 1/2% per month or fraction thereof shall be
added to the flat rate of said tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is
brought for the recovery of this tax, the individual liable therefor shall,
in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of collection.
§ 182-36 SHOPPING CARTS § 182-39
163:585
§ 182-39. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article or who refuses inspection of his books, records or accounts in
his custody and control setting forth the number of employees subject to
this tax who are in his employment or whoever fails or refuses to file any
return required by this article or who shall fail to pay the tax due shall, upon
conviction before any District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 for each offense and, in default of payment of said fine and costs,
be imprisoned in Montgomery County Prison for a period not exceeding 90
days for each offense. It is further provided that the action to enforce the
fine and penalty herein provided may be instituted against any person in
charge of the business of any employer who has failed or refuses to file a
return required by this article.
§ 182-39 EAST NORRITON CODE § 182-39
163:586
ARTICLE IV
Business Privilege Tax and Mercantile Tax
[Adopted 10-20-1986 by Ord. No. 236]
§ 182-40. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Business Privilege Tax and Mercantile
Tax Ordinance."
§ 182-41. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
BUSINESSES, TRADES, OCCUPATIONS AND PROFESSIONS — All
businesses, trades, occupations and professions in which there is offered
any service or services to the general public or a limited number thereof,
including, without limitation, those enterprises engaged in by hotel
operators, motel operators, office building operators, apartment and
rooming house operators, parking lot and garage operators, warehouse
operators, lessors of tangible personal property, social workers,
consultants, teachers, nurses, therapists, physicians and surgeons,
osteopaths, podiatrists, dentists, lawyers, engineers, architects, chemists,
certified public accountants, public accountants, funeral directors,
promoters, factories, manufacturers' representatives, agents, brokers,
advertising and public relations agencies, real estate brokers, insurance
brokers and agents, cable television operators, vending machine operators,
barbershop operators and beauty shop operators, cleaning, pressing and
dyeing establishment operators, laundry operators, shoe repair shop
operators, tailors, upholsterers, electrical, plastering, bricklaying,
carpentry, heat, ventilating, plumbing and painting contractors engaged
in the class of heavy building or other construction of any kind or in the
alteration, maintenance or repair thereof, repairers of electrical, electronic
and automotive machinery and equipment or other machinery and
equipment and other wares and merchandise and other businesses, trades,
occupations and professions in which there is offered any service or services
to the general public or a limited number thereof.
COLLECTOR — The Director of the Department of Finance of the Township
of East Norriton and/or any Township-designated agent.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Finance of the Township of East
Norriton.
GROSS RECEIPTS — The gross amount of cash, credit or property of any
kind or nature received in both cash and credit transactions allocable or
attributable to the Township by reason of any sale made, service rendered
(including labor and any materials employed in or becoming part of the
service) or commercial or business transactions in connection with any
business, trade, occupation or profession.
§ 182-40 SHOPPING CARTS § 182-41
163:587
OPERATOR — Includes both the owner of a hotel, motel, office and/or
residential apartment building, parking lot, garage or warehouse and any
person the owner may engage for hire to supervise the operation of such
hotel, motel, office and/or residential apartment building, parking lot,
garage or warehouse.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, limited partnership, association,
corporation, trust or other legally recognized or recognizable entity, except
such as are wholly exempt from taxation under the Act of December 31,
1965, P.L. 1257, as amended.162
RETAIL DEALER or RETAIL VENDOR — Any person who is a dealer in or a
vendor of goods, wares and merchandise who is not a wholesale dealer or
vendor, or a wholesale and retail dealer or vendor as herein defined.
SERVICE — Any act or instance of helping or benefiting another for a
consideration.
TAX YEAR — The calendar year.
TEMPORARY, SEASONAL OR ITINERANT BUSINESS, TRADE,
OCCUPATION OR PROFESSION — Any business, trade, occupation or
profession that is conducted within the Township for less than 60 calendar
days.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of East Norriton.
WHOLESALE DEALER or WHOLESALE VENDOR — Any person who sells
to dealers in, or vendors of, goods, wares and merchandise and to no other
persons.
§ 182-42. Registration of place of business.
For the tax year beginning January 1, 1987, and for each tax year thereafter,
every person desiring to continue to engage in or hereafter to begin to
engage in a business, trade, occupation or profession at a place of business
in the Township shall, on or before the 15th day of April of the tax year
or prior to commencing business in such tax year, make application for
registration for each place of business in the Township, and if such person
has no place of business within the Township, then such person shall apply
for one registration with the collector. Such registration shall be made
by the completion of an application furnished by the collector and the
payment of a fee of $10 for each place of business. Each application for
registration shall be signed by the applicant, if an actual person, and in the
case of an association or a partnership, by a member or partner thereof,
and in the case of a corporation, by an officer thereof, or by the authorized
person of any other legal entity. Each applicant shall receive a certificate of
registration from the collector, which shall not be assignable. Those persons
subject to both the business privilege tax and the mercantile tax hereunder
need only obtain one certificate of registration for each place of business.
In case of loss, defacement or destruction of any certificate, the person
162. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6902.
§ 182-41 EAST NORRITON CODE § 182-42
163:588
to whom the certificate was issued shall apply to the collector for a new
certificate, for which a fee of $10 shall be charged. Such certificate shall be
conspicuously posted at each place of business in the Township at all times.
§ 182-43. Tax rates.
The following tax rates shall be applicable to businesses, trades,
occupations and professions in the Township.
§ 182-44. Returns.
A. Imposition of mercantile tax.
(1) Wholesale vendors. Wholesale vendors or dealers in goods, wares
and merchandise of every kind shall be taxed at the rate of one mill
on each dollar of gross receipts of business transacted by him
during the tax year.
(2) Retail vendors. Retail vendors or dealers of goods, wares and
merchandise of every kind and all persons engaged in conducting
restaurants or other places where food, drink or refreshments are
sold shall be taxed at the rate of 1 1/2 mills on each dollar of gross
receipts of business transacted by him during the tax year.
(3) Wholesale and retail vendors. Wholesale and retail vendors or
dealers in goods, wares and merchandise of every kind shall be
taxed at the rate of one mill on each dollar of the gross volume of
wholesale business transacted by him and 1 1/2 mills on each dollar
of the gross receipts of retail business transacted by him during the
tax year.
(4) Resale. The tax imposed by this section shall not apply to the dollar
volume of annual business transacted by wholesale and retail
dealers derived from the resale of goods, wares and merchandise,
taken by any dealer as a trade-in or as a partial payment for other
goods, wares and merchandise, except to the extent that the resale
price exceeds the trade-in allowance.
B. Imposition of business privilege tax. Every person engaged in the
offering of services to the general public as defined in § 182-41 above
and subject to the tax imposed by this article shall be taxed at the rate
of 1 1/2 mills on each dollar of gross receipts.
A. Form. Every return as hereinafter required by this article shall be made
upon a form furnished by the collector and in accordance with such
regulations as may hereafter be issued by the Department. Each person
making such return shall certify the correctness thereof under the
penalties of perjury and shall supply the collector with a copy of the
appropriate schedule of such person's federal tax return indicating
such person's gross receipts for prior tax year.
B. First return.
§ 182-42 SHOPPING CARTS § 182-44
163:589
(1) Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who
engaged in business at least one full year prior to the beginning of
any tax year shall, on or before the 15th day of April of each year,
file with the Township a return setting forth such person's name
and business address and such information as may be necessary to
compute the actual gross receipts of such person during the
preceding year and the amount of tax estimated to be due.
(2) Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who has
commenced business less than one full year prior to the beginning
of any tax year shall, on or before the 15th day of April of each year,
file with the Township a return setting forth such person's name
and business address and such information as may be necessary in
arriving at the actual gross amount of business transacted during
the first month of business and the amount of tax estimated to be
due.
(3) Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who
commences business subsequent to the beginning of the tax year
shall, within 45 days from the date of commencing such business,
file a return with the collector setting forth his name, business and
business address and such information as may be necessary to
compute the actual gross volume of business transacted by him
during the tax year and the amount of tax estimated to be due.
(4) Every person subject to the payment of the tax imposed by this
article who engages in a business which is temporary, seasonal or
itinerant by its nature shall, within seven days from the date of
completion of such business, file with the Township a return setting
forth such person's name, business and business address and such
information as may be necessary in arriving at the actual gross
receipts of such person during such period and the amount of tax
due. Such persons shall deposit with the collector, prior to the
commencement of business, funds in such amount as may be
determined by the collector pursuant to § 182-48C below.
(5) Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who ceases
to do business which is subject to the tax imposed by this article
shall, within 14 days from the date of ceasing to do business, file a
return showing the actual gross volume of business conducted and
done by such person during the tax year in which the person ceased
doing business and pay the tax due as computed thereon at the rate
herein provided for at the time of filing said return. If such tax has
been previously paid based upon estimated gross receipts, the
taxpayer shall be entitled to a refund, without interest, of any
excess tax paid for the tax year in which the business was
terminated.
C. Final return. On or before April 15 following the end of the tax year,
every person shall file a final return as provided in § 182-45B below. The
initial such final return under this article shall be filed on or before April
§ 182-44 EAST NORRITON CODE § 182-44
163:590
§ 182-45. Computing of tax.
§ 182-46. Payment of tax.
15, 1987, by those persons who were subject to the mercantile license
tax during the year 1986. Otherwise, the initial final return shall be filed
on or before April 15, 1988.
A. Estimated tax.
(1) Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who
has engaged in business at least a full year prior to January 1, 1987,
shall compute the gross receipts of business upon the actual gross
amount of business transacted during the 12 months preceding
January 1, 1987.
(2) Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who
has commenced business less than one full year prior to January 1,
1987, shall compute the gross receipts of business by multiplying
by 12 the monthly average of the actual gross amount of business
transacted during the months prior to January 1, 1987.
(3) Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who
commences business subsequent to January 1, 1987, shall compute
the gross receipts of business for the tax year upon the gross
volume of business transacted by them during the first month of
engaging in business, multiplied by the number of months
remaining in the tax year.
B. Actual tax. At the end of the tax year, every person subject to the tax
hereby imposed shall make a final return to the collector of the actual
volume of business transacted by the taxpayer during the period for
which the taxpayer is subject to the tax. Such final return shall state the
amount of gross receipts of business as set forth in the first return, the
amount of tax paid at the time of the filing of the first return and the
amount of tax due upon the final computation. The initial such final
return under this article shall be filed on or before April 15, 1987, by
those persons subject to the mercantile license tax during the year
1986. Such final return shall be filed in addition to the first return due
pursuant to § 182-44B above.
A. First return. At the time of filing the first return, the person making the
same shall pay the amount of the tax estimated to be due.
B. Final return. At the time of the filing of the final return, if the full
amount of the tax due by the taxpayer for the tax year has not been
paid, the taxpayer shall pay the remaining balance of the tax, which will
be the difference between the amount of the tax paid at the time of
making the first return on the estimated computation and the amount of
the tax finally shown to be due. Payment of the tax due on gross receipts
§ 182-44 SHOPPING CARTS § 182-46
163:591
§ 182-47. Exemptions; deductions; adjustments.
earned during the year 1986 shall be remitted with the initial final
return required under § 182-45B above.
A. Joint returns. All persons required to pay a business privilege tax under
the provisions of this article shall be exempted from paying such tax
upon the same subject matter of taxation upon which such persons are
required to pay a mercantile tax hereunder. Any person required to pay
both a business privilege tax and a mercantile tax may file one joint
return.
B. Governmental or educational purposes. The business of any political
subdivision or of any authority created or organized under and
pursuant to any Act of Assembly are exempt from the provisions of this
article.
C. Utilities. No tax shall be assessed and collected on the gross receipts
from utility service to any company whose rates of service are fixed and
regulated by the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or on any
privilege or transaction involving the rendering of any such public
utility service.
D. Production and manufacture. No tax shall be assessed and collected
hereunder on goods, articles and products or on materials, timber,
natural resources and farm products manufactured, produced or grown
in the Township or on the preparation or processing thereof for use or
market or on any privilege, act or transaction related to the business of
manufacturing, the production, preparation or processing of minerals,
timber and natural resources or farm products by manufacturers,
producers and farmers with respect to the goods, articles and products
of their own manufacture, production or growth or on any privilege, act
or transaction relating to the business of processing by-products of
manufacture or on the transportation, loading, unloading, dumping or
storage of such goods, articles or by-products.
E. Religious and charitable organizations. Nonprofit corporations or
associations organized solely and exclusively for religious, educational
and charitable purposes are exempt from the provisions of this article
generally, except that such exemptions shall not apply to the receipts
from any regular or established business competing commercially with
any persons subject to the tax imposed by this article, nor shall such
exemption apply to receipts from any noncharitable services or
nontraditional activities.
F. Adjustments. Refunds, credits or allowances given by a person to a
customer on account of defects in services rendered or in goods, wares
and merchandise sold or returned may be deducted from the amount of
the gross receipts of the person. Adjustments allowed to customers may
be deducted from gross receipts if they are deducted on the face of the
invoice as a medium of adjusting the price or fee for the service and if
§ 182-46 EAST NORRITON CODE § 182-47
163:592
§ 182-48. Powers and duties of Collector.
they are not reimbursed to the person by his supplier or some other
person. Federal, state and local taxes are not included in gross receipts
if they are collected from the customer and are separately stated on the
evidence of charge or sale or the customer produces satisfactory proof
of payment of the federal, state or local taxes.
G. Services performed outside the Township. Specifically excluded from
the definition of "gross receipts" hereunder are receipts from services
performed from a place of business regularly maintained outside the
Township by the taxpayer to a place of business regularly maintained
outside the Township by the customer, provided that such performance
is not made for the purpose of evading the tax. Services or deliveries to
a residence located outside the Township do not qualify for this
exclusion.
H. Limited taxation. Where the gross receipts of the taxpayer cannot in
their entirety be subjected to the tax imposed by this article by reasons
of provisions of the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any other provisions of law,
the Manager shall establish rules and regulations and methods of
allocation and evaluation so that only that part of the gross receipts
which is properly attributable to doing business in the Township shall
be taxed by this article.
A. It shall be the duty of the collector to collect and receive the taxes, fines
and penalties imposed by this article. It shall also be the duty of the
collector to keep a record showing the amount of tax received and the
date of payment.
B. The collector or any agent designated by the collector and/or the
Department are hereby authorized to examine the books, papers and
records of any taxpayer or of any person whom the collector reasonably
believes to be a taxpayer, in order to verify the accuracy of any return
or, if no return was filed, to ascertain the tax due. Every taxpayer and
every person whom the officer reasonably believes to be a taxpayer is
hereby directed and required to give to the collector or any agent
designated by the collector the means, the facilities and opportunity for
such examination and investigations as are hereby authorized.
C. If the collector is not satisfied with the return and the payment of tax
made by any taxpayer under the provisions of this article, the collector
is hereby authorized and empowered to make a determination of the tax
due by such person based upon the facts contained in the return or
upon any information obtained by the collector. The collector is hereby
authorized and directed to make and keep such records, prepare such
forms and take such other measures as may be necessary or convenient
to carry this article into effect and may, at his discretion, require
reasonable deposits to be made by persons who engage in a business
which is temporary, seasonal or itinerant by its nature.
§ 182-47 SHOPPING CARTS § 182-48
163:593
§ 182-49. Recovery of unpaid taxes.
D. If any person shall neglect or refuse to make any return or payment of
tax required by this article or if, as a result of any investigation by the
collector, a return is found to be incorrect, the collector shall estimate
the tax due by such person and determine the amount due for taxes,
penalties and interest thereon.
E. The burden is hereby imposed upon any person claiming an exemption
from the payment of the tax hereby imposed to prove by clear and
convincing evidence the legal right of such exemption to the
satisfaction of the collector.
F. Any information contained on the returns of a taxpayer and any
information obtained as a result of the examination of the books and
records of the taxpayer through any returns, investigations, hearings or
verifications shall be confidential except for official purposes and
except in accordance with a proper judicial order or as otherwise
provided by law.
G. Every person subject to the taxation under this article shall maintain
such records and books of account as will enable such person to make a
true and accurate return in accordance with the provisions of this
article. Such accounts and records must disclose detail of the gross
receipts and other data pertaining to the taxpayer's gross volume of
business and must be sufficiently complete to enable the collector or his
deputies to verify all transactions.
H. The collector is hereby empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and
enforce rules and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the
administration and enforcement of this article, including provisions for
the reexamination and correction of returns and all payments alleged or
found to be incorrect or as to which an overpayment is claimed or found
to have occurred and to make refunds in case of overpayment, for any
period of time not to exceed six years subsequent to the date of
payment of the sum involved, and to prescribe forms necessary for the
administration of this article. A copy of such rules and regulations
currently enforced shall be available for a public inspection.
A. All taxes due and unpaid under this article shall be recoverable by the
Township Solicitor as other debts due the Township are now by law
recoverable. Persons liable for tax hereunder which remains unpaid
when due shall be liable for the cost of collection and interest and
penalties herein imposed.
B. All taxes due under this article shall bear interest at the rate of 1 1/2%
per month or a fractional part of a month from the day they are due and
payable until paid. If any taxpayer shall neglect or refuse to make any
return or payment as herein required, an additional 10% of the amount
of the tax shall be added by the collector and collected.
§ 182-48 EAST NORRITON CODE § 182-49
163:594
§ 182-50. Construal.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
Township to levy and collect the taxes hereby imposed on any person or
any business or any portion of any business not within taxing power of the
Township under the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution
and laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 182-51. Violation and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1988 by Ord.
No. 274]
Any person or any officer, agent, servant or employee thereof who shall fail,
neglect or refuse to comply with any of the terms or provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine
not to exceed $600 and costs of prosecution for each offense, to be collected
as other fines and costs are now by law collectible, or imprisonment not
exceeding 90 days, if the amount of said fine and costs shall not be paid.
The fine imposed by this section shall be in addition to any other penalty
imposed by any other section of this article. Each day on which such person
violates this article will be considered as a separate offense and punishable
as provided herein.
C. All taxes, interests and penalties received, collected or recovered under
the provisions of this article shall be paid into the treasury of the
Township for the use and benefit of the Township.
§ 182-49 SHOPPING CARTS § 182-51
163:595

ARTICLE V
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 1-19-1987 by Ord. No. 243]
§ 182-52. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of East
Norriton Township."
§ 182-53. Authority.
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or interest in real estate situated within East
Norriton Township, regardless of where the documents making the transfer
are made, executed or delivered or where the actual settlements on such
transfer took place, as authorized by Article XI-D, Local Real Estate
Transfer Tax, 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq.
§ 182-54. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors of East Norriton Township,
Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of this
commonwealth, the United States or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title to
real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not
pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has
been paid or any cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding 30 years or instruments which solely grant,
vest or confirm a public utility easement. Document shall also include a
declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording under
§ 182-59C of this article.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of it
assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each
class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business of agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
§ 182-52 SHOPPING CARTS § 182-54
163:597
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendants of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing and the estate of any of the
foregoing. Individuals related by half blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they were related by whole blood.
PERSON — Every natural person, association or corporation. The term
person as applied to associations, shall include the responsible members or
general partners thereof and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or
more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and
which:
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
Recreational activities, such as but not limited to hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing.
A.
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities.
B.
C. Fur farming.
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations.
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
All lands, tenements or hereditaments within this Township, including,
without limitation, buildings, structures, fixtures, mines, minerals, oil,
gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower boundaries, trees
and other improvements, immovables or interests which, by custom,
usage or law, pass with a conveyance of land, but excluding
permanently attached machinery and equipment in an industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or
disposition of real estate; or
A.
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets
which are freely transferable and actively traded on an established
market.
B.
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
A.
§ 182-54 EAST NORRITON CODE § 182-54
163:598
TOWNSHIP — East Norriton Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
years, including, without limitation, an estate in fee simple, life estate
or perpetual leasehold; or
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including, without limitation, a leasehold interest
or possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term
of 30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity.
B.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents, or a
commensurate part thereof where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against other real
estate, provided that, where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the value thereof shall be determined from the price set
forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale.
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, any exchange of properties or the real estate
of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local
real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio factor developed
by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue for Pennsylvania realty
transfer tax base calculations.
B.
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate the "value" of
which is not determinable under Subsection A or B, the actual monetary
worth of such interest.
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor of a related
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.
D.
§ 182-54 SHOPPING CARTS § 182-55
163:599
§ 182-55. Imposition of tax; interest.
A. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording shall be
subject to pay for and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof a
tax at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate represented by such
document, which tax shall be payable at the earliest of the time the
document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of
such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
B. The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the Recorder of Deeds
whereon the date of the payment of the tax, amount of the tax and the
signature of the collecting agent shall be set forth.
C. It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of the tax imposed
herein on a person or transfer shall not exceed the limitations
prescribed in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965,
P.L. 1257, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq., so that if any other political subdivision
shall impose or hereafter shall impose such tax on the same person or
transfer, then the tax levied by the Township of East Norriton under the
authority of that Act shall, during the time such duplication of the tax
exists, except as hereinafter otherwise provided, be 1/2 of the rate, and
such 1/2 rate shall become effective without any action on the part of
East Norriton Township; provided, however, that the Township of East
Norriton and any other political subdivision which impose such tax on
the same person or transfer may agree that, instead of limiting their
respective rates to 1/2 of the rate herein provided, they will impose
respectively different rates, the total of which shall not exceed the
maximum rate permitted under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
D. Any realty transfer tax, or a portion thereof, imposed by East Norriton
Township which is not paid by the date the tax is due shall bear interest
at a rate as prescribed for interest on delinquent municipal claims
under the Act of May 16, 1923 (P.L. 207, No. 153)(53 P.S. § 7101 et
seq.), as amended, known as the "Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act."
This provision is subject to and authorized by Article XI-D of the Tax
Reform Code of 1971, known as the "Realty Transfer Tax," and other
provisions authorizing the Department of Revenue and the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to determine, collect and enforce the
tax, interest and penalties. The interest rate shall be the lesser of the
interest rate imposed upon delinquent commonwealth taxes as
provided in Section 806 of the Act of April 9, 1929 (P.L. 343, No. 176)(72
P.S. § 806), as amended, known as "The Fiscal Code," or the maximum
interest rate permitted under the Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act
for tax claims. [Amended 12-19-2006 by Ord. No. 491]
§ 182-55 EAST NORRITON CODE § 182-56
163:600
§ 182-56. Exemptions.
The United States, the commonwealth or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax
imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
§ 182-57. Excluded transactions.
A. The tax imposed by § 182-55 shall not be imposed upon:
(1) A transfer to the commonwealth or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions by gift, dedication or deed in lieu
of condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings or a reconveyance by the condemning
body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the time
of condemnation, which reconveyance may include property fine
adjustments, provided that said reconveyance is made within one
year from the date of condemnation.
(2) A document which the Township of East Norriton is prohibited from
taxing under the Constitution or statutes of the United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, Township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, Township, school
district or county of a tax-delinquent property at Sheriffs sale or
Tax Claim Bureau sale.
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded but which does not extend
or limit existing record legal title or interest.
(5) A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in
value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
(6) A transfer between husband and wife; between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided that the property or interest therein subject to such
transfer was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife
prior to the granting of the final decree in divorce; between parent
and child or the spouse of such child; between brother or sister or
spouse of a brother or sister and brother or sister or the spouse of a
brother or sister; and between a grandparent and grandchild or the
spouse of such grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by the
grantee within one year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor
were making such transfer.
§ 182-56 SHOPPING CARTS § 182-57
163:601
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are
contingent or specifically named. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a copy of
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries.
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
(11) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration between principal
and agent or straw party or from or to an agent or straw party
where, if the agent or straw party were his principal, no tax would
be imposed under this article. Where the document by which title is
acquired by a grantee or statement of value fails to set forth that
the property was acquired by the grantee from or for the benefit of
his principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the property is
the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if the grantee
claims an exemption from taxation under this subsection.
(12) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the Department reasonably determines that the
primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is
avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.
(13) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of
the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more than two years.
(14) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt or the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
(15) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if the
grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary purpose
of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding, processing,
§ 182-57 EAST NORRITON CODE § 182-57
163:602
§ 182-58. Documents to be fully taxable.
Except as otherwise provided in § 182-57, documents which make, confirm
or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between
associations or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or
stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this article,
corporations and associations are entities separate from their members,
partners, stockholders or shareholders.
§ 182-59. Acquired company.
publishing, research and development, transportation, energy
conversion, energy production, pollution control, warehousing or
agriculture and the agency or authority has the full ownership
interest in the real estate transferred.
(16) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
(17) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
is not being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial
purposes.
(18) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954
[68A Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)] and which has as its primary
purpose preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic,
agricultural or open space opportunities.
(19) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
(20) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
(21) A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
(22) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. A copy of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax statement of value
may be submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an explanation of the
reason such document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 182-57 SHOPPING CARTS § 182-59
163:603
§ 182-60. Credits against tax.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change
does not affect the continuity of the company and of itself or together
with prior changes has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly,
90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a
period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this article.
C. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the Recorder of each county in
which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and
recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax declaration of acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker, which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given
the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
§ 182-59 EAST NORRITON CODE § 182-60
163:604
§ 182-61. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
§ 182-62. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid and have priority out of the
proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made, except the state realty transfer tax, and the Sheriff or
other officer conducting said sale shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the
first moneys paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale
are insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be
liable for the remaining tax.
§ 182-63. Duties of Recorder of Deeds.
than the amount or tax due, no refund or carryover credit shall be
allowed.
A. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by Act of July 7, 1983 (P.L.
40, No. 21), the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for the
local realty transfer tax, including any amount payable to East Norriton
Township based on a redetermination of the amount of tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax,
without compensation from East Norriton Township.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the Recorder shall not
accept for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
C. On or before the 10th of each month, the Recorder shall pay over to
East Norriton Township all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2%
for use of the county, together with a report containing the information
as is required by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting
collections of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The two-percent
commission shall be paid to the county.
D. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Recorder shall rerecord the deed
or record the additional realty transfer tax form only when both the
state and local amounts and a rerecording or recording fee have been
tendered.
§ 182-60 SHOPPING CARTS § 182-64
163:605
§ 182-64. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for
recording shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof or shall be accompanied by a statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value
thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under
this article. A copy of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax statement of
value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt
from taxation based on family relationship. Other documents presented
for the affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy of
the document and statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 182-65. Civil penalties.
§ 182-66. Lien.
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements or hereditaments, or any interest therein, lying or being situated,
wholly or in part, within the boundaries of the Township of East Norriton,
which lands, tenements or hereditaments, or interest therein, are described
in or conveyed by or transferred by the deed which is the subject of the
tax imposed, assessed and levied by this article, said lien to begin at the
time when the tax under this article is due and payable and continue until
discharge by payment or in accordance with the law, and the Solicitor is
authorized to file a municipal or tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas
of Montgomery County, in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal
Claims and Liens Act of 1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., its supplements and
amendments.
§ 182-67. Recovery of taxes.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character are
recovered.
A. If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this article is due to
fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
B. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this article
on the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is
due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the
amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an
additional 5% for each additional month or fraction thereof during
which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
§ 182-64 EAST NORRITON CODE § 182-67
163:606
ARTICLE VI
Collection of Delinquent Real Estate Taxes
[Adopted 12-11-2012 by Ord. No. 545]
§ 182-68. Authorization; appointment of collector.
In addition to the authorization for the collection of taxes and institution of
tax sales authorized by the Real Estate Tax Sales Law ("RETSL"), 72 P.S.
§ 5860.201 et seq., the Montgomery County Tax Claim Bureau is appointed
as alternative collector and is authorized and directed to file liens for
existing delinquent real estate taxes with the Prothonotary of Montgomery
County in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Claims and Tax
Liens Act, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 182-69. Interest rate.
In accordance with the MCTLA and RETSL, interest shall be charged on
taxes so returned from and after but not before the first day of the month
following the return. Interest shall be charged at the rate of 9% per annum.
§ 182-70. Charges, expenses and fees.
Pursuant to Section 7106 of the MCTLA, it is hereby established that
the reasonable charges, expenses and fees incurred in the collection of
any delinquent account under the MCTLA are hereby fixed at 5% of the
total amount of the delinquent taxes (including interest and penalties), and
that additional reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in the collection of any
delinquent taxes shall be fixed at 1% of the total amount of the delinquent
taxes (including interest and penalties), and that said charges for attorneys'
fees and for all charges, expenses and fees set forth herein shall be paid
to the County of Montgomery through the Montgomery County Tax Claim
Bureau in lieu of payment of commission pursuant to Section 207 of RETSL.
§ 182-71. Authorization to implement provisions of this article.
The proper officials of East Norriton Township and Montgomery County are
hereby authorized and empowered to take such additional action as they
may deem necessary or appropriate to implement this article.
§ 182-68 SHOPPING CARTS § 182-71
163:607

ARTICLE VII
Local Taxpayers Bills of Rights
[Adopted 7-23-2013 by Ord. No. 547163]
§ 182-72. Purpose.
§ 182-73. Applicability.
A. Act 50 of 1998 of the General Assembly of Pennsylvania was signed into
law on May 5, 1998, including Subchapter C, entitled the "Local
Taxpayers Bill of Rights," 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8421-8438, requiring that local
taxing authorities prepare a statement which sets forth in simple and
nontechnical terms the following:
(1) The rights of a taxpayer and the obligation of the local taxing
authority during an audit or an administrative review of the
taxpayer's books or records.
(2) The administrative and judicial procedures by which a taxpayer
may appeal or seek review of any adverse decision of the local
taxing authority.
(3) The procedure for filing and processing refund claims and taxpayer
complaints.
(4) The enforcement procedures.
B. East Norriton Township shall establish regulations by resolution to
implement Act 50 of 1998 providing for the Local Taxpayers Bill of
Rights.
A. This article and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto shall apply to
the following articles of this chapter:
(1) Amusement tax.
(2) Local services tax.
(3) Realty transfer tax.
(4) Business privilege tax and mercantile tax.
163. Editor's Note: This article was originally enacted as Art. VI but was renumbered as Art. VII
to accommodate an existing Art. VI.
§ 182-72 SHOPPING CARTS § 182-73
163:609
Chapter 186
TOWING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 196.
§ 186-1. Establishment of call list.
The Board of Supervisors shall establish a call list approved towing service
establishments, which list shall be utilized by the East Norriton Township
Police Department to engage a towing service establishment for the
purpose of expediting the clearing of highways within the Township in the
event of a vehicular accident or the breakdown of a vehicle.
§ 186-2. Assignments of services.
Towing service establishments shall be assigned on a rotating monthly basis
to be on call 24 hours a day, seven days a week during the assigned month.
Establishments shall respond to a call through the East Norriton Township
Police Department itself or through the Montgomery County Radio Center
within 20 minutes from the time of the call.
§ 186-3. Backup service established.
A backup towing service establishment shall be on call on a rotating
monthly basis. If the primary assigned towing service establishment fails to
respond within 20 minutes from the time of the call, the backup operator
shall be notified and will have the primary responsibility of towing if the
backup towing service establishment responds within 20 minutes from the
time of the backup call.
§ 186-4. Responsibility of service establishment.
The towing service establishment shall be responsible for reasonable
security of the towed vehicle and its contents during the towing of the
vehicle and during the storage of the vehicle. Nothing herein shall be
construed to impose upon East Norriton Township liability for the conduct
of the towing service establishment, its agents, servants, workmen or
employees. Towing service establishments shall at no time be the agents
of the Township, nor shall they in any manner be compensated by the
Township.
§ 186-5. Option to select establishment.
In all events, the owner/operator of a vehicle which must be towed shall
have the first option to select a towing service establishment to tow the
disabled vehicle so long as such selection is reasonable under the
§ 182-73 EAST NORRITON CODE § 186-5
186:610
circumstances. The East Norriton Township Police Department shall have
authority under this chapter to call the towing service establishment only if
the owner/operator of a disabled vehicle is unwilling or unable to select a
towing service establishment.
§ 186-6. Abandoned vehicles.
Abandoned vehicles shall be towed and stored only by authorized salvagers
which have been issued a certificate of authorization from the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation.
§ 186-7. Liability.
All towing establishments on the call list shall maintain current liability
insurance policies in effect. Towing establishments shall furnish to the
Township evidence of current coverage prior to be entered on the call list
and at such other times as the Township shall request evidence of coverage.
§ 186-8. Regulations to be established.
The Board of Supervisors shall establish regulations concerning the
qualification criteria for towing service establishments to be included on
the call list and the maximum rates to be charged by such towing service
establishments.164
Chapter 190
USE AND OCCUPANCY AND TEMPORARY ACCESS
CERTIFICATES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
175.
§ 190-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as "Use and Occupancy and Temporary Access
Certificates."
§ 190-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the certification process of real
property for use and occupancy in East Norriton Township.
§ 190-3. Definitions.
164. Editor's Note: The Towing Service Establishment Call List Regulations are on file in the
office of the Township Manager and may be examined there during regular business
hours.
§ 186-5 TOWING § 190-3
186:611
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DATE OF PURCHASE — The date on which title and right to possess
the property transfers to the purchaser or, in cases where the property
is sold pursuant to the act of May 16, 1923 (P.L. 207, No. 153), referred
to as the Municipal Claim and Tax Lien Law,165 the first day following
the right of redemption period authorized under the Municipal Claim
and Tax Lien Law.
PERSON — Individuals, corporations, and all other forms of entities, as
the circumstances dictate.
SUBSTANTIAL VIOLATION — A violation of a Township ordinance
related to building, housing, property maintenance or Fire Code or
maintenance, health, safety, or nuisances, that makes a building,
structure, or any part thereof, unfit for human habitation, and is
discovered during the course of a Township inspection of a property,
and disclosed to the record owner, or prospective purchaser of the
property, through issuance of report from the Township.
TEMPORARY ACCESS CERTIFICATE — A certificate issued by the
Township, as a result of an inspection of a property, incident to the
resale of the property, that identifies at least one substantial violation.
The purpose of the certificate is to authorize the purchaser to access
the property for the purpose of correcting substantial violations,
pursuant to the maintenance and repair provisions of this chapter. No
person may occupy a property during the term of a temporary access
certificate, but the owner shall be permitted to store personalty that is
related to the proposed use or occupancy of the property, or is needed
to repair the substantial violations, during the time of the temporary
access certificate.
TEMPORARY USE AND OCCUPANCY CERTIFICATE — A certificate,
issued by the Township as a result of an inspection of a property
incident to the resale of the property, that reveals a violation, but no
substantial violation. The purpose of the certificate is to authorize the
purchaser to fully utilize or reside in the property, while correcting
violations pursuant to the maintenance and repair provisions of this
chapter.
TOWNSHIP — East Norriton Township, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania.
UCC — Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code (34 Pa. Code,
Chapters 401 through 405).
UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION — A condition which renders a
building or structure, or any part thereof, dangerous or injurious to the
health, safety or physical welfare of an occupant or the occupants of
neighboring dwellings. The condition may include substantial violations
of a property that show evidence of: a significant increase to the
165. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 190-3 EAST NORRITON CODE § 190-3
186:612
§ 190-4. Certificate required.
hazards of fire or accident; inadequate sanitary facilities; vermin
infestation; or a condition of disrepair, dilapidation or structural
defects, such that the cost of rehabilitation and repair would exceed 1/
2 of the agreed-upon purchase price of the property.
UNIT — Each separate area of a building, designed or intended to be
used for one family dwelling, one commercial user, including business
and professional users, or one industrial user.
USE AND OCCUPANCY CERTIFICATE — A certificate issued by the
Township, stipulating that the property meets all ordinances and codes
and may be used or occupied as intended.
VIOLATION — A violation of a Township ordinance related to building,
housing, property maintenance or Fire Code or maintenance, health,
safety, or nuisances, that does not rise to the level of a substantial
violation, and is discovered during the course of a Township inspection
of a property and disclosed to the record owner or prospective
purchaser of the property through issuance of a report.
B. Any terms not herein defined shall have the meanings given to them in
the East Norriton Code (or, if not defined therein, the 2009
International Building Code and the 2015 International Property
Maintenance Code), unless the context plainly requires another
meaning.
A. Resale. Certificates of use and occupancy shall be required for all
properties prior to sale. The owner of the property subject to the sale
shall notify the Township at least 30 days prior to the proposed transfer
and shall make all areas to be inspected available to the Township, upon
the Township's request. Purchasers of properties with known
substantial violations must comply with the requirements of § 190-10.
B. Rentals. Certificates of use and occupancy shall be required for all
properties, upon their advertisement or offering for rent, with the
exception of properties rented to relatives.
(1) Such certificate shall be required upon leasing the property to each
new tenant, or every two years, if rented continuously to the same
tenant.
(2) The owner of the rental property shall notify the Township at least
30 days prior to the proposed rental and shall make all areas to be
inspected available to the Township, upon the Township's request.
C. Construction.
(1) New construction. Whenever, pursuant to permits issued by the
Township, a new dwelling unit, commercial unit, or industrial unit
is constructed or created by any means, no such units shall be
occupied, or used by the owner, or a tenant, or any other person,
§ 190-3 TOWING § 190-4
186:613
until a use and occupancy certificate has been issued by the
Township, to the owner, or to his duly authorized agent.
(a) No use and occupancy permit shall be issued unless there shall
be filed with the Township a site plan that is accurate and to
scale, showing to a scale of not smaller than one inch equals 40
feet all as-built features. The plan at a minimum shall indicate
the following:
[1] The actual building envelope of the structure with
dimensions;
[2] The actual dimensions from property lines (front, side, and
rear) to the structure;
[3] Front and rear entry, accessory structures, porches,
patios, and/or decks;
[4] Driveway location, dimensions and slopes;
[5] Finished floor elevation of the garage and first floor to the
building;
[6] Property lines, building setback lines and street locations,
showing curbs, sidewalks, driveway aprons, etc.;
[7] Grades of the entire site, including spot elevations at the
outside corners of each building, as well as a grading plan
at one-foot contour intervals indicating contour lines;
[8] Definition and percent of slope and center line of drainage
channels, diversion terraces, top of grate and invert
elevations of stormwater facilities;
[9] The location of any retaining walls, tree wells, wing walls
or berms;
[10] The location of individual trees or woodland masses and
other natural features or man-made features, such as
streams, roads or walkways;
[11] The location of street trees or site landscaping per the
codes of the Township;
[12] The plot plan shall show the lot area, the area of dwellings
and structures, the area of driveways and parking areas,
the area of other impervious coverage, the percent of
building coverage and the percent of impervious coverage;
[13] Foundation verification.
(b) Exception. A certificate of use and occupancy shall not be
required for new construction or dwelling units that receive a
certificate of occupancy, pursuant to the UCC, and within one
§ 190-4 EAST NORRITON CODE § 190-4
186:614
§ 190-5. Responsibility for obtaining certificate.
§ 190-6. Violations and penalties.
year of the issuance of such UCC certificate of use and
occupancy.
(2) Additions and alterations. Such construction shall comply with all
applicable provisions of the Code of East Norriton Township, the
International Building Code, the International Property
Maintenance Code, and the International Fire Code.
D. No property shall be occupied in whole, or in part, until the issuance of
a temporary certificate of occupancy, or a certificate of occupancy, by
the Code Enforcement Office, stating that the structure conforms in all
respects to the requirements of this chapter, the International Property
Maintenance Code, the International Fire Code, and the Township's
Zoning Code.
E. No certificate of use and occupancy shall be issued unless and until a
fireplace certification is obtained, when applicable.
F. No certificate of use and occupancy shall be issued unless and until the
property passes a sewer lateral inspection, to be obtained by the seller
or transferor, from a licensed plumber.
A. The use and occupancy certificate shall state the proposed use for the
structure, building or dwelling unit. No transfer of, and no change in
the use or ownership of, any structure, building or dwelling unit shall be
made until a use and occupancy certificate has been issued in
accordance with this chapter. It shall be the duty of any person who
shall sell or otherwise transfer ownership of any structure, building or
dwelling unit to another person to apply for and obtain the use and
occupancy certificate required by this chapter, prior to such transfer of
ownership and/or any change in the use or occupancy of such premises.
B. The failure on the part of such seller or transferor to obtain such
certificate shall not excuse the purchaser or transferee of such
premises from the requirements of this chapter. Purchasers of
properties with known substantial violations must comply with the
requirements of § 190-10.
A. Any person who or which shall occupy or use any structure, building or
dwelling unit without obtaining a use and occupancy certificate shall be
in violation of this chapter and shall, upon conviction thereof in a
summary proceeding, be guilty of a summary offense, and subject to the
payment of a fine of not more than $1,000, and the costs of prosecution,
including the attorneys' fees of the Township, and, in default thereof, to
imprisonment in the Montgomery County prison as provided by law.
B. Each and every day that occupancy or use of any structure, building or
dwelling unit shall continue without the permits required by this
§ 190-4 TOWING § 190-6
186:615
§ 190-7. Issuance of use and occupancy certificate.
The Township will issue a use and occupancy certificate in the following
manner:
§ 190-8. Items to be inspected.
The Township shall inspect all properties for compliance with the items set
forth on the Township's Use and Occupancy Inspection Form (NOTE: The
Township's Use and Occupancy Inspection Form is on file at the Township
office and may be examined there during regular business hours.) created
in accordance with the International Property Maintenance Code, as
amended, and all local, state, and federal laws, before issuing use and
occupancy certificates. These items may be amended from time to time, in
accordance with the aforementioned laws.
§ 190-9. Revocation.
Any use and occupancy certificate issued hereunder may be revoked in
the event that the structure, building or dwelling unit is subsequently
determined to be unsafe or uninhabitable, or that a condition exists that is
in violation of any applicable ordinance of the Township. In the event that
a temporary access certificate or temporary use and occupancy certificate
is issued, such certificates may be revoked if the necessary repairs are not
made within the time limit provided for at the time of issuance of such
certificate.
§ 190-10. Compliance requirements for purchasers of properties
with known substantial violations.
chapter, after notice to cease and desist such occupancy or use shall
have been given, shall constitute a separate offense and be punishable
as such.
A. If the inspection reveals no violations.
B. If the inspection reveals at least one violation, but no substantial
violations, the Township shall issue a temporary use and occupancy
certificate.
C. If the inspection reveals at least one substantial violation, the Township
shall specifically note those items on the inspection report, and shall
issue a temporary access certificate.
A. Within 12 months of the date of purchase, the purchaser of a property
known to be in violation of a Township code or ordinance shall, at the
purchaser's option, either:
(1) Bring the property into compliance with Township codes and/or
ordinances; or
(2) Demolish the building or structure in accordance with law.
§ 190-6 EAST NORRITON CODE § 190-10
186:616
§ 190-11. Applicability.
B. Negotiation of longer time periods. At the request of the property
owner, the Township may negotiate, at its discretion, longer time
periods for maintenance and repair of the structure under a temporary
certificate, but the time periods stated in Subsection A may not be
shortened.
C. Reinspection of property. At the expiration of the time period set forth
in Subsection A, or before that time, if requested by the property owner,
the Township shall reinspect the property for the purpose of
determining compliance with the cited violations.
(1) If a temporary access certificate has been issued, and reinspection
indicates that the noted substantial violations have been corrected,
but other cited violations have not yet been corrected, the
Township shall issue a temporary use and occupancy permit, to be
valid for the time remaining on the original temporary access
certificate.
(2) If the reinspection indicates that all noted violations have been
corrected, the Township shall issue a use and occupancy certificate
for the property.
D. Penalty. Failure to comply with the requirements of Subsection A shall
result in:
(1) Revocation of the temporary certificate;
(2) The purchaser being subject to § 190-6;
(3) The purchaser being personally liable for the costs of maintenance,
repairs or demolition, sufficient to correct the cited violations, and
a fine of not less than $1,000 and not more than $10,000. Not less
than 1/3 of the fine imposed specifically for code violations shall be
used by the Township for low-income housing, in a manner
determined by the Township.
A. Financial institutions.
(1) Except as set forth in Subsection B below, this chapter does not
require a certificate of occupancy, a temporary use and occupancy
certificate, or a temporary access certificate for a real estate
transfer, including a residential or nonresidential transfer, as
provided under 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 7103(b)(2), relating to any of the
following, which take title to property for the purpose of holding
the property for sale, to offset losses incurred on a loan or other
obligation, in default secured by a mortgage, deed of trust or other
lien on the property:
(a) Bank.
(b) Savings association.
§ 190-10 TOWING § 190-11
186:617
Chapter 196
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 127.
Parking on private property — See Ch. 135.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 168.
Towing — See Ch. 186.
(c) Credit union.
(d) Mortgage lender.
(e) Financial institution similar to an institution listed in
Subsection A(1)(a) through (d).
(f) Subsidiary of a financial institution listed in Subsection A(1)(a)
through (e).
(2) Exception. A financial institution not subject to this chapter under
Subsection A(1) may be required by the Township to correct a
substantial violation.
B. Exception. A violation of a Township code or ordinance, for which a fine,
other penalty or a judgment to abate or correct was imposed by a
Magisterial District Judge or Municipal Court, or a judgment at law or
in equity was imposed by the Court of Common Pleas of Montgomery
County, prior to purchase, shall not be subject to the requirements of
§ 190-10.
C. Section 190-10 shall not apply where the Township denies the
certificate or permit pursuant to 53 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 61 (relating to
neighborhood blight reclamation and revitalization).
D. This chapter shall not apply to the continuation of the existing lawful
use and occupancy of an existing structure, building or dwelling unit;
the lawful transfer of a structure, building or dwelling unit within one
year from the effective date of this chapter, where such transfer is
pursuant to a legally binding agreement in force as of the effective date
of this chapter; and any transfer between husband and wife.
E. This chapter shall not apply to transfers of real estate between
relatives, if such a transfer would be exempt from realty transfer tax
under the State Realty Transfer Tax Statute166 and Regulations.
Transfers of real estate between parent and subsidiary corporations or
between other entities having common ownership shall also be exempt
from this chapter.
166. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq.
§ 190-11 EAST NORRITON CODE § 190-11
186:618
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 196-1. Definitions and interpretation.
§ 196-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances or as parts of ordinances or as amendments to ordinances of
the Township of East Norriton.
§ 196-3. Temporary and emergency regulations.
§ 196-4. Experimental regulations.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, except for sections or
articles to which different or additional definitions apply, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et
seq. (the Act of June 17, 1976, P.L, 162, No. 81), as amended, except
that in this chapter the word "street" may be used interchangeably with
the word "highway" and shall have the same meaning as the word
"highway" as defined in the Vehicle Code.
B. The term "legal holidays," as used in this chapter, shall mean and
include New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
C. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
A. The duly authorized law enforcement official shall have the following
powers to regulate traffic and parking temporarily and in time of
emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations.
(2) In the case of emergency public works or public events of limited
scope or duration, to restrict or prohibit traffic and/or parking in
limited areas for periods of not more than 72 hours.
B. These temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
duly authorized law enforcement official and the police in the same
manner as permanent regulations. Any person who drives or parks a
vehicle in violation of any such regulation or who shall move, remove,
destroy, injure or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made to
give notice of any such regulation shall, upon conviction thereof, be
liable to the penalty set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for
a violation of such nature.
§ 196-1 TOWING § 196-4
186:619
§ 196-5. Streets closed or restricted for construction, maintenance
or special events.
§ 196-6. Authority of police officers.
The police shall have authority to direct traffic on the streets in the
Township, at intersections in public and in other places where the Vehicle
Code or this chapter applies.
A. The Board of Supervisors may, from time to time, designate places upon
and along the streets in the Township where, for a period of not more
than 90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations, prohibitions
and restrictions shall be in force and effect and shall designate those
locations by proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions
and restrictions shall be effective just as if they had been specified in
this chapter. No person shall drive or park a vehicle in violation of any
such regulation, prohibition or restriction, and no person shall move,
remove, destroy or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made
by authority of this section. Any person who violates any provision of
this section shall, upon conviction, be liable to the penalty set out in the
law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such nature.
B. The purpose of this section is to allow for test and experimental
determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent changes
in the ordinances of the Township relative to traffic and parking.
A. The Board of Supervisors shall have authority to close any street or
specific part of a street to vehicular traffic and to place barriers or
station police officers at each end of the closed portion while
construction or maintenance work is under way or a special event is
being conducted on the closed portion. It shall be unlawful for any
person to drive a vehicle upon any such closed portion.
B. The Board of Supervisors shall have authority to establish a restricted
traffic area upon any street where construction or maintenance work is
under way and to station flagmen at each end of the restricted portion.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any such
restricted traffic area at any time when the flagman is displaying a sign
directing that vehicle to stop or is signaling that vehicle, by a flag or
other device, not to proceed.
§ 196-4 EAST NORRITON CODE § 196-6
186:620
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 196-7. Speed limits.
The maximum speed at which vehicles may proceed on or along any streets
or highways within the Township is hereby established at 25 miles per
hour, except for any state or county highway or roadway and except that
the speed limit for vehicles proceeding on or along those streets or parts
of streets described in Schedule I (§ 196-42) shall be as indicated in said
schedule.
§ 196-8. Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated (or are ratified if
previously installed) at the intersection of those streets described in
Schedule II (§ 196-43), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 196-9. Prohibited right turns on red signal.
No person shall make a right turn (or a left turn from a one-way street
into another one-way street) when facing a steady red signal at any of the
locations described in Schedule III (§ 196-44), attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
§ 196-10. Prohibited turns at intersections.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to make a turn of the kind
designated (left, right, all) at any of the intersections described in Schedule
IV (§ 196-45), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 196-11. U-turns.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to make a U-turn on any of
the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule V (§ 196-46), attached
to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 196-12. One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VI (§ 196-47), attached
to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as one-way streets
in the direction indicated, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive
a vehicle on any one-way street other than in the direction established for
traffic on that street.
§ 196-13. No-passing zones.
No-passing zones are hereby established along those streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule VII (§ 196-48), attached to and made a part of
this chapter, and it shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to overtake
§ 196-7 TOWING § 196-13
186:621
or pass another vehicle or to drive on the left side of the roadway in any nopassing
zone described in said schedule.
§ 196-14. Stop intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule VIII (§ 196-49), attached to and
made a part of this chapter, are hereby established as stop intersections,
and official stop signs shall be erected (or are ratified if previously erected)
in such a position upon the first-named street as to face traffic approaching
the second-named street in the direction or directions indicated in said
schedule. Every driver of a vehicle approaching any such intersection upon
the first-named street, in the direction or directions indicated in each case,
shall come to a full stop before entering any such intersection.
§ 196-15. Yield intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule IX (§ 196-50), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby established as yield intersections, and
official yield signs shall be erected (or are ratified if previously erected) in
such a position upon the first-named street as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street in the direction or directions indicated. Every driver of
a vehicle approaching any such intersection upon the first-named street, in
the direction or directions indicated in each case, shall slow down or stop
the vehicle and then yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection
or approaching on the second-named street so closely as to constitute a
hazard during the time that the driver is moving across or within such
intersection.
§ 196-16. Closing of certain streets to certain vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle, except a passenger
vehicle (but not including any passenger vehicle drawing any trailer or
towing any other vehicle), upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule X (§ 196-51), attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 196-17. Vehicle weight limits.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any commercial vehicle or
other tractor, trailer or tractor-trailer combination, having a gross weight in
excess of that respectively prescribed, upon any of the streets or bridges, or
portions thereof, described in Schedule XI (§ 196-52), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, except for the purpose of making local deliveries on
said streets.
§ 196-17.1. "Do not enter" areas. [Added 2-17-1998 by Ord. No.
392]
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to enter any of the streets
or parts of streets described in Schedule XI-A (§ 196-52.1), attached to and
made a part of this chapter.
§ 196-13 EAST NORRITON CODE § 196-17.1
186:622
ARTICLE III
Parking Regulations
§ 196-18. Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces.
Wherever a space is marked off on any street for the parking of an individual
vehicle, every vehicle parked there shall be parked wholly within the lines
bounding that space, and it shall be a violation of this article for any person
to park a vehicle or allow it to remain parked otherwise.
§ 196-19. Manner of parking.
§ 196-20. Parking of commercial equipment.
A. Every vehicle which is standing or parked on a two-way highway shall
be positioned parallel to either the curb or the edge of the highway and
in all cases in the direction of authorized traffic movement. The vehicles
shall be parked such that the right-hand wheels are within 12 inches of
the right-hand curb or, in the absence of a curb, as close as practicable
to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder.
B. Every vehicle which is standing or parked on a one-way highway shall
be positioned parallel to the curb or edge of the highway in the
direction of authorized traffic movement. Said vehicle shall be parked
so that its wheels are within 12 inches from the curb or, in the absence
of a curb, as close as practicable to the shoulder of the road.
C. No person shall park a vehicle at any time within the Township of East
Norriton in such a way that any part of such vehicle: [Added
12-17-2002 by Ord. No. 444]
(1) Is located within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
(2) Is located on a public sidewalk;
(3) Is located in a designated fire zone;
(4) Is located within 20 feet of an intersection;
(5) Blocks or impedes ingress or egress from a public or private
driveway;
(6) Is located within a designated handicap only parking space;
(7) Is located within a pedestrian crosswalk; or
(8) Blocks or impedes the flow of traffic in any way.
A. No commercial equipment, including but not limited to trucks, tandems
(in excess of one ton capacity), tractor-trailers, tractors or other
commercial construction or cargo-moving vehicles or equipment, shall
be parked upon any highway or street within the Township of East
Norriton. Furthermore, no commercial equipment as described in this
§ 196-18 TOWING § 196-20
186:623
§ 196-21. Angle parking.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts thereof
described in Schedule XII (§ 196-53), attached to and made a part of this
chapter, except at the angle designated and only within the painted stall
lines. On all streets or portions thereof where angle parking is now or shall
hereafter be authorized, all vehicles parked thereon shall be parked with
the front thereof nearest the curb.
§ 196-22. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule XIII (§ 196-54), attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
§ 196-23. Parking prohibited certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule XIV (§ 196-55), attached to and made a part of this
chapter, during the hours specified in said schedule, on any day except
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays.
§ 196-24. Time limit parking.
No person shall park a vehicle or allow the same to remain parked upon
any of the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XV (§ 196-56),
attached to and made a part of this chapter, between the hours specified,
for longer than the time indicated in said schedule.
§ 196-25. Special purpose parking zones.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle or to allow the
same to remain parked in any special purpose parking zone established in
Schedule XVI (§ 196-57), attached to and made a part of this chapter, except
as specifically provided for such zone.
subsection shall be parked or stored upon any highway or street in the
Township of East Norriton after completion of the working day.
B. The following are exceptions to the restrictions set forth in this section:
(1) Any commercial equipment described in this section may legally
park for the purpose of delivering goods or rendering services
during the normal course of business, provided that such vehicle
does not substantially impede the flow of vehicular traffic.
(2) Vehicles being used for the purpose of road construction shall be
permitted to park, stand or stop on any highway or street within the
Township of East Norriton when construction is in progress upon
said highway or street.
§ 196-20 EAST NORRITON CODE § 196-26
186:624
§ 196-26. Penalties for parking violations. [Amended 12-19-1996 by
Ord. No. 376; 2-22-2005 by Ord. No. 475]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $30 and costs; provided,
however, that it shall be the duty of the police officers and of parking
enforcement personnel of the Township to report to the duly authorized law
enforcement official all violations of any provision of this article, indicating,
in each case, the section violated, the license number of the vehicle involved
in the violation, the location where the violation took place and any other
facts that might be necessary in order to secure a clear understanding of
the circumstances attending the violation. The police officer or other person
making the report shall also attach to or place upon every such vehicle a
notice stating that the vehicle was parked in violation of this article. The
notice shall contain instructions to the owner or driver of the vehicle that
if he will report to the office of the Chief of Police and pay the sum of $30
(or, if the violation was of § 196-20, Parking of commercial equipment, the
sum of $25) within 72 hours after the time of the notice, or if he will forward
the sum of $30 (or if the violation was of § 196-20, Parking of commercial
equipment, the sum of $25) by regular mail to the office of the Township
Police Secretary, postmarked within 72 hours of the violation, that act will
save the violator from prosecution and from payment of the fine and costs
prescribed in the first sentence of this section.
§ 196-26 TOWING § 196-26
186:625

ARTICLE IV
Removal and Impounding of Certain Vehicles
§ 196-27. Applicability and scope.
This article is enacted under authority of Section 6109(a)(22) of the Vehicle
Code and gives authority to the Township to remove and impound vehicles
that are parked overtime on any street in the Township in violation of any
provision of Article I or Article III of this chapter.
§ 196-28. Authority to remove and impound.
The Township shall have authority to remove and impound or to order
the removal and impounding of any vehicle parked overtime or otherwise
illegally, provided that the circumstances of its parking were within the
conditions stated in § 196-27 of this article and provided that no such
vehicle shall be removed or impounded except in strict adherence to the
provisions of this article.
§ 196-29. Designation of approved storage garages; bonding;
towing and storage.
Removal and impounding of vehicles under this article shall be done only
by approved storage garages that shall be designated from time to time
by the Board of Supervisors. Every such garage shall submit evidence
to the Board of Supervisors that it is bonded or has acquired liability
insurance in an amount satisfactory to the Board of Supervisors as sufficient
to indemnify owners of impounded vehicles against loss or damage to
those vehicles while in the custody of the garagekeeper for the purpose of
towing or storage. The approved storage garage shall submit to the Board
of Supervisors its schedule of charges for towing and storage of vehicles
under this article, and when the schedule is approved by the Board of
Supervisors, those charges shall be adhered to by the approved storage
garage. No different schedule of charges shall be adopted without approval
of the Board of Supervisors, and no different charges shall be demanded of
or collected from any person whose vehicle is removed or impounded under
this article by any approved storage garage. The Board of Supervisors shall
delete from its list of approved storage garages any garage that makes any
unapproved charge in connection with any vehicle removed or impounded
under this article.
§ 196-30. Notification of removal and impounding.
Within 12 hours from the time of removal of any vehicle under authority
granted by this article, notice of the fact that the vehicle was removed shall
be sent by the Township to the owner of record of the vehicle. The notice
shall designate the place from which the vehicle was removed, the reason
for its removal and impounding and the garage in which it was impounded.
§ 196-27 TOWING § 196-31
186:627
§ 196-31. Effect of payment of towing and storage charges.
The payment of any towing and storage charges authorized by this article
shall, unless payment is made under protest, be final and conclusive and
shall constitute a waiver of any right to recover the money so paid. If
payment of any towing or storage charges is made under protest, the
offender shall be entitled to a hearing before a District Justice. Payment
of towing and storage charges shall not relieve the owner or driver of any
vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation of the provision
of this chapter for which the vehicle was removed or impounded.
§ 196-32. Records of vehicles removed and impounded.
The Township shall cause a record to be kept of all vehicles impounded
under this article and shall be able at all reasonable times to furnish the
owners or the agents of the owners of those vehicles with information as to
the place of storage of the vehicle.
§ 196-33. Restrictions upon removal of vehicles.
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this article if, at the
time of the intended removal, the owner or the person for the time being in
charge of the vehicle is present and expresses a willingness and intention
to remove the vehicle immediately.
§ 196-31 EAST NORRITON CODE § 196-33
186:628
ARTICLE V
Snow and Ice Emergencies
[Amended 10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 565]
§ 196-34. Declaration of snow and ice emergency.
In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards
of snow and ice, the Chairman of the Board of Supervisors, or his or her
designee, in his or her discretion, may declare a snow and ice emergency
(designated in this article as a "snow emergency"). Information on the
existence of a snow emergency may be given by the Township through
radio, newspaper or other available media, and information on the
termination of the emergency may be given by use of the same media.
§ 196-35. Parking restrictions.
After any snow emergency is declared, it shall be unlawful, at any time
during the continuance of the emergency, for any person to park a motor
vehicle or to allow that vehicle to remain parked on any street or road
within the Township until the snow has been completely plowed for the full
width of the cartway.
§ 196-36. (Reserved)
§ 196-37. Penalty for violation.
A. If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under
§ 196-34 of this article, a person, corporation, or other entity shall park
a motor vehicle or allow a motor vehicle to remain parked, stalled, or
incapable of moving anywhere upon any street or road in the Township,
that person shall be guilty of a violation of this article and, upon
conviction, shall be fined not more than $600 plus costs of prosecution,
after a summary proceeding brought in the name of the Township
before a District Justice. A new and separate offense shall be deemed to
be committed for each day that such violation exists. In default of the
payment of any fine imposed and the costs, the person or persons that
are charged may be sentenced to be committed to the county jail for a
period not exceeding 30 days.
B. In all cases where a police officer of East Norriton Township shall first
give notice of the offense by either handing to the offending operator or
affixing to the motor vehicle in question a ticket on which he has noted
the time and place of the offense, nature of the offense charged and the
license registration of the motor vehicle in question, no prosecution
shall be instituted for 72 hours thereafter, provided that, if, during said
seventy-two-hour period, the offender shall voluntarily appear at the
office of the Township Secretary of East Norriton Township during
regular business hours and voluntarily enter a plea of guilty and pay a
fine of $30 to the Township, no prosecution for such offense shall
thereafter be brought.
§ 196-34 TOWING § 196-37
186:629

ARTICLE VI
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 196-38. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by the Vehicle Code (75
Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.) or except as herein specified, every person
convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter, or any supplement
thereto, shall be liable to a penalty of $25 and costs of prosecution.
§ 196-39. Repeal of previous ordinances; effect.
§ 196-40. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter shall be severable; and if any of its provisions
shall be held to be unconstitutional, illegal or otherwise invalid, such
decision shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining provisions of
this chapter. It is hereby declared as a legislative intent that this chapter
would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or otherwise
invalid provision not been included herein.
§ 196-41. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect after approval in accordance with the
provisions of the Second Class Township Code.
A. All previous ordinances of the Township of East Norriton pertaining to
the regulation of traffic and parking are hereby repealed.
B. The repeal of ordinances provided for in Subsection A above shall not
affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for any
act done or liability incurred in violation of any ordinance or regulation
in force immediately prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
C. The provisions of this chapter, insofar as they are the same as those of
ordinances and regulations in force immediately prior to the enactment
of this chapter, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and
regulations and not as new enactments.
§ 196-38 TOWING § 196-41
186:631

ARTICLE VII
Schedules
§ 196-42. Schedule I: Speed Limits. [Amended 8-21-2000 by Ord.
No. 425]
In accordance with the provisions of § 196-7, speed limits other than 25
miles per hour are established as indicated upon the following streets or
parts of streets:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Burnside Road 35 Entire length
Old Arch Road
[Amended
4-22-2014 by Ord.
No. 552]
35 From East Johnson Highway
to the east intersection of
Birchwood Drive
Potshop Road 35 Entire length
Swede Road 35 Entire length
Whitehall Road 35 Entire length
§ 196-43. Schedule II: Traffic Control Signals.
In accordance with the provisions of § 196-8, traffic control signals shall
be installed and operated (or are ratified if previously installed) at the
intersections described below:
Intersection
(Reserved)
§ 196-44. Schedule III: Prohibited Right Turns on Red Signal.
[Amended 9-21-1992 by Ord. No. 323]
In accordance with the provisions of § 196-9, no person shall make a right
turn (or a left turn from a one-way street into another one-way street) when
facing a steady red signal at any of the locations described below:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel
Prohibited Right Turn on Red
Signal Onto
Arch Road North Renel Road
Arch Road South Old Arch Road
Old Arch Road East Arch Road
Renel Road West Arch Road
§ 196-42 TOWING § 196-45
186:633
§ 196-45. Schedule IV: Prohibited Turns at Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 196-10, no driver of any vehicle shall
make a turn of the kind designated below at any of the following locations:
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours At Intersection of
Germantown
Pike
West Left All Western end of the
traffic gore between
Swede Square
Shopping Center and
Hillcrest Shopping
Center
Hannah Avenue South Left All Germantown Pike
K-Mart Shopping
Center, north
exit
East Left All DeKalb Pike
Meridian Bank,
north exit
West Left All DeKalb Pike
Mill Road East Left All Germantown Pike
Norris City
Avenue [Added
9-21-1992 by
Ord. No. 323]
East Left 6:00
a.m. to
6:00
p.m.
Swede Road
Norriton Square
Shopping Center,
easternmost and
middle exits
South Left All Germantown Pike
Northtowne
Shopping Center,
easternmost exit
South Left All Germantown Pike
Scenic Road South Left All Germantown Pike
Suburban
General Hospital
parking lot, east
exit
East Left All DeKalb Pike
Swede Square
Shopping Center,
westernmost exit
South Left All Germantown Pike
§ 196-46. Schedule V: U-Turns. [Amended 6-9-1997 by Ord. No. 384]
In accordance with the provisions of § 196-11, no driver of any vehicle shall
make a U-turn on any of the streets or parts of streets described below:
§ 196-45 EAST NORRITON CODE § 196-46
186:634
Name of Street Location
DeKalb Pike Germantown Pike
Germantown Pike DeKalb Pike
Germantown Pike North Wales Road
Germantown Pike Penn Square Road
Germantown Pike Stanbridge Street/Stoney Creek Road
Germantown Pike Swede Road
Germantown Pike Whitehall Road
Hillcrest Road Germantown Pike
Penn Square Road Germantown Pike
§ 196-47. Schedule VI: One-Way Streets. [Amended 9-21-1992 by
Ord. No. 323]
In accordance with the provisions of § 196-12, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way streets in the
direction indicated:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
DeKalb Boulevard North Must exit on south side of
intersection at DeKalb Pike
DeKalb Boulevard South Must exit on south side of
intersection at DeKalb Pike
DeKalb Pike North Must enter on the north side of
intersection at DeKalb Boulevard
DeKalb Pike South Must enter on the north side of
intersection of DeKalb Boulevard.
§ 196-48. Schedule VII: No-Passing Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 196-13, no-passing zones are hereby
established upon the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Direction of Travel Limits
(Reserved)
§ 196-49. Schedule VIII: Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 196-14, the following described
intersections are hereby established as stop intersections, and stop signs
shall be erected thereon as indicated in § 196-14.
§ 196-46 TOWING § 196-49
186:635
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
*Indicates stop signs controlling two or more streets in intersection
Adams Avenue North Swede Street
Adams Avenue South DeKalb Boulevard
Arch Road South Heather Lane
Avon Road East Keenwood Road
Baker Drive
[Added
11-25-1991 by
Ord. No. 307]
East Whitehall Road
Baldwin Avenue North Sharon Lane
Baldwin Avenue South North Wales Road
Barbara Drive East Manchester Road
Barbara Drive East North Wales Road
Barbara Drive East/west Denise Road
Barbara Drive East/west Nottingham Road
Barbara Drive* East/west Wellington Road
Barley Sheaf Drive
[Added
11-25-1991 by
Ord. No. 307]
East/west Scenic Road
Beechwood Road South Penn Square Road
Birchwood Drive
(east intersection)
South Old Arch Road
Birchwood Drive
(west intersection)
South Old Arch Road
Black Swift Road* North Woodland Avenue
Black Swift Road North/south Kinglet Drive
Black Swift Road South Bunting Road
Brambling Lane
[Added 6-9-1997
by Ord. No. 383]
North/south Bunting Road
Brambling Lane North/south Kinglet Drive
Brambling Lane West Black Swift Road
Brenda Lane* North Northampton Road
Brenda Lane South Markle Road
Briar Lane South Hillcrest Avenue
Briar Lane West Stanbridge Street
Brookside Road North Stoney Creek Road
§ 196-49 EAST NORRITON CODE § 196-49
186:636
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
*Indicates stop signs controlling two or more streets in intersection
Brookside Road North/south Woodlawn Road
Brookside Road South Penn Square Road
Bryans Road East Brookside Road
Bryans Road East Orchard Lane
Bunting Road
[Amended
6-9-1997 by Ord.
No. 383]
East Brambling Lane
Bunting Road
[Amended
6-9-1997 by Ord.
No. 383]
West Green Ridge Drive
Butchers Lane North DeKalb Pike
Butchers Lane North Township Line Road
Capitol Circle
[Added
11-25-1991 by
Ord. No. 307]
East Eisenhower Drive
Capitol Road
[Added
11-25-1991 by
Ord. No. 307]
East Taft Road
Capitol Road
[Added
11-25-1991 by
Ord. No. 307]
West Eisenhower Drive
Carol Lane East Old Arch Road
Coles Boulevard* East/west Francis Avenue
Congress Road North Senator Road
Congress Road* South Taft Road
Cottage Lane East Brookside Road
Cottage Lane South Woodlawn Road
Cresswell Drive
[Added
10-16-1996 by
Ord. No. 364]
North Crossing Circle
DeKalb Boulevard North/south Washington Avenue
DeKalb Boulevard South DeKalb Pike
DeKalb Pike East/west Colonial Drive
§ 196-49 TOWING § 196-49
186:637
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
*Indicates stop signs controlling two or more streets in intersection
Denise Road North Michele Drive
Desmond Road East Pinecrest Road
Desmond Road South Keenwood Road
Dogwood Lane North Briar Lane
Donna Drive East Markel Road
Doris Lane East Singer Lane
Dorp Circle West Dorp Lane
Dorp Lane South Briar Lane
Eisenhower Drive East/west Senator Road
Eisenhower Drive North Pot Shop Road
Eisenhower Drive North Township Line Road
Eisenhower Drive South Taft Road
Eisenhower Road
[Added
11-25-1991 by
Ord. No. 307]
North/south Fillmore Road
Eisenhower Road North/south Woodland Avenue
Elizabeth Drive
[Added
11-25-1991 by
Ord. No. 307]
East Old Arch Road
Embassy Circle* North Taft Road
Evergreen Avenue South Swede Street
Evergreen Avenue
[Added 9-21-1992
by Ord. No. 323]
West Hillcrest Avenue
Faith Drive [Added
11-25-1991 by
Ord. No. 307]
North Faith Drive
Faith Drive [Added
11-25-1991 by
Ord. No. 307]
South Sandra Lane
Farview Road South Hillcrest Avenue
Felton Road South Germantown Pike
Fillmore Road* East Taft Road
Foundry Road North Germantown Pike
Francis Avenue North/south Third Street
§ 196-49 EAST NORRITON CODE § 196-49
186:638
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
*Indicates stop signs controlling two or more streets in intersection
Francis Avenue
[Added
11-25-1991 by
Ord. No. 307]
West Swede Road
Francis Avenue South Second Street
Germantown Pike East/west Mill Road
Greenhill Lane
[Added
11-25-1991 by
Ord. No. 307]
North Township Line Road
Greenhill Lane South Stoney Creek Road
Green Ridge Drive East Woodland Avenue
Green Ridge Drive
[Added 6-9-1997
by Ord. No. 383]
North/south Bunting Road
Green Ridge Drive North/south Kinglet Drive
Hancock Avenue North Swede Street
Hancock Avenue North/south Coles Boulevard
Hancock Avenue North/south Second Street
Hancock Avenue North/south Third Street
Hancock Avenue South DeKalb Pike
Hancock Avenue South Germantown Pike
Hannah Avenue North Township Line Road
Hannah Avenue*
[Added 4-17-2000
by Ord. No. 421]
North/south Kory Lane
Hartranft Avenue North Swede Street
Hartranft Avenue North/south Coles Boulevard
Hartranft Avenue North/south First Street
Hartranft Avenue North/south Fourth Street
Hartranft Avenue North/south Second Street
Hartranft Avenue North/south Third Street
Hartranft Avenue South DeKalb Pike
Hayes Road East/west Pierce Road
Hayes Road
[Added 9-21-1992
by Ord. No. 323]
East/west Polk Road
Hayes Road North/south Kelly Drive
§ 196-49 TOWING § 196-49
186:639
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
*Indicates stop signs controlling two or more streets in intersection
Hayes Road West Eisenhower Drive
Heather Lane North Hemlock Drive
Hemlock Drive North Township Line Drive
Hemlock Drive
[Amended
12-23-1991 by
Ord. No. 308]
North/south Oak Drive
Hillcrest Avenue* East/west Woodlyn Avenue
Hillcrest Avenue West Evergreen Avenue
Independence Road North Eisenhower Drive
Irenic Court
[Added
11-25-1991 by
Ord. No. 307]
North Woodland Avenue
James Circle
[Added
11-25-1991 by
Ord. No. 307]
North Woodland Avenue
Jefferson Avenue North Swede Street
Jefferson Avenue South DeKalb Boulevard
Jennifer Drive East Kimberly Drive
Johnson Highway North/south Coles Boulevard
Johnson Highway North/south Second Street
Johnson Highway North/south Third Street
Keenwood Road* East Scenic Road
Keenwood Road North/south Pinecrest Road
Kelly Drive
[Amended
11-25-1991 by
Ord. No. 307]
East Sunset Avenue
Kennedy Road* West Pierce Road
Kimberly Drive North Township Line Road
Kinglet Drive East Pot Shop Road
Knoeller Road North Township Line Road
Kory Lane East Kimberly Drive and
Jennifer Drive
§ 196-49 EAST NORRITON CODE § 196-49
186:640
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
*Indicates stop signs controlling two or more streets in intersection
Kory Lane*
[Amended
4-17-2000 by Ord.
No. 421]
West Hannah Avenue
Kristin Court East Jennifer Drive
Kristin Court
[Added 2-13-1995
by Ord. No. 348]
North Kimberly Drive
Lafayette Road North Springview Road
Lawntown Road East DeKalb Pike
Lawnton Road East/west Lafayette Road
Lena Lane West Woodland Avenue
Lewis Lane West Woodland Avenue
Lisa Road North Sharon Lane
Lisa Road South Baldwin Avenue
Manchester Road East Nottingham Road
Manchester Road North Northampton Road
Marcia Lane East North Wales Road
Marcia Lane* West Shirlene Road
Marion Avenue
[Amended
11-25-1991 by
Ord. No. 307]
West Whitehall Road
Markle Road East Baldwin Avenue
Markle Road West Wellington Road
Marsha Road East North Wales Road
Marsha Road West Michele Drive
Meadowbrook
Road*
North Stanbridge Street
Meadowbrook Road North/south Alan Road
Meadowbrook Road North/south Hanover Lane
Meadowbrook Road South Swede Street
Megann Court
[Added 4-17-2000
by Ord. No. 421]
North Marielle Lane
Michele Drive North St. Vincent Street
Michele Drive South Barbara Drive
§ 196-49 TOWING § 196-49
186:641
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
*Indicates stop signs controlling two or more streets in intersection
Mill Road [Added
6-9-1997 by Ord.
No. 383]
East West side of the bend
Mill Road North Swede Street
Mill Road, except
right turning traffic
[Added 6-9-1997
by Ord. No. 383]
South North side of the bend
Montgomery
Avenue*
North/south Coles Boulevard
Montgomery
Avenue
North/south First Street
Montgomery
Avenue
North/south Third Street
Montgomery
Avenue
South DeKalb Pike
Municipal Complex,
Main Complex Road
[Added 2-13-1995
by Ord. No. 348]
South Employee's Parking Lot
Municipal Complex,
Parks and
Recreation
Driveway [Added
2-13-1995 by Ord.
No. 348]
East Main Complex Road
New Hope Street East/west Belvoir Road
New Hope Street [Repealed 11-25-1991 by Ord. No. 307]
New Stanbridge
Street*
South Stanbridge Street
Norris City Avenue East/west Bridge
Norris City Avenue North Stanbridge Street
Norris City Avenue South Swede Street
Norriton Drive East Keenwood Road
Norriton Drive West North Wales Road
Northampton Road East Nottingham Road
Northampton Road* East/west Brenda Lane
Northampton Road West Whitehall Road
North Wales Road North Township Line Road
§ 196-49 EAST NORRITON CODE § 196-49
186:642
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
*Indicates stop signs controlling two or more streets in intersection
North Wales Road North/south Avon Road
North Wales Road* North/south Norriton Drive
Nottingham Road
[Added 1-4-1999
by Ord. No. 402]
East Nottingham Road and
Knoeller Road
Nottingham Road North Whitehall Road
Nottingham Road North/south Brenda Lane
Nottingham Road North/south Knoeller Road
Nottingham Road North/south Wellington Road
Oaktree Road North Stoney Creek Road
Oaktree Road South Penn Square Road
Orchard Lane East Brookside Road
Overhill Road South Swede Street
Pacer Lane East Meadowbrook Road
Pacer Lane [Added
1-4-1999 by Ord.
No. 402]
North Pacer Lane at
Meadowbrook Road
Patricia Circle
[Amended
2-13-1995 by Ord.
No. 348]
North Jennifer Drive
Penn Square Road East Stoney Creek Road
Pierce Road North Pot Shop Road
Pierce Road* North/south Kennedy Road
Pierce Road* South Sunset Avenue
Polk Road East Hayes Road
Polk Road East/west Kennedy Road
Polk Road West Pierce Road
Pot Shop Road North Township Line Road
Rahway Avenue
[Amended
11-25-1991 by
Ord. No. 307]
North/south Bristol Avenue
Rahway Avenue
[Added 2-13-1995
by Ord. No. 348]
North/south Central Street
§ 196-49 TOWING § 196-49
186:643
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
*Indicates stop signs controlling two or more streets in intersection
Rahway Avenue
[Amended
11-25-1991 by
Ord. No. 307]
North/south Hazelton Street
Rahway Avenue
[Amended
11-25-1991 by
Ord. No. 307]
South Johnson Highway
Robin Lane North Carol Lane
Robin Lane South Old Arch Road
Roland Drive
[Added
12-13-1993 by
Ord. No. 337]
North North side of circle
Roland Drive North Township Line Road
Roland Drive
[Added
12-13-1993 by
Ord. No. 337]
South South side of circle
Roland Drive South Stoney Creek Road
Sandra Lane North Germantown Pike
Sandra Lane West Whitehall Road
Sardaro Lane East Evergreen Avenue
Sawmill Court East New Hope Street
Scenic Road East Pinecrest Road
Scenic Road* East/west Keenwood Road
Scenic Road
[Amended
11-25-1991 by
Ord. No. 307]
North/south Germantown Pike
Scenic Road
[Added 5-8-1995
by Ord. No. 350]
South Barley Sheaf Drive
Schultz Road North Trooper Road
Schultz Road South Pot Shop Road
Second Street
[Added
11-25-1991 by
Ord. No. 307]
North/south Francis Avenue
Senator Road South Taft Road
§ 196-49 EAST NORRITON CODE § 196-49
186:644
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
*Indicates stop signs controlling two or more streets in intersection
Sharon Lane North Township Line Road
Sharon Lane North/south Donna Drive
Sharon Lane South Brenda Lane
Shirlene Road* North/south Marcia Lane
Shirlene Road* North/south Markle Road
Sienna Drive
[Added
11-23-2004 by
Ord. No. 469]
South Crimson Drive
Singer Lane North Schultz Road
Singer Lane North/south Lewis Lane
Singer Lane South Lena Lane
Springview Road East Colonial Drive
Springview Road East/west Lawnton Road
Springview Road East/west Valley View Drive
Stanbridge Street* East/west Meadowbrook Road
Stanbridge Street* East/west New Stanbridge Street
Stanbridge Street* East/west Norris City Avenue
Stanbridge Street North Germantown Pike
Stanbridge Street
[Added
11-25-1991 by
Ord. No. 307]
North/south Timberlake entrance
Stoney Creek Road East/west Beechwood Road
Stoney Creek Road East/west Norwood Lane
Stoney Creek Road East/west Orchard Lane
Stoney Creek Road* East/west Sycamore Lane
Stoney Creek Road East/west Woodlawn Road
Stoney Creek Road South Swede Street
Sunset Avenue North Township Line Road
Sunset Avenue* North/south Pierce Road
Sunset Avenue* North/south Woodland Road
Sunset Avenue South Germantown Pike
Swede Street [Repealed 11-25-1991 by Ord. No. 307]
Sycamore Lane* North Stoney Creek Road
Taft Road East/west Capital Road
§ 196-49 TOWING § 196-49
186:645
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
*Indicates stop signs controlling two or more streets in intersection
Taft Road* East/west Congress Road
Taft Road* East/west Embassy Circle
Taft Road East/west Independence Road
Taft Road* East/west Woodland Road
Taft Road North Pot Shop Road
Taft Road* North/south Fillmore Road
Toll Gate Road North Taft Road
Township Line Road East/west Oak Drive
Trooper Road North Township Line Road
Valley View Circle East Valley View Road
Valley View Road East Colonial Drive
Washington Avenue North Swede Street
Wellington Road* North Barbara Drive
Wellington Road North/south Shirlene Road
Wellington Road West North Wales Road
West Crossing
Circle [Added
10-16-1996 by
Ord. No. 364]
North East Crossing Circle
West Hayes Road
[Added
10-12-1999 by
Ord. No. 409]
South Woodland Avenue
Windsor Drive North/south Nottingham Road
Windsor Drive West Knoeller Road
Woodland Avenue
[Added
11-25-1991 by
Ord. No. 307]
East/west Eisenhower Road
Woodland Avenue
[Added
11-25-1991 by
Ord. No. 307]
East/west Irenic Court
Woodland Avenue
[Added 9-21-1992
by Ord. No. 323]
East/west James Circle
Woodland Road East Pot Shop Road
Woodland Road* East Sunset Avenue
§ 196-49 EAST NORRITON CODE § 196-49
186:646
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
*Indicates stop signs controlling two or more streets in intersection
Woodland Road* East/west Black Swift Road
Woodland Road North/south Hayes Road
Woodland Road* North/south Taft Road
Woodlyn Avenue* North Hillcrest Avenue
Woodlyn Avenue South Swede Street
§ 196-50. Schedule IX: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 196-15, the following described
intersections are hereby established as yield intersections, and yield signs
shall be erected thereon as indicated in § 196-15:
Yield Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
(Reserved)
§ 196-51. Schedule X: Closing of Certain Streets to Certain
Vehicles.
In accordance with the provisions of § 196-16, it shall be unlawful for any
person to drive any vehicle, except a passenger vehicle (but not including
any passenger vehicle drawing any trailer or towing any other vehicle),
upon any of the streets or parts of streets described below:
Name of Street Limits
(Reserved)
§ 196-52. Schedule XI: Vehicle Weight Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 196-17, gross weight limits are
established as indicated for commercial vehicles or other tractor, trailer
or tractor-trailer combinations, upon the streets or bridges, or portions
thereof, described below, except for the purpose of making local deliveries
on said streets:
Name of Street or
Bridge
Maximum Gross
Weight
(pounds) Location
Schultz Road 4,000 From Pot Shop Road to Sunset
Avenue
Sunset Avenue 4,000 From Germantown Pike to
Township Line Road
§ 196-49 TOWING § 196-52.1
186:647
§ 196-52.1. Schedule XI-A: Do-Not-Enter Areas. [Added 2-17-1998
by Ord. No. 392]
In accordance with the provisions of § 196-17.1, no driver of any vehicle
shall enter any of the streets or parts of streets described below during the
times and days set forth below:
Name of Streets Restricted Days Restricted Time
Adams Avenue at the
intersection with Swede
Street
Monday through
Friday
7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
DeKalb Boulevard at the
intersection with DeKalb
Pike
Monday through
Friday
4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.
Jefferson Avenue at the
intersection with Swede
Street
Monday through
Friday
7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
Washington Avenue at the
intersection with Swede
Street
Monday through
Friday
7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
§ 196-53. Schedule XII: Angle Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 196-21, no person shall park a vehicle
upon any of the streets or parts thereof described below, except at the angle
designated:
Name of Street Side
Angle
(degrees) Location
(Reserved)
§ 196-54. Schedule XIII: Parking Prohibited at All Times.
In accordance with the provisions of § 196-22, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Germantown Pike [Added
3-22-2011 by Ord. No.
535]
South Along eastbound lanes between
Mill Road and property at 18
West Germantown Pike
Marielle Lane [Added
10-12-1999 by Ord. No.
409]
South Along south bulb of this cul-desac
Megann Court [Added
10-12-1999 by Ord. No.
409]
South Along south bulb of this cul-desac
§ 196-52.1 EAST NORRITON CODE § 196-54
186:648
Name of Street Side Location
Mill Road [Added
10-12-1999 by Ord. No.
409]
South Along the west side for a
distance of 235 feet
New Stanbridge Street East/west Entire length
Old Arch Road [Added
10-12-1999 by Ord. No.
409]
East 450 feet north of the
intersection of Robin Lane
extending 380 feet along the
road widening for Fox Hunt
land development
Stanbridge Street East/west From New Stanbridge Street to
Meadowbrook Road and
Township Building entrance
Stoney Creek Road
[Added 10-12-1999 by
Ord. No. 409]
East/west 50 feet north of Germantown
Pike
§ 196-55. Schedule XIV: Parking Prohibited Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 196-23, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours specified below of any day, except Saturdays, Sundays
and holidays, upon any of the streets or parts of streets described below:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Birchwood Drive East 8:00 a.m. to 2:00
p.m.
Entire length
§ 196-56. Schedule XV: Time Limit Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 196-24, no person shall park a vehicle
or allow the same to remain parked upon any of the streets or parts of
streets described below, between the hours specified, for longer than the
time indicated below:
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
(Reserved)
§ 196-57. Schedule XVI: Special Purpose Parking Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 196-25, the following are hereby
established as special purpose parking zones:
Name of Street Side
Authorized Purpose
or Vehicle Location
(Reserved)
§ 196-54 TOWING § 196-58
186:649
§ 196-58. (Reserved)167
167. Editor's Note: Former § 196-58, Schedule XVII: Snow Emergency Routes, amended
8-21-2000 by Ord. No. 425, was repealed 10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 565.
§ 196-58 EAST NORRITON CODE § 196-58
186:650
Chapter 205
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Historic preservation — See Ch. 11.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 30.
Uniform Construction Code — See Ch. 74.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 95.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 105.
Grading and excavations — See Ch. 114.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 166.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
175.
Use and occupancy permits — See Ch. 190.
§ 196-58 TOWING § 196-58
186:651

ARTICLE I
Title; Purpose; Objectives
§ 205-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "East Norriton
Township Zoning Ordinance."
§ 205-2. Purpose.
The purpose of the East Norriton Township Zoning Ordinance is to:
§ 205-3. Objectives.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the health,
safety, morals and the general welfare of the Township. The community
development objectives which shall be encompassed in the East Norriton
Township Comprehensive Plan shall be stated therein and have been
formulated to implement the purposes set forth in § 205-2 hereinabove, with
a view toward the following objectives:
A. Promote, protect and facilitate any or all of the following: the public
health, safety, morals and the general welfare; coordinated and
practical community development and proper density of population;
emergency management preparedness and operations, airports and
national defense facilities, the provisions of adequate light and air,
access to incident solar energy, police protection, vehicle parking and
loading space, transportation, water, sewage, schools, recreational
facilities, public grounds, the provision of a safe, reliable and adequate
water supply for domestic, commercial, agricultural or industrial use
and other public requirements; as well as preservation of the natural,
scenic and historic values in the environment and preservation of
forests, wetlands, aquifers and floodplains.
B. Prevent one or more of the following: overcrowding of land, blight,
danger and congestion in travel and transportation, loss of health, life
or property from fire, flood, panic or other dangers.
C. Preserve prime agriculture and farm land considering topography, soil
type and classification, and present use.
D. Provide for the use of land within the Township for residential housing
of various dwelling types encompassing all basic forms of housing.
E. Accommodate reasonable overall community growth, including
population and employment growth, and opportunities for development
of a variety of residential dwelling types and nonresidential uses.
A. Guiding and encouraging the future development of the Township in
accordance with comprehensive planning of land use and population
density that represents the most beneficial and convenient
§ 205-1 TOWING § 205-3
186:653
relationships among the residential, commercial, industrial and
recreational areas within the Township, having regard to their
suitability for the various uses appropriate to each of them and their
potentiality for such uses, as indicated by topography and soil
conditions, existing man-made conditions and the trends in population,
in the direction and manner of the use of land in building development
and in economic activity, considering such conditions and trends both
within the Township and with respect to the relation of the Township to
surrounding areas.
B. Protecting the character and social and economic stability of each of
such areas and encouraging their orderly and beneficial growth.
C. Protecting and conserving the value of land and buildings throughout
the Township appropriate to the various zoning districts established
herein.
D. Bringing about, through proper timing, the gradual conformity of land
use to the Comprehensive Plan aforesaid, and minimizing conflicts
among the uses of land and buildings.
E. Aiding in bringing about the most beneficial relation between land use
and the circulation of traffic throughout the Township, having
particular regard to and from the expressways and to avoidance of
congestion in the streets and the provisions of safe and convenient
access appropriate to the various land uses.
F. Aiding in providing a guide for public safety and action in the efficient
provision of public facilities and services, in the provision of safe and
proper sanitary sewage disposal and for private enterprise in building,
development, investment and other economic activity relating to land
use, insofar as such objectives are consistent with the purposes set
forth in § 205-2 and with aforesaid minimum requirements therefor. The
provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted, administered and
applied in such a manner as will facilitate attainment of said objectives.
§ 205-3 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-3
186:654
ARTICLE II
Word Usage; Definitions
§ 205-4. Word usage.
The present tense includes the future; the singular number includes the
plural, and the plural the singular; the word "building" includes the word
"structure" and shall be construed as if followed by the words "or part
thereof"; the word "person" includes corporation, partnership, joint venture
and association, as well as individuals; the word "lot" includes plot or
parcel; the word "occupy" includes the words "designed or intended to
be occupied"; the word "used" includes the words "arranged, designed
or intended to be used"; and the word "shall" is always intended to be
mandatory when capable of such interpretation; the word "Commission"
and the words "Planning Commission" always mean the East Norriton
Township Planning Commission; the word "Supervisors" or the words
"Board of Supervisors" always means the East Norriton Township Board of
Supervisors; the word "Board" or the words "Zoning Hearing Board" always
mean the East Norriton Township Zoning Hearing Board.
§ 205-5. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ADULT BOOKSTORES — An establishment having more than 5% of its
stock-in-trade books, magazines, video tapes, video disks, video displays,
films for sale or viewing on premises by use of motion-picture devices or any
other coin-operated means and other periodicals which are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating
to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or an
establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of
such material.
ADULT DAY CARE — A facility in which day care is provided for seven
or more senior citizens at any one time, where senior citizen care areas
are not being used as a family residence, and the facility meets all state
requirements, including licensing by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, if
required.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET — A public or private establishment
which is licensed to serve food and/or alcoholic beverages, which features
topless dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators or similar
entertainers.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building used
regularly and routinely for presenting material having as a dominant theme
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.
AGE-TARGETED HOUSING — A development of multiplex dwelling units
and/or townhouses designed to be attractive to (but not required to be
§ 205-4 TOWING § 205-5
186:655
restricted to) older persons, with each unit having interior access to a
garage; being limited to no more than three bedrooms; and with all exterior
building surfaces, landscaping and parking facilities maintained by a
homeowners’ association.[Added 5-26-2009 by Ord. No. 517]
AGRICULTURE — The cultivating of the soil, and the raising and harvesting
of the products from the soil, including, but not by way of limitation,
nursery, horticulture and forestry.
ALLEY — A strip of land over which there is a right-of-way, municipally
or privately owned, on which no dwellings or stores front, serving as the
secondary means of access to two or more properties.
ALTERATIONS — As applied to a building or structure, any change or
rearrangement in the total floor area, or any enlargement, whether by
extending on a side or rear or by increasing in height or by moving from one
location or position to another.
ALTERATIONS, CONVERSION — A multifamily dwelling constructed by
converting an existing dwelling into apartments for more than one family.
ALTERATIONS, STRUCTURAL — Any change in supporting members of a
building such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.
APARTMENT — A permanent dwelling unit within a building containing
three or more dwelling units (also known as “apartment house”), each
for a single family living independent of one another, and being vertically
arranged, sharing outside access, and having one or more walls as well as
a ceiling or floor in common with another dwelling unit. (See also "multiple
dwelling.")[Amended 8-28-2007 by Ord. No. 497]
ARTISANAL MANUFACTURING — The manufacture and production by
a manual worker or craftsperson of commercial goods, such as jewelry,
metalwork, cabinetry, stained glass, textiles, ceramics, or hand-made food
products. Artisanal manufacturing may include a retail component.
Artisanal manufacturing does not include any activity that causes noise,
odor, or vibration to be detectable on a neighboring property, and it is
limited to 5,000 square feet of gross floor area.[Added 10-27-2015 by
Ord. No. 566]
BAR, TAVERN or TAPROOM — An establishment primarily devoted to the
serving of alcoholic beverages by the drink and in which food service
is incidental to consumption of such beverage. This shall not include
brewpubs or microbreweries.[Added 4-28-2009 by Ord. No. 515;
amended 10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 566]
BASE FLOOD — The flood which has been selected to serve as the basis
upon which the floodplain management provisions of this chapter and other
ordinances have been prepared; for purposes of this chapter, the onehundred-
year flood, as referenced in the current Flood Insurance Study,
Township of East Norriton, prepared by the Federal Insurance
Administration, United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development.
§ 205-5 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-5
186:656
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year-flood elevation, as
referenced in the Flood Insurance Study, East Norriton Township, prepared
by the Federal Insurance Administration, United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development. Within the approximated floodplain, the
one-hundred-year-flood elevation shall be established as a point on the
boundary of the approximated floodplain nearest to the construction site in
question.
BASEMENT — A story partly underground but having 1/2 or more of
its height measured from floor to ceiling above the average level of the
adjoining ground.
BILLBOARD — A sign that directs attention to a business, commodity,
service, or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered at a location other
than the premises on which the billboard is located.[Added 7-26-2011 by
Ord. No. 538]
BREWPUB — A full-service or fast-casual restaurant where the sale and
production of alcoholic beverages is accessory to the consumption of
prepared food.[Added 10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 566]
BUFFER AREA — A strip of required yard space adjacent to the boundary
of a property or district, not less in width than is designated in this chapter,
and on which is placed year-round shrubbery, hedges, evergreens or other
suitable plantings of sufficient height and density to constitute an effective
screen and give maximum protection and adequate screening to an abutting
property or district. The "buffer area" may include a wall or fence or a
solid wall or fence, provided that such wall or fence shall be screened or
constructed in such a manner that it will not conflict with the character of
the abutting district.
BUILDING — Any structure having enclosed walls and roof, permanently
located on the land. This definition shall be deemed to include a mobile
home which is properly and securely anchored in accordance with industry
standards.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A building subordinate to the principal building
on the lot, used for purposes customarily incidental to those of the principal
building and not to be used as a dwelling unit unless such building was
originally designed as a dwelling unit, as in conjunction with an institution.
Any portion of a principal building devoted or intended to be devoted to an
accessory use is not an accessory building.
BUILDING AREA — The aggregate of the maximum horizontal crosssectional
areas of all buildings on a lot above the ground level, measured
at the greatest outside dimensions, excluding cornices, eaves, girders or
chimneys projecting not more than 18 inches, bay windows not extending
through more than one story and not projecting more than five feet, steps
and balconies.
BUILDING COVERAGE — That percentage of the lot area covered by the
building area.
BUILDING LINE — The same meaning as "building setback line."
§ 205-5 TOWING § 205-5
186:657
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building on which is conducted the principal
use of the lot on which it is situated.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — The line which establishes the minimum
depth of front yard required by the particular zoning district as measured
from the ultimate right-of-way line between which line and the ultimate
right-of-way line of the street on which the lot abuts a building may not be
erected.
CELLAR — A story partly underground and having more than 1/2 of its clear
height below the average level of the adjoining ground. A cellar shall not be
considered in determining the permissible number of stories, nor shall it be
used for dwelling purposes.
CLUB — A place where members of a fraternal, cultural or religious
organization hold meetings. Such use shall occur only within a building and
shall not include facilities for temporary or continuous rental of rooms or
dwelling units.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water
or a combination of land and water within a development site and designed
and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a development, not
including streets, off-street parking areas and areas set aside for public
facilities.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use which may be allowed or denied pursuant
to express standards or criteria by the Township Board of Supervisors, in
accordance with Article XXI, after a public hearing and reviewing comments
by the Township Planning Agency to occupy or use land and/or buildings
or structures for specific purposes in accordance with this chapter when
such use is not permitted by right. The burden of proving compliance with
the express standards and criteria applicable shall be on the applicant. The
Township Board of Supervisors may attach such reasonable conditions and
safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this chapter, as it may deem
necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter.
CONSTRUCTION — The construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair,
extension, expansion, alteration or relocation of a building or structure,
including the placement of mobile homes.
CONVALESCENT OR NURSING HOME — A building, except a hospital,
used for the care, treatment or lodging for three or more persons who
are either infirm, senile, afflicted or suffering from any chronic physical or
mental disease, illness or application.
CORNER LOT — A lot fronting on two or more streets at their junction, said
streets forming with each other an angle of 45° up to and including 135°.
DAY-CARE — A service providing out-of-home care for up to 12 hours per
day for children under 16 years of age and/or senior citizens.
DAY-CARE CENTER — A facility in which day care is provided for seven
or more children or senior citizens at any one time, where the child and/
or senior citizen care areas are not being used as a family residence,
§ 205-5 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-5
186:658
and the facility meets all state requirements, including licensing by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, if required.
DECISION — Final adjudication of any board or other body granted
jurisdiction under any land use ordinance or other applicable law, either by
reason of the grant of exclusive jurisdiction or by reason of appeals from
determinations. All decisions shall be appealable to the Court of Common
Pleas of Montgomery County and the judicial district in which East Norriton
Township lies.
DETERMINATION — Final adjudication of any board or other body granted
jurisdiction under any land use ordinance or other applicable law, either by
reason of the grant of exclusive jurisdiction or by reason of appeals from
determinations. All decisions shall be appealable to the Court of Common
Pleas of Montgomery County and the judicial district in which East Norriton
Township lies.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, the
placement of mobile homes, streets and other paving, utilities, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, excavation or drilling operations.
DOMESTIC ANIMALS — Dogs, cats, rabbits, guinea pigs and such other
nonagricultural and noncommercial animals normally recognized as pets.
DUPLEX — An attached dwelling unit having a horizontal party wall in
common with another dwelling unit. The building is designed so that the
horizontal party wall separates two families.
DWELLING — A building designed for and occupied exclusively for
residential purposes, excluding hotels, rooming houses, tourist homes,
institutional homes, residential clubs, motor courts and the like, but
including the following:
DWELLING UNIT — A building or portion thereof providing complete
housekeeping facilities for one family, including living, sleeping, cooking,
eating and sanitary facilities.
ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the engineer for a
municipality, planning agency or joint planning commission.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A building designed for and occupied
exclusively as a dwelling for one family. This shall include a mobile
home.
A.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — A building designed for and occupied
exclusively as a dwelling for two families.
B.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — A building not a single-family dwelling nor a
two-family dwelling, designed for and occupied exclusively for dwelling
purposes by three or more families living independently of one another;
not a townhouse, but customarily called an "apartment house."
C.
§ 205-5 TOWING § 205-5
186:659
FAMILY — Any number of individuals related by blood or marriage,
including adopted children, foster children or minor children under the
legal custody of an adult, living together as a single nonprofit housekeeping
unit and doing their cooking on the premises on a single cooking facility;
including two gratuitous guests. Family shall exclude, however, occupants
of a club, fraternity house, lodge, residential club or rooming house. Family
shall be deemed to include unrelated persons with disabilities living
together as a functional family equivalent.[Amended 4-28-2009 by Ord.
No. 515]
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — Any dwelling in which child day care is
provided at any one time to between four to six children who are not
relatives of the caregiver, and where such children do not reside at the
family day-care home, and where the child care areas are being used as
a family residence, and which the facility meets all state requirements,
including registration or licensing where required by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
FENCE, OPEN — An open fence shall be a minimum of 40% transparent as
measured from the top rail or top of board to the bottom rail or bottom of
board of the fence.[Added 4-28-2009 by Ord. No. 515]
FLOOD — A temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas.
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors in a
building measured from the exterior face of the exterior walls or from the
center line of a wall separating two buildings, but not including interior
parking spaces, loading space for motor vehicles, stairwells and elevator
shafts or any area where the floor-to-ceiling height is less than six feet.
FORESTRY — The management of forests and timberlands when practiced
in accordance with accepted silvicultural principles, through developing,
cultivating, harvesting, transporting and selling trees for commercial
purposes, which does not involve any land development.
FUND-RAISING ACTIVITY — Any activity, excluding volume retail sales,
conducted in an IN Institutional District whose profits are used to benefit
the institution. "Fund-raising activities" include but are not limited to fairs,
carnivals, flea markets, meals, games, rides and athletic events.
GARAGE —
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A building accessory to or an integral part of
a single-family or two-family dwelling, for the storage of one or more
motor vehicles owned and used by the owner or tenant or member
of their household. Not more than one commercial vehicle or truck of
a gross vehicle weight which does not exceed 9,000 pounds may be
stored in a private garage.
A.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — A building, other than a private or storage garage,
one or more stories in height, used solely for the commercial storage,
service or repair of motor vehicles.
B.
§ 205-5 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-5
186:660
GASOLINE FILLING STATION — An area of land used for the retail sale of
gasoline or other motor vehicle fuel in combination with a food store that
provides a mix of packaged and freshly prepared foods and where seating
for up to 16 patrons or four tables may be permitted.[Added 10-27-2015
by Ord. No. 566]
GREEN AREA — Land composed of pervious surfaces set aside for the
growing of vegetation, including lawn area, trees, shrubs, grasses, plants,
flowers and also including lakes, ponds, streams and other natural features.
GROUP DAY-CARE HOME — A facility in which care is provided for more
than six but fewer than 12 children, at any one time, where the childcare
areas are being used as a family residence, and which the facility
meets all state requirements, including licensing by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, where required.
GROUP HOME — A residential facility used as living quarters by any
number of unrelated persons requiring special care, specifically designed
to create a residential setting for the mentally and physically handicapped.
The individuals may be either transient or permanent residents. Any
number of handicapped persons, as defined in Title VIII of the Civil Rights
Act of 1968, as amended by the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988, have
the right to occupy a dwelling unit in the same manner and to the same
extent as any family unit.[Added 5-27-2014 by Ord. No. 553]
HEIGHT OF BUILDING — A building’s vertical measurement from the mean
level of the ground surrounding the building to a point midway between
the highest and lowest points of the roof, provided that chimneys, spires,
towers, elevator penthouses, tanks, pentwall and similar projections shall
not be included in calculating the height; provided that these projections
shall not extend more than 15 feet above the maximum height established
for the district in which located.[Amended 1-3-2011 by Ord. No. 533]
HELIPAD — An area designated for the takeoff and landing of helicopters
that does not include ancillary services such as crew quarters, maintenance,
repair, parking and fueling services for helicopters.[Added 12-23-2008 by
Ord. No. 512]
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation for gain or support conducted only
by individuals residing on the premises and conducted entirely within the
dwelling, provided that no article is sold or offered for sale except such
as may be produced on the premises. Retail sales are prohibited. Anyone
wishing to pursue a home occupation within the Township must first apply
for and obtain a permit from the Township Zoning Officer, who shall issue
such permit upon a showing of compliance with the provisions of this
chapter. Such permit must be renewed annually by the applicant. The
number of employees who are not residents of the dwelling is limited to
two. No more than 25% of the total floor area of the residence may be used
GARAGE, STORAGE — A building, not a public or private garage, one
story in height, used solely for the storage of motor vehicles (other than
trucks) but not for the service or repair thereof nor for the sale of fuel,
accessories or supplies.
C.
§ 205-5 TOWING § 205-5
186:661
for the operation of the home occupation, including storage area. Outdoor
storage or display of goods is prohibited. Day care for up to three unrelated
children, not subject to space limitation, when provided only by residents
of the dwelling, shall be considered a home occupation. Each dwelling shall
be considered a home occupation. Each dwelling or residential lot shall be
limited to not more than one home occupation. The conducting of a clinic,
hospital, barbershop, beauty parlor, tearoom, tourist home, animal hospital
or real estate office shall not be deemed to be a home occupation.
HOTEL — A facility offering furnished, transient lodging accommodations
to the general public and providing additional services, such as restaurants,
meeting rooms, banquet facilities and recreation facilities, with pedestrian
access for at least 90% of all rooms having to pass through a main lobby. A
hotel does not include a motel or convention center.
INSTITUTION — Any church, school, hospital or other non-profit-making
organization.
JUNKYARD — A lot, land or structure, or plot thereof, used primarily for
the collection, storage or sale of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal or discarded
materials or for the collection, dismantling, storage and salvaging of
material or vehicles not in running condition and for the potential sale or
sales of parts thereof.
LOADING SPACE — A space, accessible from a street or way, in a building
or on a lot, for the temporary use of vehicles while loading or unloading
merchandise or materials.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
LOT AREA — The area contained within the property lines of the individual
parcels of land as shown on a subdivision or development plan, excluding
any area within any right-of-way, but including the area of an easement.
LOT AREA, NET — Lot area excluding the following: area continuously
covered by water, areas contained within the one-hundred-year floodplain,
areas contained within regulated wetlands, areas contained within steep
slopes in excess of 15%, areas used for permanent stormwater management
facilities having a temporary storage elevation greater than 1 1/2 feet, areas
contained within overhead utility lines and 50% of areas contained within
underground utility easements, and the area contained within the access
leg of a flag or rear lot.
LOT LINE — A property boundary line of any lot held in single and separate
ownership, except that in the case of any lot abutting a street or alley the lot
line for such portion of the lot as abuts the street shall be deemed to be the
same as the street line and shall not be the center line of the street or any
other line within the street even though such may be the property boundary
line.
MASSAGE PARLORS — A commercial establishment in which the principal
use consists of massage or bodywork conducted by persons other than
§ 205-5 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-5
186:662
massage therapists, and may include nude human modeling.[Added
10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 566]
MASSAGE THERAPIST — A person holding a valid massage license issued
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or, absent such licensing procedure,
satisfying either of the following criteria:[Added 10-27-2015 by Ord. No.
566]
MASSAGE THERAPIST BUSINESS — A commercial establishment in which
the principal use consists of massage or bodywork conducted solely by
massage therapists.[Added 10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 566]
MEDIATION — A voluntary negotiating process in which parties in a dispute
mutually select a neutral mediator to assist them in jointly exploring and
settling their differences, culminating in a written agreement which the
parties themselves create and consider acceptable.
MICROBREWERY — A facility that produces malt or brewed alcoholic
beverages with another facility that offers said malt or brewed alcoholic
beverages for sale or consumption on the same or adjoining premises. Such
uses may also serve food items and must be licensed by the Pennsylvania
Liquor Control Board. This term may include nanobreweries,
microdistilleries, and wineries.[Added 10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 566]
MINERAL EXTRACTION — The extraction of any aggregate or mass of
mineral matter, whether or not coherent. The term includes, but is not
limited to, quarrying, limestone and dolomite, sand and gravel, rock and
stone, earth, fill, slag, iron ore, zinc ore, vermiculite and clay, anthracite and
bituminous coal, coal refuse, peat and crude oil and natural gas.
MINING — The extraction of minerals and coal from the subsurface of
grounds located within the Township and shall not include quarrying or
open-face mining.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one unit or in two or more units
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready
for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent
foundation.
Has graduated from a school licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, or by another state of the United States, which requires
at least 500 hours of education in massage or bodywork techniques,
anatomy and physiology, and who is a member of a nationally
recognized professional organization for massage or bodywork
therapists that adheres to a code of ethics; or
A.
Holds current and valid certification from the National Certification
Board of Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork (NCBTMB).
B.
§ 205-5 TOWING § 205-5
186:663
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has
been so designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile home
lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
MOTOR COURT or MOTEL — A building or group of two or more detached
or semidetached buildings containing rooms or apartments having separate
ground-floor entrances provided directly or closely in connection with
automobile parking or storage space serving such rooms or apartments,
which building or group of buildings is designed, intended or used
principally for the providing of sleeping accommodations for automobile
travelers and is suitable for occupancy at all seasons of the year.
MULTIPLEX — An attached dwelling unit having horizontal and/or vertical
party walls in common with other dwelling units. In general all units have
independent outside access, but this is not necessary. Units may be
arranged in a variety of configurations: side by side, back to back or
vertically. Because of the variety of unit configurations, a multiplex can be
designed to look like a large single-family detached house; this feature is
encouraged. No fewer than three nor more than six units shall be attached
in any group. Individual dwelling units may be one story or two stories, but
in no case shall any portion of the multiplex building exceed two stories
exclusive of basement.
NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS — A business or commercial activity
administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly secondary
to the use as a residential dwelling and which involves no customer, client or
patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian, pickup, delivery or removal
functions to or from the premises, in excess of those normally associated
with residential use. The business or commercial activity must satisfy the
following requirements:
The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of the
property and surrounding residential uses.
A.
The business shall employ no employees other than family members
residing in the dwelling.
B.
There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling or
inventory of a substantial nature.
C.
There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including, but
not limited to, parking, signs or lights.
D.
The business activity may not use any equipment or process which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or electronic
interference, including interference with radio or television reception,
which is detectable in the neighborhood.
E.
The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage
discharge in volume or type which is not normally associated with
residential use in the neighborhood.
F.
§ 205-5 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-5
186:664
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot the area or dimension of which was lawful
prior to the adoption or amendment of a zoning ordinance, but which fails
to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located
by reason of such adoption or amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or part of a structure
manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable use or extent of use
provisions in a zoning ordinance or amendment heretofore or hereafter
enacted, where such structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment of
such ordinance or amendment or prior to the application of such ordinance
or amendment to its location by reason of annexation. Such nonconforming
structures include but are not limited to nonconforming signs.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or of structure, which
does not comply with the applicable use provisions in a zoning ordinance or
amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully in
existence prior to the enactment of such ordinance or amendment, or prior
to the application of such ordinance or amendment to its location by reason
of annexation.
OLDER PERSONS — Persons 55 years of age or older.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that has one chance in 100 or a
one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. For
the purposes of this chapter, the one-hundred-year flood (base flood), as
defined by the Federal Insurance Administration, United States Department
of Housing and Urban Development, in the Flood Insurance Study, East
Norriton Township.
OUTDOOR DINING AREA — A designated area on the premises of a
restaurant, but outside the principal building, and where patrons may sit at
tables while consuming food and beverages ordered from and served by a
waiter or waitress.[Added 10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 566]
OUTDOOR EATING AREA — A designated area on the premises of a retail
food establishment, but outside the principal building, and where patrons
may sit at tables while consuming foods, soft drinks, ice cream, and similar
confections purchased from the retail food establishment.[Added
10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 566]
OUTDOOR FOOD SERVICE — An outdoor area on the premises of a
restaurant or retail food establishment where patrons may sit at tables to
consume food and beverages. Outdoor food service is classified as either
"outdoor dining" or "outdoor eating" areas.[Added 10-27-2015 by Ord.
No. 566]
OUTSIDE VENDOR — A person or group of people offering goods or
services for sale at a profit, who is not currently licensed to operate in East
Norriton Township.168
The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling and
may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area.
G.
H. The business may not involve any illegal activity.
§ 205-5 TOWING § 205-5
186:665
PARKING SPACE, ALL-WEATHER — A parking space surfaced to whatever
extent necessary to permit reasonable use under all conditions of
weather.169
PERSON — A natural person, heirs, executors, administrators or assigns,
and includes a firm, partnership or corporation, or limited liability
corporation, its or their successors or assigns, or the agent of any of the
aforesaid.
PERSONAL CARE HOME — Any premises, licensed by the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, in which food, shelter and personal assistance or
supervision are provided for a period exceeding 24 hours for four or more
senior citizens who are not relatives of the operator, who do not require
the services in or of a licensed long-term care facility but who do require
assistance or supervision in such matters as dressing, bathing, diet,
financial management, evacuation of a residence in the event of an
emergency or medication prescribed for self-administration. Also known as
"assisted living."
PRINCIPAL ARTERIAL STREET — Roads identified as "principal arterial"
in the Township-wide Traffic Study, prepared for East Norriton Township
by Valley Forge Laboratories, Figure 2, pages 2 through 8, which is
incorporated herein by reference and is available for inspection at the
municipal offices of East Norriton Township.
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by
the Board of Supervisors or the Planning Commission, intended to inform
and obtain public comment, prior to taking action in accordance with the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance and the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code (P.L. 805, No. 247, as amended).170
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once every week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in East Norriton Township.
Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular
nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication
shall not be more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less
than seven days from the date of the hearing.
PUBLIC/PRIVATE UTILITY FACILITY — A building or structure and its
equipment used for the transmission and exchange of electricity, gas, heat,
steam, transportation, water, sewage collection or other similar service;
provided, however, that in a residential district, these shall not include
business facilities, storage of materials, truck or repair facilities or housing
of repair crews.[Amended 2-25-2014 by Ord. No. 550]
PUBLIC UTILITIES FACILITY — A building or structure and its equipment
used for the transmission and exchange of telephone, radio, telephone, gas,
168. Editor’s Note: The former definition of “parking space,” which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 2-28-2017 by Ord. No. 571.
169. Editor’s Note: The former definition of “parking space, residential,” which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 2-28-2017 by Ord. No. 571.
170. Editor's Note: See Ch. 175, Subdivision and Land Development, and 53 P.S. § 10101 et
seq., respectively.
§ 205-5 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-5
186:666
power, sewer and water facilities; provided, however, that in a residential
district, these shall not include business facilities, storage of materials,
trucks or repair facilities or housing of repair crews. This definition shall not
include wireless telecommunications facilities, as defined in Article XXIX of
this chapter.[Amended 2-25-2014 by Ord. No. 550]
PUBLIC UTILITY OFFICE — Offices for administration, executive, business,
professional, sales and other similar uses which do not involve the actual
storage of materials, trucks or repair facilities or housing of repair crews on
the premises.
RESTAURANT — Any establishment, however qualified in the subsequent
defined terms of this use, at which a principal use is to sell prepared
food/beverages to the general public for consumption on and off the
premises.[Added 4-28-2009 by Ord. No. 515; amended 10-27-2015 by
Ord. No. 566]
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — A restaurant where customers may place
their food/beverage orders by phone, online, at a counter inside the facility,
or from the customer's vehicle outside the facility by use of drive-through or
drive-in service. Food is often pre-prepared and is predominantly served in
disposable wrappings or containers. A fast-food restaurant may have takeout
food service.[Added 10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 566]
RESTAURANT, FAST-CASUAL — A restaurant where customers place their
orders by telephone, online, or at a counter, and either the customer takes
the food/beverage to a table, booth, or counter or wait staff serves the food/
beverage at the customer's table, booth, or counter. Food is typically custom
prepared and generally served in disposable wrappings or containers. A
fast-casual restaurant may have take-out food service. Up to two parking
spaces may be restricted for limited drive-in service when the parking
spaces dedicated to this use are surplus to the number of parking spaces
otherwise required for the site.[Added 10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 566;
amended 12-12-2017 by Ord. No. 574]
RESTAURANT, FULL-SERVICE — A restaurant that provides full wait staff
service where food/beverages are ordered, served, and consumed by the
customer normally while seated at a table, booth, or counter. Food is
predominantly served with nondisposable dinnerware and flatware. A fullservice
restaurant may include a brewpub. A full service restaurant may
provide limited take-out food service. Up to four parking spaces may be
restricted for limited drive-in service when the parking spaces dedicated to
this use are surplus to the number of parking spaces otherwise required for
the site.[Added 10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 566; amended 12-12-2017 by
Ord. No. 574]
SENIOR CITIZEN — Persons 62 years of age or older.
SIGN — Any name, nameplate, billboard, poster, panel, display, illumination,
structure or other device used for visual communication, which is affixed,
painted or represented directly or indirectly upon a building or other
outdoor surface for the purpose of bringing the subject thereto to the
§ 205-5 TOWING § 205-5
186:667
attention of the public or advertising a business, commodity, service or
products or for identifying a business, structure or use of land.
SPECIAL OUTDOOR EVENT — A temporary outdoor use that extends
beyond the normal uses allowed within the district and subject to a special
use permit that may be issued by the Zoning Officer. Special outdoor events
are limited to lawful retail sales, art shows, car shows, sidewalk sales,
Christmas tree sales, carnivals, grand openings, festivals and customary
activities generally associated with the property where the special outdoor
event is to be located.[Added 4-28-2009 by Ord. No. 515]
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES —
STORY — That portion of a building, including parking facilities, included
within the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or,
if there is not floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling
next above.
STREET — A strip of land, including the entire ultimate right-of-way,
publicly or privately owned, serving primarily as a means of vehicular
and pedestrian travel, furnishing access to abutting properties, which may
also be used to provide space for sewers, public utilities, shade trees and
sidewalks.
STREET LINE — The dividing line between the street and the lot. The street
line shall be the same as a legal right-of-way, provided that the street rightof-
way line shall not be less than 25 feet from the center line of any road or
street, and where a future right-of-way width for a road or street has been
officially established, the street right-of-way line shall be the side line of the
future right-of-way so established.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationery
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE — A combination of materials assembled,
constructed or erected, the use of which does not require attachment to
the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground.
No structure containing more than 168 square feet shall be considered a
temporary structure. [Amended 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 512]
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttock and female breast below a point immediately above the
top of the areola.
A.
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
B.
A. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock or female breast.
C.
§ 205-5 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-5
186:668
TOURIST HOME — A dwelling in which sleeping accommodations for fewer
than 10 persons are provided or offered primarily for automobile travelers
for compensation.
TOWNHOUSE — A single-family attached dwelling unit, with one dwelling
unit from ground to roof, having individual outside access both from front
and rear. The dwelling unit has a vertical party wall in common with one or
two of the other dwelling units in the series adjacent to it and has no more
than two floors exclusive of basement. No fewer than three nor more than
eight units shall be attached in any group.
TRIPLEX — An attached dwelling unit having a vertical party wall in
common with another dwelling unit. The building is designed so that the
vertical party wall separates three families.
TWIN HOUSE — A single-family, semidetached dwelling unit having only
one dwelling unit from ground to roof and only one party wall in common
with another dwelling unit. Each dwelling unit has no more than two floors
exclusive of basement. The building is designed so that a vertical party wall
separates two families.
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed,
arranged, intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained. The
term "permitted use" or its equivalent shall not be deemed to include any
nonconforming use.
USE, ACCESSORY — A use located on the same lot with a principal use and
clearly incidental or subordinate to and customarily in connection with the
principal use.
VOLUME RETAIL SALES — Total goods, new or used, offered for sale,
having a fair market value over $1,500 or fair market value over $500 from
one source or for one item.
YARD — An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a building or other
structure or use, open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky.
YARD, FRONT — A yard between a structure and a street line and extending
the entire length of the street line. In the case of a corner lot, the yards
extending along all streets are front yards, and among the yards other than
those defined as front yards shall include a rear yard opposite the street to
which the principal building is generally faced and a side yard opposite the
street. In the case of a lot other than a corner lot that fronts on more than
one street, the yards extending along all streets are front yards.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending the full width of the lot along the rear lot
line and extending in depth from the rear lot line to the nearest point of any
structure on the lot.
YARD, SIDE — A yard extending the full depth of the lot along a side lot line
and extending in width from such side lot line to the nearest point of any
structure on the lot.
§ 205-5 TOWING § 205-5
186:669

ARTICLE III
Districts; Boundaries
§ 205-6. Districts enumerated. [Amended 8-28-2007 by Ord. No.
497]
For the purpose of this chapter, the Township is hereby divided into
districts, which shall be designated as follows:
AR Residential District
BR Residential District
BR-1 Residential District
MR Medium-Density Residential District
GA Garden Apartment Residential District
CR Residential District
HR High-Rise Residential District
HR-1 High-Rise-1 Residential District
RR Residential Retirement District
RP Residential and Professional District
RO Residential Office District
ATR
[Added
5-26-2009
by Ord.
No. 517]
Age-Targeted Residential District
IN Institutional District
BP Business and Professional District
EC Executive Campus District
ECII Executive Campus II District
C Commercial District
C-1 Commercial District
SC Shopping Center District
I Industrial District
LI Limited Industrial District
HI Heavy Industrial District
FP Floodplain Conservation District
§ 205-7. Zoning Map; Floodplain Overlay Map.
The boundaries of said districts shall be shown upon the maps attached to
and made a part of this chapter, which shall be designated the "Zoning Map"
and "Floodplain Overlay Map." Said maps and all notations, references and
§ 205-6 TOWING § 205-7
186:671
other things shown thereon shall be made a part of this chapter, as if the
matters and things shown by said maps were all fully described herein.171
§ 205-8. Designation of boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various
districts shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
§ 205-9. Classification of tract on Township boundary line.
In any case where a tract has for one of its boundaries a Township boundary
line, then, for the purpose of this chapter, the existing zoning classification
of the adjacent property in the neighboring municipality shall be
determined and related to the most similar East Norriton Township zoning
district. If the zoning classification in the neighboring municipality as
related to the East Norriton Township Zoning Ordinance is more restrictive
than the zoning classification of the property in East Norriton Township,
then the East Norriton Township Zoning Ordinance regulations shall apply
as if the neighboring property were in East Norriton Township.
§ 205-10. Federal- and state-owned property.
Whenever federal- or state-owned property or property owned by any
federal or state agency or political subdivision thereof, as well as public
utilities, is included in one or more zoning districts, it shall be subject to
the provisions of this chapter only insofar as permitted by the Constitution
and laws of the United States of America and the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
A. The district boundaries are center lines of roads unless otherwise
shown.
B. Where the district boundaries are not shown to be roads, the
boundaries shall be construed to be property lines or dimensions from
streets or roads as shown on the Zoning Map and Floodplain Overlay
Map.
C. When a district boundary line passes through a parcel of land with no
indication of distance, the scale of the map shall determine the location
of such line.
D. District boundaries shall be construed to be the centerline of any public
or private right-of-way. [Added 5-25-2010 by Ord. No. 526]
171. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map and Floodplain Overlay Map are on file in the Township
offices and may be examined there during regular business hours.
§ 205-7 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-10
186:672
ARTICLE IV
General Provisions
§ 205-11. Regulations to govern districts.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following regulations shall govern each
and every district.
§ 205-12. Lots of record.
In the event that any lot is held of public record in single and separate
ownership on the effective date of this chapter, which shall not be of
sufficient size or dimension to permit the erection of a building thereon in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter, and provided that the
Zoning Hearing Board shall find that the necessary additional ground is not
available because of the settled condition of the neighborhood or because
of inability of the owner to acquire additional ground upon fair terms,
the Zoning Hearing Board may grant a variance for the use of such lot
upon such conditions as the Zoning Hearing Board may specify so that the
minimum and maximum regulations of the district shall be met as closely as
possible. In cases where all requirements of the applicable district can be
met except for lot area, the Zoning Officer shall have discretion to permit a
permitted use.
§ 205-13. Reduction of lot area.
No lot shall be so reduced that the area of the lot or the dimensions of the
required open space shall be less than herein prescribed.
§ 205-14. Modification of front yard requirements.
§ 205-15. Clear sight triangle; obstructions.
There shall be measured along the center line of intersecting streets a
minimum clear sight triangle of 75 feet from the point of intersection.
Within the sight triangle, no wall, fence or other structure shall be erected,
altered or maintained and no hedge, trees, shrub or other growth shall be
planted or maintained which shall interfere with a free or unobstructed view
down and across lands within such sight triangle.
A. Where there is pronounced uniformity or alignment of the fronts of
existing buildings on the same side of the street within 200 feet of each
side line of a proposed building, the front yard requirement of the
district may be modified as to said building to permit a depth of not less
than the mean front yard existing within said district.
B. Where there is a conflict in providing for the installations of the
requirements to comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act, the
front yard setback shall be allowed to be reduced to meet these
requirements so long as no interference is created with pedestrian,
vehicle or emergency access.
§ 205-11 TOWING § 205-16
186:673
§ 205-16. Accessory uses.
Accessory uses authorized in this chapter shall include the following:
A. Uses accessory to agriculture: noncommercial greenhouses and barns;
the keeping, breeding and management of livestock and poultry, but in
such quantities and to such extent as are customarily incidental to the
principal use; and the preparation of products on the premises for use
and the disposal thereof by marketing or otherwise. Roadside stands for
the sale of products produced on the premises on which the stand for
the sale of products is located shall be permitted upon the following
conditions:
(1) An annual permit is secured from the Zoning Officer.
(2) The location shall not be within the boundaries of any street.
(3) The location shall not be nearer than 60 feet to any intersection.
(4) Parking for stopping vehicles shall be provided off the paved
portion of the street of a sufficient width so as to not interfere with
the safety of persons stopping or using the street. Parking nearer
than 30 feet to an intersection shall not be permitted.
(5) One stand not exceeding 400 square feet and one story high is
permissible as an accessory use. The stand shall be constructed in
accordance with the East Norriton Township Building Code.172 It
may be permitted to remain until a renewal permit is secure for the
following year. If no renewal permit is secured by July 1 of any year,
said stand shall be removed within 30 days of the receipt of notice
in writing from the Zoning Officer. No permit shall be valid beyond
December 31 of any year.
B. Uses accessory to dwelling:
(1) A private garage shall require a zoning permit and be constructed
to the then current building codes in effect. A private garage with a
total area no greater than the square footage of the first floor of the
dwelling to which it is accessory, private parking spaces, shelters
for not more than three domestic pets owned by the occupant and
one temporary structure as outlined in § 205-17 for the occupants'
noncommercial use. The housing of pigeons, chickens, ducks or
other fowl and the keeping of farm animals shall not be permitted.
(2) Swimming pools for the use of dwelling residents and guests only,
provided that it is located in the rear yard, unless it is a corner
property. The minimum setback for swimming pools in an AR, BR,
RP or RO Residential District shall be 20 feet to all property lines.
(3) Home occupation only as defined in § 205-5.
172. Editor's Note: See Ch. 72, Building Construction.
§ 205-16 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-16
186:674
(4) Relative quarters, subject to the following conditions:
(a) Neither the present structure nor the proposed addition shall
at any time be occupied by any person other than the property
owner and members of his or her immediate family.
(b) Any sale, lease, transfer or other alienation of the property
shall be as a single-family dwelling and shall include the entire
structure located on the property.
(c) The owner shall not lease or rent the in-law quarters as an
apartment or separate dwelling.
(d) Upon the sale, transfer or other alienation of the property,
unless the appropriate deed restriction has been filed with the
Recorder of Deeds and the property is being continued as a
relative quarters by the new owner/buyer, there shall be no
more than one kitchen and/or cooking facility located thereon.
Any additional kitchen or cooking facility on the property must
be removed prior to sale, transfer or other alienation of the
property.
(e) In-law quarters must be located in the existing dwelling or
must be attached to the existing dwelling, and there shall
always be maintained the standard doorway and/or
passageway connecting the principal residence and the in-law
quarters. In-law quarters shall not be located in a separate
freestanding building.
(f) The applicant shall prepare and file with the Recorder of Deeds
a deed restriction, in a form acceptable to the Township
Solicitor, setting forth the conditions set forth in Subsection
B(4)(a) through (e) above, which shall reflect that the property
is encumbered with those specific conditions.
(g) A one-year renewable permit issued by the Township Zoning
Officer shall be required to ensure compliance with this
chapter. The fee for this permit shall be established by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
(5) Portable and standby electric generators when rated at 24 KW or
less, provided that such generators are used only during times of
loss of utility-provided power, except that such generators may be
exercised for a period of no more than one hour from 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m. when they are located behind the building setback line.
[Added 10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 566]
C. Uses accessory to an Institutional District:
(1) Fund-raising activities conducted inside or outside a structure,
subject to the following regulations:
§ 205-16 TOWING § 205-16
186:675
(a) All licenses and permits must be obtained, and all applicable
fees shall be paid by each outside vendor.
(b) All parking, traffic and crowd control shall be the responsibility
of the institution.
(c) Signs may be erected in accordance with § 205-117 of this East
Norriton Township Zoning Chapter.
(d) A list of all outside vendors participating in a fund-raising
activity shall be submitted to the Township by the institution
prior to the start of the activity.
D. Uses accessory to all zoning districts: [Added 1-3-2011 by Ord. No.
533]
(1) Solar and small wind-powered generation devices rated at 200 KW
or less may be installed on existing structures that conform to
current height and setback requirements of the zoning district in
which they are located. [Amended 10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 566]
(2) Ground-mounted solar and small wind-powered generation devices
rated at 100 KW or less subject to the following:
(a) Solar or small wind-powered generation devices shall not be
permitted in the front yard of any district nor forward of the
line of the rear facade of any principal building which occupies
the lot.
(b) Solar or wind-energy devices shall be permitted within side or
rear yards established for the district and shall be set back
from the property line a distance equal the greater of the
following:
[1] Five feet; or
[2] The maximum height of the device measured from the
ground level upon which it will be installed.
(c) In no event shall the maximum height measured to its highest
point exceed:
[1] Fourteen feet for freestanding solar panels.
[2] Thirty-five feet for small wind-powered generation
devices. For devices having rotor blades that rotate around
a horizontal axis, the height shall include the highest point
of the rotor blade above ground elevation.
(d) Special regulations for small wind-powered generation
devices:
[1] In residential districts only devices with vertical axis
rotors shall be permitted.
§ 205-16 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-16
186:676
§ 205-17. Minimum setback of temporary structures.
[2] The lowest part of a horizontal rotor blade shall be a
minimum of 25 feet higher than the surrounding ground
elevation. The lowest part of a wind turbine with vertical
axis rotors shall be a minimum of 15 feet higher than the
surrounding ground elevation.
[3] Measured at the property line, the sound shall in no event
neither exceed 65 dB nor be greater than 10 dB above the
ambient noise level.
[4] There shall be no climbable features less than 15 feet from
ground elevation.
[5] There shall be not more than one small wind turbine per
acre, or more than two per individual lot.
[6] Color. Acceptable colors shall be limited to matte grey,
light sky blue, or silver. Other colors or combinations of
colors may be acceptable subject to the approval of the
Board of Supervisors, provided the color(s) are determined
to be stealth in nature.
[7] No advertising, logo or signage of any kind shall be
permitted on the wind turbine structure or rotor blades.
[8] No light source shall be permitted on the device.
[9] Removal of devices (turbines) required. The property
owner shall be required to remove small wind turbines
that have either been abandoned or are not in operation
for three consecutive months.
[10] Manufacturer’s construction and electrical drawings shall
be submitted for approval by a Pennsylvania licensed
Building Code Official.
[11] A manual override braking system shall be required
during power outages.
[12] A plot plan indicating the location of the turbine, including
dimensions from property lines, road rights-of-way, utility
easements, and occupied buildings shall be provided.
[13] Pennsylvania P.E. sealed twenty-four-inch-by-thirty-sixinch
structural drawings with wind load calculations.
A. For temporary structures of up to 168 square feet, there shall be a
minimum setback of five feet from any side or rear property line. The
placement of any temporary structure shall not be any further forward
than the rear wall of the primary structure, shall not be located in the
front yard, in any easement or in any drainage way that would affect the
§ 205-16 TOWING § 205-17
186:677
§ 205-18. Access to public streets.
§ 205-19. Development requirements.
overall public interest. A temporary structure shall not exceed 14 feet
measured to its highest point. [Amended 4-28-2009 by Ord. No.
515]
B. For temporary pool structures erected in a residential townhouse
development, this side and rear yard requirement shall be reduced to
four feet each; provided, however, that the installation of a temporary
pool structure will not be allowed where the installation thereof will
violate a private restriction or will have any adverse effect on the
stormwater drainage system.
C. The determination of any adverse effect on the stormwater drainage
system shall be made by the Township Zoning Officer. Appeals from an
adverse decision of the Zoning Officer shall be made pursuant to this
Township Zoning Ordinance.
A. Each and every lot shall abut a public street serving as a means of
vehicular and pedestrian travel, furnishing access to abutting
properties for at least 100 feet at the right-of-way, with the exception of
lots in the BR Residential Districts, which shall be required to abut
public streets for at least 80 feet at the right-of-way, and with further
exception of CR Residential District lots in fee simple sale cases, which
lots shall be required to abut a public street for at least the same width
as required by Article VIII, § 205-38E, for a minimum width at the
building line; however, in a CR Residential District in which the lots do
not rely for access on a dedicated street or a street proposed to be
dedicated, this section shall not apply. The length of a lot abutting a
public street at the right-of-way line may be reduced to 50 feet for lots
abutting the turnabout portion of the permanent cul-de-sac streets in
AR Residential and BR Residential Districts.
B. A "public street" shall mean an improved state highway, improved
county highway or street improved in accordance with East Norriton
Township's current standards and regulations.
A. Mobile homes and mobile home parks. In any AR Residential District or
BR Residential District, mobile homes may be located on individual lots
or in a land development commonly known as a "mobile home park." All
of the provisions of AR Residential and BR Residential Districts shall be
complied with.
B. In the case of development in any Zoning District except AR Residential
and BR Residential, no building permit shall be issued until the
proposed site has been reviewed by the Township Engineer and found
to be in accordance with the following requirements:
§ 205-17 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-19
186:678
§ 205-20. Requirements for special outdoor events.
(1) The development shall consist of harmonious selection of uses and
grouping of buildings, service and parking areas, circulation and
open spaces, planned and designed as an integrated unit, in such
manner as to constitute safe, efficient and convenient development.
(2) The proposed development shall be constructed in accordance with
an overall plan with appropriate landscaping.
(3) Adequate area shall be provided for loading and unloading of
delivery trucks and other vehicles; servicing of shops by refuse
collection, fuel, fire and other service vehicles; and automobile
accessways; and service areas shall be screened from view from
any abutting roadway and from within the parking area. The
requirements of Article XVIII of this chapter shall also apply.
(4) Provision shall be made for safe and efficient ingress and egress to
and from public streets and highways serving the development
without undue congestion to or interference with normal traffic
flow. Wherever practical and recommended by the Township
Engineer, common vehicular access points shall be required.
(5) A description of the commercial uses proposed, including
approximate number of employees and an indication of the number
of customers in sufficient detail to indicate the effects of those
operations in producing traffic congestion, noise, glare, air
pollution, water pollution, fire hazards or safety hazards, shall be
provided.
(6) If deemed appropriate, the Township Engineer may consult with
the East Norriton Township and Montgomery County Planning
Commissions.
A. In the SC, C, EC and ECII Districts, a nonrenewable special use permit
may be issued by the Zoning Officer to existing lawful tenants to allow
for special outdoor events, including lawful retail sales, subject to the
following conditions: [Added 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 512]
(1) Events must be temporary in nature, not to exceed seven
consecutive days, except those seasonal sale items which, by their
nature, require a longer selling period (e.g., Christmas tree sales).
(2) No event shall use more than 25% of the usable lot area, excluding
buffer zones.
(3) Application for such temporary use permit must be made in writing
to the Township Zoning Officer and must be executed by both the
landowner and the proposed land user.
§ 205-19 TOWING § 205-20
186:679
§ 205-21. Group homes. [Added 5-27-2014 by Ord. No. 553174]
Group homes shall be permitted by special exception in the AR, BR, BR-1,
MR, GA, CR, HR, HR-1, RR, RP, RO, ATR, and IN Zoning Districts, subject to
the additional requirements listed below. Prior to obtaining a permit for a
group home use, the applicant shall provide evidence that the group home
will be in compliance with the below regulations, and the below regulations
shall be in full force and effect so long as the dwelling continues to be used
as a group home:
(4) A nonrefundable permit fee and refundable escrow fee to ensure
restoration of the area to its former condition, as required in the
Township Fee Schedule,173 must accompany the application.
(5) All temporary structures erected as part of the special use must
conform to the requirements of the Pennsylvania Uniform
Construction Code, as amended. Temporary structures shall be
removed immediately upon the conclusion of the event.
(6) All applicants shall provide safe and adequate off-street parking
and adequate traffic and crowd control.
(7) All appropriate Township licenses, taxes and permits must be
obtained from the respective Township offices prior to issuance of
this permit.
B. Failure to comply with any of the aforesaid requirements or conditions
shall constitute a violation of this chapter and shall result in forfeiture
of applicant's escrow deposit and any other penalties provided for
under this chapter.
A. A fire sprinkler system which complies with NFPA 13D (2007) shall be
installed throughout the group home and any attached accessory
buildings.
B. A fire alarm system which complies with Chapter 11 of NFPA 72 (2007)
shall be installed throughout the group home and any attached
accessory structures.
C. When applying for a group home permit, the applicant shall provide a
dimensioned floor plan indicating the size of each room, including
sleeping rooms, and identifying the maximum number of residents who
will occupy each sleeping room, to demonstrate that the home will not
be overcrowded and in compliance with all applicable building codes.
D. When applying for a group home permit, the applicant shall provide a
written statement describing how the facility will have adequate
173. Editor’s Note: The fee schedule is on file in the Township offices.
174. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former §§ 205-21,
205-21.1, 205-21.2, 205-21.3, 205-22 and 205-23 as §§ 205-22, 205-22.1, 205-22.2,
205-22.3, 205-23 and 205-24, respectively.
§ 205-20 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-21
186:680
§ 205-22. Conditional uses.
trained staff supervision for the number of residents and their related
disability or disabilities.
E. In place of the off-street residential parking requirements for
residential units, a group home shall provide a minimum of four offstreet
parking spaces. A group home with more than four residents
shall provide one additional off-street parking space for every two
residents, or fraction thereof, in excess of four residents. All parking
spaces shall measure no less than nine feet in width and 18 feet in
length, and a garage shall not be counted as a parking space.
F. Supervisory, counseling and medical services shall be provided only to
residents of the group home, and no outpatient services will be
provided to individuals who are not residents of the group home.
G. A minimum of one nonresident (caretaker) employee shall be on the
premises at all times and shall be readily available to provide assistance
to residents of the group home.
H. All nonresident (caretaker) employees shall be qualified by training
and/or experience to provide supervision and care to residents of the
group home.
I. If a group home is in a residential district, an appearance shall be
maintained closely similar to nearby dwellings, and no sign shall
identify the use.
A. It is hereby recognized that certain uses may be necessary to serve the
needs and convenience of the Township, but which uses may become
inimical to the public health, safety and general welfare by reason of
their inherent nature and/or operation and therefore require special
and proper consideration of existing and probable future conditions and
characteristics of the surrounding area. Such uses are hereby declared
to be conditional uses and may be permitted upon written application to
the Township, review by the East Norriton Township Planning
Commission and approval by the Board of Supervisors of East Norriton
Township, provided that said use is shown as a conditional use in the
Zoning District Schedule for the district in which the use is proposed
and subject to the following considerations:
(1) The suitability of the property for the use desired.
(2) The effect of the proposed use upon the safety and health of the
immediate neighborhood and the general public therein.
(3) The effect of the proposed use upon the character of the immediate
neighborhood so as to conserve the value of existing buildings and
encourage the most appropriate use of the land.
§ 205-21 TOWING § 205-22
186:681
§ 205-22.1. Standards for family day-care homes, group day-care
homes and day-care centers.
B. In granting a conditional use, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this
chapter, as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this
section and the Zoning Ordinance. The burden of proof in any
application for a conditional use shall be on the applicant to prove that
the use is one which is permitted by conditional use and that the
proposed use will not adversely affect the general public.
A. The following provisions shall apply to family day-care centers, group
day-care homes and day-care centers.
(1) An approved Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare
registration certificate or license, as appropriate must be obtained,
and all Department of Public Welfare regulations, including those
standards governing adequate indoor space, accessible outdoor
play space and any applicable state or local Building and Fire
Safety Codes, must be met.
(2) Each owner or operator shall register with East Norriton Township
prior to the issuance of a use and occupancy permit. The owner or
operator must certify compliance with all applicable Township and
state requirements for child care.
(3) Firesafety. The owner or operator shall allow the premises to be
inspected by the Township Fire Marshal and shall implement all
required corrective measures and within the time limits stated by
the Fire Marshal.
(4) Inspection. The owner or operator shall permit inspection of the
premises for compliance with the requirements of all applicable
Township and state requirements by Township employees as are
designated to perform such inspections.
B. The following provisions shall apply to group day-care homes and daycare
centers.
(1) Buffer standards. All side or rear property lines abutting residential
uses in the Township or in an adjacent municipality shall be
screened so as to provide an appropriate visual and noise buffer
between the adjacent land uses. The following standards apply to
all required buffers:
(a) Buffers shall contain combinations of evergreen and deciduous
vegetation, earthen berms, fences and/or walls. The buffer
shall be a minimum of five feet in width. No more than 25% of
the screen shall be composed of fences or walls. Earthen berms
shall not exceed four feet in height.
§ 205-22 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-22.1
186:682
(b) The required buffer is to be a minimum of six feet in height at
the time of installation.
(c) All plant material shall be guaranteed for two years. All plant
material which dies within that time shall be replaced by the
applicant.
(2) Parking for employees and clients. At least one on-site parking
space must be provided for each 200 square feet of floor area
dedicated to child care. This parking is in addition to any required
for any other use on the site.
(3) Dropoff and pickup area.
(a) A minimum of one vehicle space for dropoff and pickup shall be
provided for each eight children cared for. These spaces must
be located so as not to conflict and interfere with vehicular
traffic or cause a stacking of cars waiting to enter the dropoff
and pickup area.
(b) The dropoff and pickup area shall be made up of two one-way
aisles. One aisle shall be used for dropoff or receiving of
children and shall have a width of 12 feet. The second aisle
shall be used for passing and shall have a ten- to twelve-foot
width. The minimum required length for each space is 22 feet.
(4) Entrance/exit accessibility.
(a) The entrances/exits of the child care service use should be
visible from the pickup/delivery area. Parents and children
should be able to access the center from the dropoff/pickup
area and parking areas without crossing vehicular traffic lanes
or other dissimilar uses.
(b) When located in a multiuse building complex, entrances/exits
should have direct access to the child-care center without
walking through other significant portions of the building. In
all cases, a secondary entrance/exit should be provided for
emergency use.
(5) Entrance/exit control. The center should control the entrance and
exit to the child-care center to prevent unauthorized access to the
portion of the child care use housing the children without being
physically admitted by a staff member. Anyone leaving the center
should similarly come under the direct control of center personnel.
(6) Play area setback. All structured play areas or other areas of high
activity shall not be located in any required or provided front yard.
Such uses when located at other locations on the property shall be
so located and designed so as to address the question of separation
and protection from noise for the adjoining properties. This may be
accomplished by means of landscaping as set forth elsewhere
§ 205-22.1 TOWING § 205-22.1
186:683
§ 205-22.2. Forestry.
Forestry, as defined in § 205-5, shall be permitted in any zoning district in
the Township, subject to the following regulations and requirements:
herein, and sound deadening devices and other suitable methods.
These uses shall not be located within 10 feet of a rear or side yard
property line.
(7) Recreational spaces: location. An outdoor play area as required by
state regulations shall be provided and shall be located
immediately adjacent to the child-care center.
A. Forestry activities. Forestry activities shall be practiced in accordance
with accepted silvicultural principles, through developing, cultivating,
harvesting, transporting, and selling of trees for commercial purposes.
A plan shall be filed with the Township which shall provide measures for
erosion and sedimentation control and the immediate replanting of
trees on areas where existing tree growth has been harvested.
B. Setbacks. Buildings, including accessory structures, and the harvesting
or cutting of timber which is part of any forestry operation within the
Township shall be set back from property lines and road frontages as
follows:
(1) Font yard setback: 100 feet;
(2) Side yard setback: 100 feet;
(3) Rear yard setback: 100 feet;
(4) Setback from any residential building: 100 feet; and
(5) Setback from road frontages: 100 feet.
C. Hours of operation. No forestry operations conducted in the Township
shall commence operations of any machinery utilized in the forestry
business, including motorized vehicles engaged in the business, until
7:00 a.m., and all such operations shall cease by 5:00 p.m., prevailing
time, Monday through Friday only.
D. Exterior storage. Any exterior storage of lumber or forestry product or
by-product shall comply with all recognized fire standards and safety
standards and shall be screened from view with the planting of an
appropriate evergreen screen.
E. Deliveries or transport to and from the site. No deliveries to the location
or transportation of product or by-product of the forestry operation
shall be conducted except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m., Monday through Friday only.
F. External illumination. Any external illumination to be placed on the site
as part of or to assist in the forestry operation shall be shielded from
§ 205-22.1 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-22.2
186:684
§ 205-22.3. Fences. [Added 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 512175]
§ 205-22.4. Limited personal service establishments. [Added
10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 566]
Limited personal service: a retail facility offering psychic readings, body
piercing, branding or tattooing of persons and similar uses. The following
requirements shall be met:
§ 205-22.5. Outdoor food service. [Added 10-27-2015 by Ord. No.
566]
direct visual observation on any adjoining property or along any
adjacent roadway.
G. Signage and retail operations. No sale of any of the lumber or any other
product or by-product of the forestry operation may be sold on the
premises where the forestry operation is conducted.
A. Fences that do not exceed six feet in height are permitted in all
districts. Fences shall not extend toward the front of the building line
further than the front wall of the structure except that an open fence
may enclose the front of the property but shall not exceed four feet in
height and may not be placed in the right-of-way. The use of barbed wire
or razor wire is prohibited.
B. In nonresidential districts that abut a residential district, a solid wood
or PVC fence not exceeding eight feet in height may be installed along
the rear property line to serve as a buffer between the nonresidential
and residential districts. In all other nonresidential districts, fences
greater than six feet in height but not exceeding eight feet in height are
permitted by special exception when authorized by the Zoning Hearing
Board.
A. The service must be performed in sanitary conditions and in compliance
with all federal, state, and local regulations, rules, and laws regulating
such practices.
B. The place of service shall be a minimum of 1,000 feet from any property
on which a public or private school is located.
C. The limited personal service provider shall display notices as required
by Pennsylvania law regarding the necessity of parental consent before
any procedure is performed on a minor.
A. Permit required. Outdoor food service is permitted as a use accessory
to a principal restaurant use, retail food establishment and
microbrewery, subject to the following requirements:
175. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 205-21.3, Net lot area requirements
for residential districts.
§ 205-22.2 TOWING § 205-22.5
186:685
(1) All permits required by this section shall be applied for and
obtained from the Zoning Officer.
(2) Outdoor food service is permitted as an accessory use to permitted
restaurant uses, retail food establishments and microbreweries in
the SC, C, EC and ECII Zones.
(3) A one-time permit from the Township of East Norriton is required
to operate an outdoor food service area.
(4) Applicants shall apply for permit approval in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. All such applications shall be approved
by the Zoning Officer and shall be referred to the Chief of Police
and the Fire Marshal, who shall provide the Zoning Officer with
written reports of their opinions and recommendations regarding
the application.
(5) Applicants shall meet all general ordinance requirements and all
other laws, rules, regulations and codes applicable to the proposed
activity.
(6) The permit granted pursuant to this section shall allow the use of
the outdoor food service area at any time of year. However, the area
must be properly maintained at all times, including complying with
the litter control plan, complying with all applicable laws, rules,
regulations and codes, and properly securing or removing tables,
chairs and other items during times of inclement weather and high
wind; further, at no time shall chairs, tables or other items be
stacked in the area.
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, any use falling
within the definition of "outdoor food service" that was in operation
prior to the adoption of this section on October 27, 2015, may
continue without further approval by the Zoning Officer or being
required to obtain a permit as required herein; provided, however,
that permit approval in accordance with this section shall be
required in the event:
(a) The use is expanded or substantially changed; or
(b) The owner of the property makes any alteration or
improvement to the property that would require subdivision
and/or land development approval.
(8) No action shall be taken on any application for a permit under this
section until the application has been completed in its entirety and
the application fee, as required by a schedule of fees established
and amended from time to time by resolution of the Township, has
been paid in full.
B. Permit application.
§ 205-22.5 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-22.5
186:686
(1) Applicants proposing to establish an outdoor food service area
must provide satisfactory proof to the Zoning Officer of the
following:
(a) The type of outdoor food service proposed by the applicant,
whether it be outdoor dining areas or outdoor eating areas.
(b) Applicants must provide an architectural barrier, such as
flower beds, landscaping or decorative fencing, designed to
enclose the eating area and limit the ability of litter to blow off
the premises.
(c) An applicant proposing to establish an outdoor eating area or
outdoor dining area shall submit to the Zoning Officer a layout
of the proposed seating areas, which shall include but not be
limited to:
[1] A depiction of all aisles;
[2] Routes of ingress and egress;
[3] Proposed occupant load;
[4] Clearances between tables and between the seating area
and the curb;
[5] The location of all food preparation and service areas;
[6] A landscape plan;
[7] The location and description of all electrical and other
equipment and fixtures that will be utilized;
[8] An illustration, rendering or photograph of all proposed
furniture, umbrellas, awnings, signage and other furniture
proposed;
[9] Distances from automobile travelways and parking areas.
(d) The written consent of the property owner, if different than the
applicant.
(e) The indoor seating capacity of the principal use.
(f) Such other information as may be required from time to time
by the Township.
(2) The Zoning Officer shall review each application to ensure that the
proposed operation of the outdoor food service area will not
interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
(3) The Zoning Officer shall require each applicant to submit a litter
control plan, which shall include, but not be limited to, a
description of the number and location of trash receptacles for the
§ 205-22.5 TOWING § 205-22.5
186:687
areas and the frequency with which the tables, surrounding area
and adjacent public and private properties will be policed for litter.
(4) Outdoor food service areas will comply with the noise standards
described in § 127-6 (Noise limits).
(5) The seating contained in an outdoor food service area shall not be
counted in determining any parking space requirement for a retail
food establishment or restaurant use, unless the number of seats
for the outdoor food service area exceeds 20% of the interior seats
or interior floor area dedicated to patron use, whichever is greater.
(6) No fees shall be prorated nor any part thereof refunded for any
reason.
(7) The Township may, from time to time, promulgate whatever rules
or regulations it deems necessary or desirable to effectuate the
purposes of this section, and the same shall be approved by the
Township.
C. Appeals. The Zoning Board shall have the power to hear and decide
appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is error in any
requirement, decision or refusal made by the Zoning Officer in the
enforcement of this section. Additionally, the Planning Commission or
Zoning Board, as appropriate, shall have the power to hear any request
for a variance from the regulations and conditions of this section.
D. Use guidelines. The following regulations shall apply to outdoor food
service areas:
(1) The outdoor food service area may have a retractable awning or
umbrellas and may contain furniture, including tables, chairs, and
planters, that are easily portable and that can be moved inside the
principal structure.
(2) A minimum pedestrian walkway of 54 inches clear is to be
maintained in front of the outdoor food service area.
(3) The minimum height of umbrellas which project into the required
minimum pedestrian walkway shall be 80 inches.
(4) No outdoor service area may operate before 8:00 a.m. or after
11:00 p.m., except that outdoor food service areas may be
permitted to operate later than 11:00 p.m. by special exception of
the Zoning Hearing Board.
(5) Noise generated from the outdoor food service area, including, but
not limited to, patron activity, live music or entertainment and
amplified music or sound, shall comply with the noise limitations of
Township ordinances, as amended from time to time by the East
Norriton Township Board of Supervisors.
§ 205-22.5 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-22.5
186:688
(6) Outdoor lighting shall not shine onto adjoining properties. Light
standards shall not exceed a height of 15 feet, and light fixtures
shall be focused downward with a shield, preventing light from
shining on adjacent properties.
(7) The carrying of any open container of alcoholic beverages is
prohibited outside the delineated area of the outdoor eating area.
(8) No outdoor use area shall interfere with safe pedestrian and
vehicular traffic on or in the vicinity of the restaurant or lot.
(9) The owner of the establishment is responsible for keeping the
pedestrian walkway in front of the premises clean and free of trash
and debris on at least a daily basis.
§ 205-22.5 TOWING § 205-22.5
186:689

ARTICLE V
AR Residential District
§ 205-23. Regulations to apply.
In an AR Residential District, the following regulations shall apply.
§ 205-24. Permitted uses.176
A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot or premises may be
used for any of the following purposes and no other:
§ 205-25. Lot area and building coverage.
A. A single-family detached dwelling.
B. Accessory uses in accordance with § 205-16.
C. A municipal use or firehouse.
D. No-impact home-based business as defined in Article II herein.
A. Lot area shall be as follows:
(1) If not served by sanitary sewer: 30,000 square feet.
(2) If served by sanitary sewer: 20,000 square feet.
(3) Under no circumstances shall the net lot area be less than 10,000
square feet. [Added 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 512]
B. The minimum width at the building line shall be 100 feet.
C. Yard requirements shall be as follows:
(1) Front yard: 50 feet; provided, however, than for an unenclosed
porch, patio or deck that does not exceed the width of the
residence, such encroachment shall be permitted, provided that
there remains an open front yard of at least 40 feet, and the width
does not exceed the width of the residence.
(2) Side yard, each: 20 feet.
(3) Rear yard: 60 feet; provided, however, that a covered patio, deck or
porch which, when attached to the rear line of the existing
dwelling, would encroach into the rear yard area for a patio, porch
or deck having a width of not more than 25 feet, such
encroachment shall be permitted, provided that there remains a
rear yard of at least 45 feet. A covered patio which encroaches into
the rear yard area may not be enclosed in any manner, with the
exception of screening, and may at no time be used for or become a
176. Editor's Note: Former § 205-24, Fences, was repealed 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 512. See now
§ 205-22.3.
§ 205-23 TOWING § 205-25
186:691
§ 205-26. Variations of requirements.
habitable room. It is further provided that an uncovered patio, deck
or porch which, when attached to the rear line of the existing
dwelling, would encroach into the rear yard area, provided the
structure does not exceed the width of the existing dwelling, then
such encroachment shall be permitted, provided that there remains
an open rear yard of at least 45 feet. [Amended 12-23-2008 by
Ord. No. 512]
D. The building height shall be as follows:
(1) Principal building: 35 feet.
(2) Accessory building: 20 feet.
E. The building coverage shall be not exceed 15% of the total lot area.
[Amended 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 512]
F. (Reserved)177
A. In order to encourage a creative approach to the use of land, a desirable
visual character in residential areas, creation of open space corridors
throughout the Township and more efficient development in terms of
streets and utilities, this section is intended to provide for a variation in
lot sizes in large-scale single-family residential developments so that
the present permitted density of dwelling units contemplated by the
minimum lot size requirement set forth in the AR Residential District is
maintained on an overall basis, and desirable open space, tree cover,
historic sites, recreation areas, scenic vistas, stream valleys or other
lands for public purposes are preserved within these developments.
B. Procedure and qualifications. The standards of this section may be
applied to a proposed subdivision located in an AR Residential District,
which must be submitted in accordance with procedures established by
Chapter 175, Subdivision and Land Development, provided that the
following conditions are met:
(1) The proposed subdivision must contain at least 80 acres in area, all
of which must be in East Norriton Township and all of which must
be contiguous and not separated by any existing roads. Any road
shown on a proposed development plan which is to be vacated shall
not be deemed to affect contiguity.
(2) The tract of land to be developed must be in one ownership.
(3) The land area of the tract to be developed must contain any one or
a combination of the following:
(a) Floodplain, as defined in § 205-92 of this chapter.
177. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, pertaining to landscaping, was repealed 4-28-2009 by
Ord. No. 515.
§ 205-25 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-26
186:692
(b) Slopes in excess of 15% as defined by the Soil Survey,
Montgomery County, Pennsylvania; United States Department
of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, 1967.
(c) Mature permanent vegetation considered by the Board of
Supervisors to be a natural amenity worthy of preservation.
(d) Other natural features of irreplaceable value, subject to the
concurrence of the Board of Supervisors.
(e) Historic sites as identified by the Montgomery County
Resource Protection Plan or other sites supported by
appropriate documentation or endorsement of local historic
societies.
(f) Land suitable for active recreational use, subject to the
concurrence of the Board of Supervisors, provided that it be
located adjacent to and as an integral part of the features of
the site detailed in Subsection B(3)(a) through (e).
(4) Open space requirements.
(a) The land to be set aside or reserved for park, woodlands,
conservation, playground, active recreational use or other
open space purposes, such as the preservation of natural
features, shall be offered for dedication to the Township and, at
the option of the Township, may be accepted by East Norriton
Township. This land must comprise at least 18% of the gross
area of the development and shall be contiguous. Public roads
created by the development crossing the land to be dedicated
shall not be deemed to affect contiguity of the open space
ground.
(b) The land area to be set aside for permanent preservation as
open space shall be so located and so shaped as to be suitable
for the purposes intended. Consideration shall be given to
contiguous portions of existing and potential open space lands
in adjacent tracts.
(c) The common land to be set aside shall be designed to promote
the preservation of those feature(s) a tract is required to
contain, pursuant to § 205-26B(3) in order to qualify for
development under this section.
(d) The total land area to be dedicated shall be delineated on the
subdivision plan with a note stipulating that the legal means of
conveyance shall be by dedication.
(e) Adequate pedestrian and vehicular access to the land to be
dedicated to East Norriton Township shall be provided.
(5) All development pursuant to this section must be served with public
water and sewer facilities.
§ 205-26 TOWING § 205-26
186:693
(6) The Board of Supervisors shall have the power to deny the
application of the provisions of this section to any tract of land to be
subdivided if, in its opinion, the intent of this section is not adhered
to.
C. Area regulations.
(1) The minimum lot sizes permitted by § 205-25A(2) may be reduced a
maximum of 25%, provided that in no case shall any lot contain less
than 15,000 square feet.
(2) Other requirements shall be as follows:
(a) Minimum width at the building line: 75 feet.
(b) Front yard: 40 feet.
(c) Side yard, each: 15 feet.
(d) Rear yard: 45 feet; provided, however, that a covered patio,
deck or porch which, when attached to the rear line of the
existing dwelling, would encroach into the rear yard area, and
if the patio, deck or porch has a width of not more than 16 feet,
then such encroachment shall be permitted, provided that
there remains an open rear yard of at least 35 feet. The
covered patio which encroaches into the rear yard area may
not be enclosed in any manner, with the exception of
screening, and may at no time be used for or become a
habitable room. It is further provided that an uncovered patio,
deck or porch which, when attached to the rear line of the
existing dwelling, would encroach into the rear yard area, such
patio, deck or porch having a width no greater than the width
of the existing dwelling, shall be permitted, provided that there
remains an open rear yard of at least 35 feet and the width of
the patio, deck or porch does not exceed the width of the
residence.
(e) Building coverage: 20% of the total lot area.
(3) The number of dwelling units permitted by utilizing the provisions
of this section shall not exceed the number which would be
permitted by applying the provisions of the zoning district within
which a given tract lies. The number shall be calculated by
deducting 20% of the gross area of the tract for street rights-of-way
and dividing the remaining land area by the minimum lot size
defined by § 205-25.
D. No structure of any kind may be built within the floodplain as finally
determined by the East Norriton Township Engineer in accordance with
Article XVII, Floodplain Conservation District. The minimum elevation
of the cellar or first floor of any structure must be above the elevation of
§ 205-26 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-26
186:694
the floodplain as determined in accordance with Article XVII,
Floodplain Conservation District.
§ 205-26 TOWING § 205-26
186:695

ARTICLE VI
BR Residential District
§ 205-27. Regulations to apply.
In a BR Residential District, the following regulations shall apply.
§ 205-28. Permitted uses.
A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot or premises may be
used for any purpose(s) in § 205-24.
§ 205-29. (Reserved)178
§ 205-30. Lot area and building requirements.
A. Lot area shall be as follows:
(1) If not served by sanitary sewer: 15,000 square feet.
(2) If served by sanitary sewer: 10,000 square feet.
(3) Under no circumstances shall the net lot area be less than 7,500
square feet. [Added 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 512]
B. The minimum width at the building line shall be 80 feet.
C. Yard requirements shall be as follows:
(1) Front yard: 30 feet.
(2) Side yard: 15 feet.
(3) Rear yard: 25 feet.
D. The building height shall be as follows:
(1) Principal building: 30 feet.
(2) Accessory building: 20 feet.
E. The building coverage shall be 18% of the total lot area.
F. Landscaping, including conservation of existing trees and woodlands,
street trees, stormwater basin landscaping and site element screens,
shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 175,
Subdivision and Land Development.
G. Fencing requirements of § 205-24 shall apply.179
178. Editor's Note: Former § 205-29, Fence requirements, was repealed 12-23-2008 by Ord. No.
512. See now § 205-22.3.
179. Editor's Note: Former § 205-24, Fences, was repealed 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 512. See now
§ 205-22.3.
§ 205-27 TOWING § 205-30
186:697
H. The driveway setback requirement from the property line shall be
allowed to be reduced from five feet to one foot, provided that no
stormwater discharge shall be directed onto the neighboring property
owner's property.
§ 205-30 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-30
186:698
ARTICLE VIA
BR-1 Residential District
§ 205-30.1. Legislative intent.
In expansion of the statement of community development objectives
contained in Article I, § 205-3, of this chapter, it is hereby declared to be the
intent of this article to provide for lot area and building area requirements
compatible with existing neighborhoods previously largely developed which
cannot reasonably comply with the BR Residential District standards. In
addition, for tracts having a minimum of 60,000 square feet, an option shall
be permitted for townhouses and/or twins to be permitted at a density not
to exceed what otherwise could be achieved utilizing a net lot area of 7,500
square feet.
§ 205-30.2. Permitted uses.
§ 205-30.3. Lot area and building requirements.
A. A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot or premises may be
used for any purpose(s) in § 205-24.
B. When approved as a conditional use, a townhouse and/or twin house
may be approved, subject to the following:
(1) A tract having a minimum contiguous lot area of not less than
60,000 square feet shall be provided.
(2) The maximum density for twins or townhouses shall not exceed 5.5
dwelling units per net lot area.
(3) Except as modified above, §§ 205-37 through 205-41 of the CR
Residential District shall apply.
A. Net lot area shall be provided for each lot as follows:
(1) If not served by sanitary sewer: 15,000 square feet.
(2) If served by sanitary sewer: 7,500 square feet.
B. The minimum width at the building line shall be 70 feet.
C. Yard requirements shall be as follows:
(1) Front yard: 30 feet.
(2) Side yard: 10 feet minimum, 25 feet aggregate.
(3) Rear yard: 25 feet.
D. The building height shall be as follows:
(1) Principal building: 30 feet.
§ 205-30.1 TOWING § 205-30.3
186:699
(2) Accessory building: 20 feet.
E. The building coverage shall not exceed 24% of the total lot area.
[Amended 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 512; 4-28-2009 by Ord. No.
515]
F. The driveway setback requirement from the property line shall be
allowed to be reduced from five feet to one foot, provided that no
stormwater discharge shall be directed onto the neighboring property
owner's property.
G. (Reserved)180
180. Editor's Note: Former Subsection G, pertaining to landscaping, was repealed 4-28-2009 by
Ord. No. 515. Former Subsection H, pertaining to fencing requirements, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 512. See now
§ 205-22.3.
§ 205-30.3 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-30.3
186:700
ARTICLE VIB
MR Medium-Density Residential District
§ 205-30.4. Legislative intent.
In expansion of the statement of community development objectives
contained in Article I, § 205-3, of this chapter, it is hereby declared to be
the intent of this article with respect to the MR Medium-Density Residential
District to establish reasonable standards of performance for a selection of
permitted uses therein and to maintain and protect the desirable benefits
which medium-density development of single-family homes, twin homes and
duplex homes will have when provided for in selected locations within the
Township. It is further the intent of this article to:
§ 205-30.5. Permitted uses.
In a MR Medium-Density Residential District, a building may be erected,
altered or used and a lot or premises may be used or occupied for any one
of the following purposes and no other; provided, however, that all other
requirements of this article are met:
§ 205-30.6. Height.
No principal building shall exceed the height of 35 feet measured from the
lowest outside finished grade around the building, nor shall any building
A. Permit a variety of housing types available to present and future
residents of the Township.
B. At the same time provide adequate protection to existing, established
neighborhoods nearby.
C. Implement the general recommendation contained in the Township's
Comprehensive Plan to provide areas for medium-density residential
development.
D. Ensure that the traffic and other impacts of development in accordance
with this district are no greater than can be accommodated by the
infrastructure of the Township.
A. Single-family detached dwelling in accordance with the requirements of
§ 205-30 (the BR Residential District).
B. Twin houses.
C. Duplexes.
D. Playgrounds, parks, tot lots and open spaces.
E. Accessory uses in accordance with § 205-16.
F. No-impact home-based businesses as defined in Article II herein.
§ 205-30.4 TOWING § 205-30.6
186:701
exceed two stories, exclusive of basements. The maximum height of an
accessory building or structure shall not exceed 14 feet.
§ 205-30.7. Development requirements.
A. Area of district. A tract area of no less than five developable acres shall
be provided for every area to be used in whole or part as a MR Medium-
Density Residential District.
B. Utilities. All dwelling units within the MR Medium-Density Residential
District shall be served by a public sanitary sewage disposal system and
by public water supply. All utility lines (electric, telephone, etc.) serving
the MR Medium-Density Residential District developed subsequent to
the enactment of this article shall be placed underground.
C. Density. The total number of dwelling units shall not exceed five
dwelling units per gross acre.
D. Lot area. A minimum lot area of 4,000 square feet shall be provided for
each dwelling unit, with an average lot area of 5,500 square feet for
each dwelling unit.
E. Lot width. A minimum lot width of 37 1/2 feet at the building line shall
be provided, with an average lot width of 45 feet.
F. Street frontage. Each lot shall be provided with a minimum of 25 feet of
street frontage measured along the right-of-way line of a public or
private street; provided, however, that a maximum reduction of five feet
to the required street frontage may be permitted for lots which front
onto the bulb of a cul-de-sac.
G. Yard requirements. The minimum yard requirements shall be as
follows:
(1) Front yard: The average front yard for all dwelling units in a land
development shall be not less than 25 feet; provided, however, that
50% of the front facade of any individual dwelling within the land
development may be set back a distance of not less than 20 feet
from the ultimate right-of-way of adjoining streets.
(2) Rear yard: 30 feet.
(3) Side yard: 10 feet (one side only required for twin houses).
(4) Setbacks for accessory buildings. No accessory building or use
shall extend within a required yard nor be less than five feet from a
common lot line of an adjoining dwelling.
H. Parking. A minimum of two off-street parking spaces shall be provided
for each dwelling unit.
I. Building coverage. The maximum building coverage shall not exceed
35% of total lot area.
§ 205-30.6 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-30.7
186:702
J. Perimeter setback. There shall be a setback of not less than 35 feet for
all buildings and parking spaces that are located adjacent to a zoning
district other than the MR Medium-Density Residential District. This
setback area shall contain a buffer area as defined in this chapter to
shield the proposed development from the uses located in neighboring
zoning districts.
K. No building addition to the front or rear facade of a twin house dwelling
shall exceed the height of one story or 14 feet, whichever is less.181
181. Editor's Note: Former Subsection L, pertaining to landscaping, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 4-28-2009 by Ord. No. 515.
§ 205-30.7 TOWING § 205-30.7
186:703

ARTICLE VII
GA Garden Apartment Residential District
§ 205-31. Regulations to apply.
In the GA Garden Apartment Residential District, the following regulations
shall apply.
§ 205-32. Permitted uses.
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for
the following purposes and no other, provided that the requirements of
the sections following are met. The following are permitted uses in the GA
Garden Apartment District:
§ 205-33. Development requirements.
The general plan for a garden apartment shall include evidence and facts
showing that it has considered and made provision for, and the development
shall be executed in accordance with the following essential conditions:
§ 205-34. General regulations.
A. Apartment houses or a group of apartment houses which constitutes a
single operating or proprietary unit.
B. Playgrounds, parks, tot-lots and open spaces.
C. Parking. Off-street automobile parking and off-street delivery-collection
facilities shall be required. Such parking areas shall be for the sole use
of the occupants of such building and the visitors thereto.
D. Accessory uses in accordance with § 205-16.
E. No-impact home-based business as defined in Article II herein.
A. The proposed development shall be constructed in accordance with an
overall plan and shall be designed as a unified architectural unit with
appropriate landscaping. If the development of the garden apartment is
to be carried out in stages, each stage shall be so planned that the
foregoing requirements and the intent of this chapter shall be fully
complied with at the completion of any stage. The initial stage of
development shall comprise a total floor area of not less than 30,000
square feet.
A. Area of tract. Not less than five acres shall be provided for every area to
be used in whole or in part as a Garden Apartment Residential District.
B. Building area. Not more than 12% of the lot area of each Garden
Apartment Residential District may be occupied by buildings.
§ 205-31 TOWING § 205-34
186:705
C. Setback from streets. There shall be a setback from the ultimate rightof-
way of each street on which the Garden Apartment Residential
District abuts which shall be not less than 50 feet in depth.
D. Setback from property lines. There shall be a building setback from any
property line which the Garden Apartment Residential District abuts of
not less than 150 feet from any residential district or 50 feet from any
nonresidential district. Building setbacks between separate parcels
within single GA District shall be 50 feet from each property line.
E. Distance between buildings. In the case of two or more garden
apartment buildings located on the same tract, the horizontal distance
measured in feet between the buildings shall not be less than 45 feet.
F. Parking.
(1) For apartment residential use, not less than two off-street
automobile parking spaces shall be required for each dwelling unit.
Initially, 1 1/2 spaces may be constructed, provided that the
remaining required spaces shall be provided and shall be
constructed as is determined from time to time by the Zoning
Officer.
(2) Parking areas shall be placed so as not to interfere with any
recreation or service area and shall not be less than:
(a) Twenty-five feet from any nonresidential district property line
to which the Garden Apartment Residential District abuts.
(b) Fifty feet from any residential district property line to which
the Garden Apartment Residential District abuts.
(c) Twenty-five feet from the ultimate right-of-way line of any
contiguous public street.
(d) Twenty feet from any garden apartment building unless said
parking is located within the lines of the garden apartment
building walls or in an attached parking garage.
G. Dwelling units per acre. There shall be no more than 10 dwelling units
per acre of lot area.
H. Height of building. No building shall exceed the height of 35 feet or
three stories, whichever is less.
I. Paving. All areas provided for use by vehicles and all pedestrian walks
shall be constructed in accordance with all pertinent specifications
within Chapter 175, Subdivision and Land Development.
J. Service. Areas for loading and unloading of delivery trucks and other
vehicles and for the servicing of refuse collection, fuel and other service
shall be provided and shall be adequate in size and shall be so arranged
§ 205-34 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-34
186:706
that they may be used without blockage or interference with the use of
accessways or automobile parking facilities.
K. Access. Provision shall be made for safe and efficient ingress and egress
to and from public streets and highways serving the apartment without
undue congestion to or interference with normal traffic flow.
L. Utilities. All buildings within the garden apartment shall be served by a
public sanitary sewage disposal system and public water supply. All
utility lines servicing the garden apartment shall be placed
underground.
M. Signs. Signs shall be permitted only pursuant to the provisions of
Article XIX of this chapter.
N. Lighting facilities. Lighting facilities provided shall be arranged in a
manner which will protect the highway and neighboring properties,
whether contiguous or not, from unreasonable direct glare or
hazardous interference of any kind. Lighting facilities shall be required
where deemed necessary for the safety and convenience of garden
apartment residents.
O. (Reserved)182
P. (Reserved)183
Q. Open space. No less than 30% of the site shall be maintained in
nonvehicular open space. The developer shall be required, where
possible, to preserve or incorporate natural features, such as woods,
streams and open space areas, which add to the overall cohesive
development of the garden apartment and overall community
development. However, all conditions deemed hazardous by the Board
of Supervisors, including natural feature hazards, are to be eliminated
or all precautions deemed appropriate by the Board of Supervisors to
reduce the hazard are to be provided by the developer.
R. Recreation. The developer shall give consideration to the provision of
community areas, laundry facilities, playgrounds and tot-lots and other
services necessary for the comfort and convenience of garden
apartment residents.
S. Building size. No single building shall have a total length, including
angles, greater than 200 feet.
T. Unit requirements. Each dwelling unit shall contain a minimum of 600
square feet and shall not contain more than two bedrooms.
182. Editor's Note: Former Subsection O, pertaining to fencing requirements, was repealed
12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 512. See now § 205-22.3.
183. Editor's Note: Former Subsection P, pertaining to landscaping, was repealed 4-28-2009 by
Ord. No. 515.
§ 205-34 TOWING § 205-34
186:707

ARTICLE VIII
CR Residential District
§ 205-35. Purpose.
The purpose of establishing the CR Residential District is to:
§ 205-36. Permitted uses.
§ 205-37. Height. [Amended 3-26-2019 by Ord. No. 583]
No building shall exceed the height of 35 feet measured from the mean
level of the ground surrounding the building to a point midway between
the highest and lowest points of the roof, provided that chimneys, spires,
towers, elevator penthouses, tanks, pent walls, and similar projections shall
not be included in calculating the height, nor shall any building exceed
three stories, exclusive of basements.
A. Encourage the logical and timely development of land for high-density
residential purposes.
B. Permit a variety of housing on the landscape.
C. Assure the suitable design of high-density dwellings in order to protect
the surrounding environment of adjacent and nearby neighborhoods.
D. Ensure that the development will constitute a residential environment
of sustained desirability and stability and not produce a volume of
traffic in excess of the capacity for which access streets are designed.
A. In a CR Residential District, a building may be erected, altered or used
and a lot or premises may be used or occupied for any of the following
purposes and no other; provided, however, that the requirements of
§ 205-37 are met:
(1) Townhouses.
(2) Twin houses.
(3) Duplexes.
(4) Multiplexes.
(5) Playgrounds, parks, tot-lots and open spaces.
(6) Mobile home parks.
(7) Accessory uses in accordance with § 205-16.
(8) No-impact home-based business as defined in Article II herein.
B. Parking. Off-street automobile parking, as required in this article, shall
not be leased but shall be for the sole use of the occupants of the
building and the visitors thereto.
§ 205-35 TOWING § 205-38
186:709
§ 205-38. Development requirements.
A. Area of district. Not less than a five-acre lot shall be provided for every
area to be used in whole or in part as a CR Residential District
development.
B. For the purposes of calculating density, all land is defined as
developable acreage except that which is reserved for right-of-way or
ultimate right-of-way. In cases where the newly developed street system
is to be retained in private ownership and not to be dedicated as rightof-
way to the Township, the length of streets in feet will be multiplied by
50 feet to determine an equivalent area to right-of-way, and this area
will be excluded along with any actual right-of-way from the
developable acreage used in calculating density.
C. Density. The total number of dwelling units shall be in accordance with
Subsection E of this section and shall not exceed:
(1) Eight townhouse dwelling units per developable acre.
(2) Five twin house dwelling units per developable acre.
(3) Six duplex dwelling units per developable acre.
(4) Seven multiplex dwelling units per developable acre.
(5) Four mobile home units per developable acre.
D. Parking.
(1) Not less than two off-street automobile parking spaces shall be
required for each dwelling unit. Such parking areas may be
designed as a court or separate driveway as deemed suitable by the
Township Supervisors.
(2) A garage shall not be counted as a parking space. In constructing
off-lot parking areas, no more than 10 adjoining parking spaces
shall be permitted. A landscaped area 10 feet by 20 feet shall be
required to separate these areas.
E. Minimum lot dimensions shall be as follows:184
F. Building size. No building or combination of adjacent dwelling units
shall exceed a total length of 200 feet.
G. All dwelling units must have a minimum living area of 650 square feet,
excluding garage.
H. Setbacks. In an unlotted development, all requirements must be met as
if the development were lotted, including the following minimum
building setbacks:
184. Editor's Note: The minimum lot dimensions are located at the end of this chapter.
§ 205-38 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-38
186:710
§ 205-39. General regulations.
(1) From the development boundary line: 40 feet.
(2) From a road ultimate right-of-way line: 40 feet.
(3) From a privately owned street: 25 feet to the curb of the privately
owned street. [Amended 2-28-2017 by Ord. No. 571]
(4) For lotted developments where access is gained through a newly
developed street system to be retained in private ownership and
not dedicated as right-of-way to the Township, the minimum
building setback from the curb of the privately owned street shall
be 35 feet. [Added 3-26-2019 by Ord. No. 583]
A. Utilities. All dwelling units within the CR Residential District shall be
served by a public sanitary sewage disposal system and by public water
supply facilities. All utility lines (electric, telephone, etc.) serving the
CR Residential Districts developed subsequent to the enactment of this
chapter shall be placed underground.
B. Signs. Signs shall be permitted only pursuant to the provisions of
Article XIX of this chapter.
C. Access. Plans evidencing provision for safe and efficient ingress and
egress to and from the public streets and highways serving the CR
Residential District without causing undue confusion or interference
with the normal traffic flow shall be submitted to the Board of
Supervisors and must be approved by the Township Engineer, who shall
make the determination by concerning himself with the adequacy of the
thoroughfare to carry the additional traffic generated by the CR
Residential District as well as to the street frontage of the proposed
district.
D. Common areas and facilities.
(1) A plan for the provision of certain facilities serving the entire
development, including but not limited to parking, interior
pedestrianways, driveways, lighting facilities, landscape planting
areas, buffers, open space and facilities and like items, is hereby
required by the Board of Supervisors. Provisions satisfactory to the
Board of Supervisors must be made for the perpetual maintenance
and care of all such common areas and facilities as well as the
perpetual maintenance of building exteriors. Adequate provisions
for such perpetual maintenance may include but shall not be
limited to condominiums, cooperatives, cross easements and
restrictions.
(2) Not less than 20% of the developable acres of the site shall be
maintained in nonvehicular common open space and shall preserve
or incorporate natural features such as woods, streams and other
amenities. Areas required for permanent detention basins for
§ 205-38 TOWING § 205-39
186:711
stormwater management control shall not be considered part of the
required open space.
(3) In addition to the above requirements, in developments with 12 or
more acres, common open space must be established which is
conveniently located for use by residents and which preserves and
protects environmentally sensitive features. The following
requirements must be met:
(a) The shape of common open space areas shall not preclude
passive and/or active recreation uses. Lands shall be deemed
appropriate for permanent common open space if they contain
any or all of the following characteristics:
[1] Lands subject to periodic flooding and delineated as
alluvial soil by the Soil Conservation Service, United
States Department of Agriculture, in the Soil Survey of
Montgomery County, 1967, including areas contained
within the Floodplain Conservation District established by
this East Norriton Township Zoning Ordinance.
[2] Lands designated as special flood hazard areas on the
Federal Insurance Administration Flood Hazard Boundary
Map of the Township of East Norriton, prepared by the
Federal Insurance Administration of the Department of
Housing and Urban Development.
[3] Lands possessing slopes in excess of 15% as delineated by
the Soil Conservation Service, United States Department
of Agriculture, in the Soil Survey of Montgomery County,
1967.
[4] Woodlands.
[5] Lands comprising the landscape entity of historic sites.
[6] Lands suitable for active recreational uses such as
baseball, football and soccer, provided that the area used
is large enough to accommodate such activity without
interfering with dwelling units, parking, driveways and
roads.
(b) Whenever possible, common open space areas shall be
designed as a continuous system of usable areas which are
interspersed among groupings of residential dwelling units
and shall be interconnected with common open space areas on
abutting parcels wherever possible.
(c) Required open space may not include areas with a horizontal
dimension less than 75 feet and shall not comprise an area
containing less than 11,000 contiguous square feet.
§ 205-39 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-39
186:712
(d) Safe and easy access to common open space areas shall be
provided either by adjoining public road frontage, public
easements or paths. To the greatest extent possible, the
common open space areas shall not extend across public and/
or private roads. Sufficient perimeter parking shall be provided
when necessary.
(e) Accessways to the common open space areas shall be
sufficiently wide so that maintenance equipment will have
convenient access to said areas.
(f) Fuel, power and other utility lines, whether underground or
overhead, shall comprise no more than 40% of the required
common open space area. Furthermore, land within utility
corridors may be used for common open space purposes only if
the utility companies possessing legal rights to these corridors
do not prohibit their use for such purposes.
(g) If land set aside and permanently preserved for common open
space is to be publicly owned, the development plan must
include by dedication, or by any other reasonable means, the
total park area at the time of filing of final plan on all or any
portion of the tract or tracts.
(h) Developments with reserved common land.
[1] If common land is reserved for private open space or
recreational use, it shall be held in corporate ownership by
the owners of the dwelling units within the development
and such other nearby landowners who may wish to
become members of the corporation (in which case the
common land may be restricted to members of the
corporation as said corporation itself may decide). The
deed, title or other legal instrument of transfer to the
owners of the dwelling units shall include a beneficial right
in the use of common land.
[2] For developments containing rental dwelling units with
common land reserved for private open space or
recreational use, the development owner (landlord) shall
provide the tenants a beneficial right in the use of the
common land.
[3] For developments containing both dwelling units for sale
and for rent with common land reserved for private open
space or recreational use, the common land shall be held
in corporate ownership by the owner of the rental dwelling
units and the owners of the individual dwelling units
within the development and such other nearby landowners
who may wish to become members of the corporation (in
which case the common land may be restricted to
members of the corporation as said corporation itself may
§ 205-39 TOWING § 205-39
186:713
§ 205-40. Submission of plan.
In districts proposed to be developed subsequent to the enactment of and in
accordance with this chapter, a general plan for the CR Residential District
shall be submitted to the Township Supervisors and shall include evidence
and facts showing that it has considered and made provision for, and the
development shall be executed in accordance with, the following essential
conditions:
decide). The deed, title or other legal instrument of
transfer to the owners of the dwelling units and the lease
for the tenants of the rental units shall include a beneficial
right in the use of the common land.
(i) The maintenance of common land for private open space or
recreational use shall be guaranteed by trust indenture
approved by the Board of Supervisors and shall be held with
the Recorder of Deeds of Montgomery County simultaneously
with the recording of the final plan of the subdivision. Such
common land shall be set aside by deed restrictions for a
minimum period of 90 years.
E. Lighting facilities. Lighting facilities shall be provided as required by
the Board of Supervisors and arranged in a manner which will protect
the highway and neighboring properties from unreasonable direct glare
or hazardous interference of any kind. Lighting facilities shall be
required where deemed necessary for the safety and convenience of the
CR Residential District and shall be installed by the developer in
districts developed subsequent to the enactment of this chapter.
F. (Reserved)185
A. The proposed development shall consider the surrounding land
features of the area, including but not limited to residences, schools,
parks, other reservations, streets and location and arrangement of
parking spaces, local and regional business areas and shopping
centers, densities proposed for surrounding areas and other such
features as shall contribute to the harmonious development of the area,
with due regard to the character of the neighborhood and its peculiar
suitability for this type of use.
B. The proposed development shall be constructed in accordance with an
overall plan and shall be designed as a unified architectural unit with
appropriate landscaping.
(1) If the development of the CR Residential District is to be carried
out in stages, each stage shall be so planned that the foregoing
185. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, pertaining to landscaping, was repealed 4-28-2009 by
Ord. No. 515. Former Subsection G, pertaining to fencing requirements, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 512. See now
§ 205-22.3.
§ 205-39 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-40
186:714
requirements and the intent of this chapter shall be fully complied
with at the completion of any stage.
(2) In districts developed subsequent to the enactment of this chapter,
the developer shall be required where possible to preserve or
incorporate natural features, such as woods, streams and open
space areas, which add to the overall cohesive development of the
CR Residential District and overall community development.
However, all conditions deemed hazardous by the East Norriton
Township Board of Supervisors, including natural feature hazards,
are to be eliminated, or all precautions deemed appropriate by the
Board of Supervisors to reduce the hazard are to be provided by the
developer.
C. The area shall be adaptable to community development, being located
in relation to major thoroughfares, streets, railroads, public
transportation, shopping or other facilities, and as far as possible shall
have within or through it no major thoroughfare or other physical
feature which will tend to destroy the neighborhood or community
cohesiveness.
D. Procedural requirements.
(1) All procedural requirements of Chapter 175, Subdivision and Land
Development, shall be adhered to.
(2) Additional information to be shown. The following information shall
be shown on plans submitted for approval in addition to those
requirements of Chapter 175, Subdivision and Land Development:
(a) The floor area (in square feet) of dwelling units.
(b) The number of bedrooms per dwelling unit.
(c) The total number of dwelling units.
(d) The total number of acres in the proposed plan.
(e) The total number of all off-street parking spaces.
(f) The exterior vertical and horizontal building dimensions.
(g) The ground area of buildings by acres and by percentage of
land coverage.
(h) The buffer area by acres and by percentage of land coverage.
(i) Areas for common use by acres and by percentage of land
coverage.
(j) Areas to be dedicated by acres and by percentage of land
coverage.
§ 205-40 TOWING § 205-40
186:715
§ 205-41. Conformity.
All construction in this district whether or not lotted, shall conform to the
requirements of the district, regardless of ownership.
E. Distance between buildings. For developments where the individual lot
requirements are not applicable under § 205-38E, and in the case of two
or more buildings, the horizontal distance between any two buildings
shall not be less than:
(1) For any two exterior facing walls, the buildings of which are
oriented front to front, front to rear or rear to rear, the minimum
distance apart shall be 50 feet.
(2) For any combination of exterior facing walls not qualifying under
Subsection E(1) stated previously, the minimum distance apart
shall be 40 feet.
§ 205-40 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-41
186:716
ARTICLE IX
HR High-Rise Residential District
§ 205-42. Permitted uses.
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for
the following purposes and no other, provided that the requirements of the
following sections are met:
§ 205-43. Development requirements.
The general plan for a high-rise apartment shall include evidence and facts
showing that it has considered and made provision for, and the development
shall be executed in accordance with, the following essential conditions:
§ 205-44. General regulations.
A. The following are the permitted uses in a High-Rise Residential District:
(1) Apartment houses or groups of apartment houses.
(2) Commercial and office uses, provided that no trade or business
shall be permitted which is noxious, hazardous or detrimental to
the proper use of the property for apartment purposes. The total
floor area of any commercial and office uses shall not exceed 10%
of the total floor area of the entire project. In the event that the
project is constructed in stages, the 10% of commercial and office
use shall be computed on fully completed stages.
(3) Playgrounds, parks, tot-lots and the other public or semipublic,
noncommercial and recreational facilities, as well as open spaces.
(4) Accessory uses in accordance with § 205-16.
(5) No-impact home-based business as defined in Article II herein.
B. Parking. Off-street automobile parking and off-street delivery-collection
facilities shall be for the sole use of the occupants of such building and
the visitors thereto.
A. The proposed development shall be constructed in accordance with an
overall plan and shall be designed as a unified architectural unit with
appropriate landscaping. If the development of the high-rise apartment
is to be carried out in stages, each stage shall be so planned that the
foregoing requirements and the intent of this chapter shall be fully
complied with at the completion of any stage. The initial stage of the
development shall comprise a total floor area of not less than 30,000
square feet.
A. Area of tract. Not less than 10 acres shall be provided for every area to
be used in whole or in part as a High-Rise Residential District.
§ 205-42 TOWING § 205-44
186:717
B. Building coverage. No more than 20% of the lot area shall be occupied
by a building or buildings.
C. Setback from street. There shall be a setback from the ultimate right-ofway
of each street on which the High-Rise Residential District abuts
which shall not be less than 100 feet in depth, provided that buildings in
excess of 60 feet in height shall provide an additional one foot of
setback for each additional one foot of height.
D. Setback from property lines. There shall be a building setback from any
property line which the High-Rise Residential District abuts, which
shall not be less than:
(1) One foot for each foot of building height, but not less than 100 feet
from any residential (except HR and HR-1) or institutional district;
or [Amended 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 512]
(2) Fifty feet from any other district.
E. Distance between buildings.
(1) In the case of two or more high-rise buildings located on the same
tract, the horizontal distance measured in feet between the corners
of the buildings shall not be less than 45 feet if there is no direct
confrontation of parallel building fronts.
(2) Between obliquely aligned structures with walls containing legally
required windows, the minimum distance shall be 50 feet or equal
to the median height of the structures confronting each other,
whichever is greater.
(3) Between end walls of structures with walls containing no legally
required windows and walls containing legally required windows,
the minimum distance shall be 45 feet or 1/2 the height of the taller
structure, whichever is greater.
(4) Between end walls of structures where said walls contain no legally
required windows, the minimum distance shall be 45 feet at any
point.
F. Parking.
(1) For apartment residential use, not less than two off-street
automobile parking spaces shall be required for each dwelling unit.
Initially, 1 1/2 spaces may be constructed, provided that the
remaining required spaces shall be provided for and shall be
constructed as is determined from time to time by the Zoning
Officer.
(2) For commercial and office use, parking provision shall be off-street,
located on the same lot and be in accordance with Article XVIII of
this chapter.
§ 205-44 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-44
186:718
(3) Any and all parking garages or decked parking structures shall not
be included as part of Subsection B, Building coverage, or
Subsection Q, Open space, as provided for in this section.
(4) Parking areas shall be placed so as not to interfere with any
recreation or service area and shall not be less than:
(a) Five feet from any nonresidential district property line to
which the High-Rise District abuts.
(b) Forty feet from any residential district property line to which
the High-Rise Residential District abuts.
(c) Twenty-five feet from the ultimate right-of-way line of any
contiguous public street.
(d) Twenty feet from any high-rise apartment building unless said
parking is located within the lines of the high-rise building
walls or in an attached parking garage.
G. Dwelling units per acre. There shall be no more than 26 dwelling units
per acre of lot area.
H. Height of building. No building shall exceed the height of 80 feet or
eight stories (exclusive of the basement), whichever is greater.
I. Paving. All areas provided for use by vehicles and all pedestrian walks
shall be constructed in accordance with all pertinent specifications
within Chapter 175, Subdivision and Land Development.
J. Service. Areas for loading and unloading of delivery trucks and other
vehicles and for the servicing of refuse collection, fuel and other service
shall be provided and shall be adequate in size and shall be so arranged
that they may be used without blockage or interference with the use of
accessways or automobile parking facilities.
K. Access. Provision shall be made for safe and efficient ingress and egress
to and from public streets and highways serving the apartment without
undue congestion to or interference with normal traffic flow.
L. Utilities. All buildings within the high-rise apartment shall be served by
a public sanitary sewage disposal system and public water supply. All
utility lines servicing the high-rise apartment shall be placed
underground.
M. Lighting facilities. Lighting facilities provided shall be arranged in a
manner which will protect the highway and neighboring properties,
whether contiguous or not, from unreasonable direct glare or
hazardous interference of any kind. Lighting facilities shall be required
where deemed necessary for the safety and convenience of high-rise
apartment residents.
§ 205-44 TOWING § 205-44
186:719
N. Fencing requirements of § 205-24 shall apply.186 In addition to the
requirements in § 205-24, a fence height up to eight feet, provided that
the material is maintenance-free such as PVC material along residential
property lines, allows an increase in height.
O. (Reserved)187
P. (Reserved)188
Q. Open space. No less than 30% of the site shall be provided and
maintained in nonvehicular open space. In addition, the developer shall
be required where possible to preserve or incorporate natural features,
such as woods, streams and open space areas, which add to the overall
cohesive development of the high-rise apartment and the overall
community development. However, all conditions deemed hazardous by
the Planning Commission, including natural feature hazards, are to be
eliminated or avoided, or all precautions deemed appropriate by the
Planning Commission to reduce the hazard are to be provided by the
developer.
R. Recreation. The developer shall give consideration to the provision of
community areas, laundry facilities, playgrounds and tot-lots and other
services necessary for the comfort and convenience of high-rise
apartment residents.
S. Unit requirements. Each dwelling unit shall contain a minimum of 450
square feet.
186. Editor's Note: Former § 205-24, Fences, was repealed 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 512. See now
§ 205-22.3.
187. Editor's Note: Former Subsection O, pertaining to landscaping, was repealed 4-28-2009 by
Ord. No. 515.
188. Editor's Note: Former Subsection P, Building performance standards, was repealed
4-28-2009 by Ord. No. 515.
§ 205-44 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-44
186:720
ARTICLE IXA
HR-1 High-Rise-1 Residential District
[Added 8-28-2007 by Ord. No. 497]
§ 205-44.1. Intent.
The following is an expansion of the statement of community development
objectives contained in Article I, § 205-3 of this chapter. It is the intent
of this article to provide for suitable locations for high-density apartmenthouse-
style residential development on compact sites of between
approximately five to 10 acres which are located with frontage along
principal arterial streets and which are located in close proximity to
employment, shopping centers, health care services, and mass transit.
§ 205-44.2. Permitted uses.
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for
the following purposes and no other, provided that the requirements of the
following sections are met:
A. The following are the permitted uses in a HR-1 High-Rise-1 Residential
District:
(1) Apartment house or group of apartment houses.
(2) Personal service shops such as beauty parlors, barber shops,
clothes cleaning pickup/drop off, snack shops not greater than 600
square feet floor area, newspaper sales, and office uses shall be
permitted on the ground floor only, or in the case where ground
floor parking is provided on the first residential floor, provided that
no trade or business shall be permitted which is noxious, hazardous
or detrimental to the proper use of the property for residential
purposes. The total floor area of personal service and office use
shall not exceed 5% of the total floor area of the entire
development. In the event that the project is constructed in stages,
the 5% of commercial and office use shall be computed on fully
completed stages.
(3) Playgrounds, parks, tot-lots, clubhouse and card rooms, and the
other public or semipublic, noncommercial recreational facilities
for the exclusive use of residents of the apartment house, as well as
open space areas.
(4) Fitness center, including physical therapy studio, limited to use by
residents of the apartment house and their invited guests, provided
the total floor area devoted to these uses does not exceed 3,000
square feet plus area for lockers and showers.
(5) Accessory uses in accordance with § 205-16.
(6) No-impact home-based business as defined in Article II herein.
§ 205-44.1 TOWING § 205-44.2
186:721
§ 205-44.3. Development requirements.
The general plan for a high-rise residential district shall be designed for
the entire tract showing that it has considered and made provision for, and
that the development shall be executed in accordance with, the following
essential conditions:
B. Parking. Off-street automobile parking and off-street delivery-collection
facilities shall be for the sole use of the occupants of such apartment
building and the visitors thereto.
A. The proposed development shall be constructed in accordance with an
overall plan and the buildings shall be designed as an unified
architectural unit with appropriate pedestrian systems, parking areas,
recreation areas, buffers and landscaping.
B. If the development of the high-rise apartment plan is to be carried out
in stages, each stage shall be so planned that the foregoing
requirements and the intent of this chapter shall be fully complied with
at the completion of any stage. The initial stage of the development
shall comprise a total floor area of not less than 30,000 square feet.
C. Plans for any apartment house development shall be submitted to the
Township prior to the issuance of any permit and such plans shall
include the following:
(1) The location, use and plan for each building or other structure, the
total gross floor area of each building, and, where applicable, the
floor area of each building to be used for personal service or
offices.
(2) Floor area (in square feet) of each type of apartment dwelling unit.
(3) Building elevations.
(4) The total number of apartment dwelling units.
(5) Total number of acres in the proposed district.
(6) Total number of off-street parking spaces.
(7) Exterior, vertical and horizontal building dimensions.
(8) Ground area coverage of each building.
(9) The location, dimensions and arrangement of all open spaces,
yards, streets, accessways, entrances, exits, off-street parking
facilities, loading and unloading spaces, pedestrian ways,
sidewalks, recreation areas and areas devoted to planting,
landscaping and other similar purposes.
(10) The capacity of all areas to be used for automobile access, parking,
loading and unloading.
§ 205-44.2 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-44.3
186:722
§ 205-44.4. General regulations.
(11) The provision made for, and location of, existing or proposed
stormwater and sanitary sewerage, water supply, exterior lighting
facilities, gas and other utilities.
(12) Information sufficient to demonstrate that satisfactory
arrangements will be made to accommodate probable increases in
traffic and to facilitate traffic movements on the streets in the
vicinity of the proposed use. These arrangements shall include
provisions for emergency access and police and fire vehicular
circulation within the district.
(13) Information sufficient to determine that the proposed plan and uses
comply in all respects with the requirements of this and all other
ordinances.
(14) All procedural and content requirements of the Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance189 shall be met, unless specifically
waived by the Board of Supervisors.
A. Minimum tract. Not less than five acres shall be provided for every lot
to be used in whole or in part as a HR-1 High-Rise-1 Residential
District.
B. Building coverage. No more than 30% of the lot area shall be occupied
by a building or buildings.
C. Dwelling units per acre. There shall be no more than 20 dwelling units
per acre of lot area.
(1) In the event that an apartment building(s) shall provide not less
than 50% of the total required parking spaces for a high-rise
apartment development plan under or within the apartment
building(s), then the overall number of dwelling units shall be
permitted at no more than 30 dwelling units per acre of lot area.
D. Height of building. No apartment house building shall be less than
three stories nor exceed the height of six stories (exclusive of the
basement but inclusive of ground floor parking, if provided under the
building) and shall in no event exceed a building height of 65 feet,
provided the maximum height to the highest appurtenance of the
building shall not exceed 75 feet.
E. Setback from street. There shall be a building setback from the ultimate
right-of-way of each street from which the HR-1 High-Rise-1 Residential
District takes regular vehicular access which shall not be less than 100
feet in depth.
189. Editor's Note: See Ch. 175, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 205-44.3 TOWING § 205-44.4
186:723
F. Setback from property lines. There shall be a building setback from any
property line which the HR-1 High-Rise-1 Residential District abuts,
which shall not be less than:
(1) From any residential district, including an adjacent High-Rise
Residential District, a setback equal to the building height of a
building constructed in the HR-1 District.
(2) From any other property line a setback of not less than 50 feet.
G. Distance between buildings and wings of same building. In the case of
two or more buildings or wings of the same building, regardless of
orientation, the horizontal distance measured in feet between any two
buildings at their nearest point shall be:
(1) Not less than 50 feet for buildings the average building height of
which is 60 feet or greater.
(2) Not less than 40 feet for buildings the average building height of
which is less than 60 feet.
(3) Not less than 35 feet between end walls of buildings where said
walls contain no legally required windows.
(4) Clubhouses and buildings used for service or recreation shall
provide a distance equal to the height of the building but shall in no
event be less than 20 feet from an adjacent building.
H. Parking.
(1) For apartment residential use, not less than two off-street
automobile parking spaces shall be required for each dwelling unit.
Initially, 1 1/2 spaces per dwelling unit may be constructed,
provided that the remaining required parking spaces and service
drives shall be engineered and identified on the approved plans and
shall be constructed as may be determined from time to time by the
Zoning Officer.
(2) For personal service and office use, parking provision shall be offstreet,
located on the same lot and be in accordance with Article
XVIII of this chapter.
(3) Parking garages or decked parking structures shall not be included
in the calculation of Subsection B, Building coverage, unless
physically contained within the apartment building.
(4) Parking areas not part of a building or structure shall be placed so
as not to interfere with any recreation or service area and shall not
be less than:
(a) Seventy-five feet from the ultimate right-of-way line of a street
from which the apartment house development takes regular
vehicular access.
§ 205-44.4 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-44.4
186:724
(b) Fifteen feet from any nonresidential district property line to
which the HR-1 High-Rise-1 District abuts. This may be
reduced to not less than 10 feet, provided the requirements of
§ 205-44.4H(4)(f) herein shall apply along the property line.
(c) Forty feet from any residential district property line to which
the HR-1 High-Rise-1 Residential District abuts. This may be
reduced to not less than 25 feet, provided the requirements of
§ 205-44.4H(4)(f) herein shall apply along the property line.
(d) Twenty-five feet from the ultimate right-of-way line of any
contiguous public street from which regular vehicular access is
not taken. This may be reduced to not less than 15 feet,
provided the requirements of § 205-44.4H(4)(f) herein shall
apply along the property line.
(e) Ten feet from any high-rise apartment building unless said
parking is located within the lines of the high-rise building
walls or in an attached parking garage.
(f) Where authorized above, a high-intensity-type buffer in
accordance with Chapter 175, Subdivision and Land
Development, shall be provided in conjunction with a solid
masonry wall having a minimum height of four feet above
parking elevation. Parking facilities which are depressed below
the finish grade determined at the property line may substitute
equally for part of/all of the masonry wall requirement. In no
event shall the finish grade of parking be greater than one foot
in elevation above existing grade, as determined at the
property line, otherwise this subsection shall not be applicable
and the reduced setbacks shall not be permitted.
I. Paving. All areas provided for use by vehicles and all pedestrian walks
shall be constructed in accordance with all pertinent specifications
within Chapter 175, Subdivision and Land Development.
J. Service. Areas for loading and unloading of delivery trucks and other
vehicles and for the servicing of refuse collection, fuel and other service
shall be provided and shall be adequate in size and shall be so arranged
that they may be used without blockage or interference with the use of
accessways or automobile parking facilities.
K. Access. Provision shall be made for safe and efficient ingress and egress
to and from public streets and highways without undue congestion to or
interference with normal traffic flow.
L. Utilities. All buildings shall be served by a public sanitary sewage
disposal system and public water supply. All utility lines servicing the
high-rise apartment house shall be placed underground.
M. Lighting facilities. Lighting facilities provided shall be arranged in a
manner which will protect the highway and neighboring properties,
§ 205-44.4 TOWING § 205-44.4
186:725
whether contiguous or not, from direct or indirect glare or hazardous
interference of any kind. Lighting facilities shall be required where
deemed necessary for the safety and convenience of high-rise
apartment residents. No freestanding light fixture shall exceed a
mounting height of 25 feet above ground elevation.
(1) Techniques to minimize the impact of illumination on adjacent
properties shall include, but not be limited to, the selection and
location of lighting fixtures, use of full cut-offs and timed lighting.
(2) All lighting shall be directed away from adjacent residential uses
and districts.
(3) Freestanding light fixtures shall be located at least 25 feet from the
boundary of residential uses and districts.
(4) Pedestrian-scaled walkway lighting shall be provided where
necessary for the safety of the residents, as may be required by the
Township.
N. Fencing requirements of §§ 205-24190 and 205-44N shall apply.
O. (Reserved)191
P. Building performance standards. All building and construction
specifications shall be in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Construction Code Act.192 Requirements of the Township Fire Code
must be incorporated into the buildings and the site.193
Q. Open space. No less than 35% of the lot area shall be maintained in
nonvehicular pervious open space. In addition, the development plan
shall be required where possible to preserve or incorporate natural
features, such as woodlands, streams and open space areas, which add
to the overall cohesive development of the high-rise apartment
development and the overall community development.
(1) Open space which shall provide at least three of the following
features shall not be considered pervious for purposes of this
section:
(a) Outdoor furniture.
(b) Outdoor seating walls.
(c) Landscaped planters.
(d) Fountain.
190. Editor's Note: Former § 205-24, Fences, was repealed 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 512. See now
§ 205-22.3.
191. Editor's Note: Former Subsection O, pertaining to buffer and landscaping requirements,
was repealed 4-28-2009 by Ord. No. 515.
192. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 7210.101 et seq.
193. Editor's Note: See Ch. 95, Fire Prevention.
§ 205-44.4 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-44.4
186:726
(e) Public art.
(f) Gazebo.
(g) Decorative paving, including brick, stone and/or stamped and
colored concrete.
R. Recreation. The development plan shall give consideration to the
provision of community areas, playgrounds, tot-lots and other services
necessary for the comfort and convenience of high-rise apartment
house residents. Not less than 75 square feet of recreation space for
each dwelling unit shall be dedicated to active and passive recreation.
S. Dwelling unit requirements. Each dwelling unit shall contain a
minimum of 650 square feet of floor area.
T. Trash and refuse areas, HVAC units, and loading areas shall be visually
and acoustically screened from public rights-of-ways and surrounding
properties:
(1) Refuse areas shall be screened and shall be located at least 75 feet
from the property line of an adjacent residential use or district.
(2) Refuse areas shall be centrally located for the use of tenants. Every
day trash and garbage refuse stations shall be located within the
apartment house building or parking structure.
§ 205-44.4 TOWING § 205-44.4
186:727

ARTICLE X
RP Residential and Professional District
§ 205-45. Intent. [Amended 10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 566]
In expansion of the statement of community development objectives
contained in Article I, § 205-3, of this chapter, it is hereby declared to be
the intent of this article with respect to the RP Residential and Professional
District to allow for small-scale professional and business offices adjacent
to and within residential areas, which would be compatible with such
residential uses. Specifically, it is the intent of this article to:
§ 205-46. Permitted uses. [Amended 10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 566]
The following uses are permitted in the RP Residential and Professional
District and no other:
A. Encourage small-scale professional or business offices in existing
residential structures, especially occupant-operated offices.
B. Encourage the use of existing structures, now or lately used as
residences, and discourage the demolition of such structures.
C. Discourage significant exterior alterations for existing structures.
D. Encourage the preservation of the residential character of the district.
E. Provide for services generally useful to and in harmony with residential
neighborhoods.
A. Single-family detached dwellings and accessory uses in accordance
with § 205-16B.
B. General office uses: offices for lawyers, architects, engineers, insurance
agents, brokers, real estate, financial services or other professional,
educational or business offices which do not involve the actual storage,
exchange or delivery of equipment, goods or merchandise on the
premises.
(1) The use shall be carried on wholly indoors and within the principal
building.
(2) There shall be no use of show windows or displays visible outside
the premises to attract customers or clients.
C. Veterinary office for the treatment of domestic animals, provided that
boarding is prohibited.
D. Medical office for medical or dental examination or treatment of
persons as outpatients.
E. Barbershops, hair salons and massage therapist businesses.
F. Group day-care homes.
§ 205-45 TOWING § 205-46
186:729
§ 205-47. Conditional uses.
§ 205-48. General regulations.
For all authorized buildings and uses, the following regulations shall apply:
§ 205-49. Development requirements.
G. Day-care centers.
H. No-impact home-based businesses, as defined in Article II herein.
I. Accessory uses on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any of
the above permitted uses, including one dwelling unit, provided that
such use shall be located at or above the second story.
J. Studios for instruction and the production of music and the arts.
A. The following uses are permitted in the RP Residential and Professional
District when authorized as conditional uses by the Board of
Supervisors.
(1) Office uses which are similar to those of § 205-46B and C above.
B. In addition to all regulations pertaining to permitted uses, conditional
use uses shall meet the following provisions:
(1) The proposed use will not attract larger volumes of traffic than the
permitted uses would.
(2) Anticipated noise and congestion created by the use will be
comparable to the levels created by the permitted uses.
(3) Proposed uses shall comply with § 205-22 of this chapter.
A. Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width at the building line: 80 feet.
C. Front yard: 30 feet.
D. Side yard: 10 feet minimum per side; 30 feet minimum aggregate.
E. Rear yard: 25 feet.
F. Maximum height: 35 feet for a principal building; 20 feet for an
accessory building.
G. All lots in an RP Zoning District must be served by a sanitary sewer.194
194. Editor's Note: Former Subsection H, pertaining to fencing requirements, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 512. See now
§ 205-22.3.
§ 205-46 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-49
186:730
§ 205-50. Lighting standards.
Lighting standards shall comply with § 205-66H.
§ 205-51. Signs.
Signs in the RP Residential and Professional District shall comply with
the provisions of Article XIX. Where the RP District is not specifically
mentioned, the provisions regulating residential districts shall apply to it.
§ 205-52. Parking and access driveways.
Parking and access driveways will meet the following minimum standards:
A. A use shall utilize an existing building for its purposes, or it will be of a
similar architectural design and scale to nearby existing development.
[Amended 10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 566]
B. The maximum building coverage shall be 20% of the lot area.
C. The maximum total impervious coverage shall be 70% of the lot area,
including building coverage.
A. Parking setback. Parking spaces, areas and driveways serving the
spaces shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from rear property lines
and five feet from side property lines unless common parking is shared
with one or more abutting lots, in which case parking may abut or cross
the property lines shared by the common users.
B. When an access driveway is shared by two or more lots, the following
standards shall apply:
(1) The driveway may be located along or straddling the common
boundary of the lots.
(2) The driveway shall be a minimum width of 24 feet and shall have a
minimum three-foot planting strip along both sides.
(3) When a shared driveway is used:
(a) Access easements and maintenance agreements or other
suitable legal mechanisms shall be provided, acceptable to the
Township Solicitor.
(b) Liability safeguards for all property owners and lessees served
by the shared access shall be guaranteed to the satisfaction of
the Township Solicitor.
(c) Parking will be provided in accordance with Article XVIII.
(d) Each lot will be permitted no more than one curb cut for
vehicular access, with the balance of the frontage to a depth of
five feet from the ultimate right-of-way being maintained as a
§ 205-49 TOWING § 205-52
186:731
§ 205-53. Planting strips.
Landscaping, including conservation of existing trees and woodlands, street
trees, stormwater basin landscaping and site element screens, shall be
provided in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 175, Subdivision and
Land Development.
§ 205-54. (Reserved)195
planting strip. However, such planting strip shall not interfere
with vehicular sight distance.
195. Editor's Note: Former § 205-54, Ingress and egress, was repealed 12-23-2008 by Ord. No.
512.
§ 205-52 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-54
186:732
ARTICLE XA
RO Residential Office District
§ 205-54.1. Intent. [Amended 10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 566]
In expansion of the statement of community development objectives
contained in Article I, § 205-3, of this chapter, it is hereby declared to be
the intent of this article with respect to the RO Residential Office District
to allow for small-scale professional and business offices adjacent to and
within residential areas which would be compatible with such residential
uses. Specifically, it is the intent of this article to:
§ 205-54.2. Permitted uses. [Amended 10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 566]
The following uses are permitted in the RO Residential Office District and
no other:
A. Encourage small-scale professional or business offices in existing
residential structures that are located on major roadways.
B. Encourage the use of existing structures, now or lately used as
residences, and discourage the demolition of such structures.
C. Discourage significant exterior alterations for existing structures.
D. Encourage the preservation of the residential character of the district.
E. Provide for services generally useful to and in harmony with residential
neighborhoods.
F. Encourage the use of shared or common driveways and parking.
A. Single-family detached dwellings and accessory uses in accordance
with § 205-16B.
B. Two-family detached dwellings.
C. General office uses: offices for lawyers, architects, engineers, insurance
agents, brokers, real estate, financial services or other professional,
educational or business offices which do not involve the actual storage,
exchange or delivery of equipment, goods or merchandise on the
premises.
(1) The use shall be carried on wholly indoors and within the principal
building.
(2) There shall be no use of show windows or displays visible outside
the premises to attract customers or clients.
D. Medical office for medical or dental examination or treatment of
persons as outpatients.
E. Veterinary office for the treatment of domestic animals, provided that
boarding is prohibited.
§ 205-54.1 TOWING § 205-54.2
186:733
§ 205-54.3. Conditional uses.
§ 205-54.4. General regulations.
For all authorized buildings and uses, the following regulations shall apply:
§ 205-54.5. Development requirements.
F. Studios for instruction and the production of music and the arts.
G. Barbershops, hair salons and massage therapist businesses.
H. No-impact home-based businesses, as defined in Article II herein.
A. The following uses are permitted in the RO Residential Office District
when authorized as conditional uses by the Board of Supervisors: uses
which are similar to those in § 205-54.2 above. [Amended 10-27-2015
by Ord. No. 566]
B. In addition to all regulations pertaining to permitted uses, conditional
uses shall meet the following provisions:
(1) The proposed use will not attract larger volumes of traffic than the
permitted uses would.
(2) Anticipated noise and congestion created by the use will be
comparable to the levels created by the permitted uses.
(3) Proposed uses shall comply with § 205-22 of this chapter.
A. Minimum lot area. All lots in an RO Residential Office Zoning District
shall have a minimum of 20,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width at the building line: 100 feet.
C. Front yard: 50 feet.
D. Side yard: 20 feet minimum per side, except where an RO Zoning
District abuts a residential district, then the side yard shall be
increased to 30 feet, including a ten-foot landscaped buffer.
E. Rear yard: 100 feet.
F. Maximum height: 35 feet for a principal building; 20 feet for an
accessory building. Only one accessory building is permitted per lot.
A. A use must utilize an existing building for its purposes unless a
conditional use approval has been granted by the East Norriton
Township Board of Supervisors.
B. The maximum building coverage shall be 15% of the total lot area.
C. The maximum total impervious coverage, including the building
coverage, shall be 30%.
§ 205-54.2 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-54.5
186:734
§ 205-54.6. Lighting standards.
Lighting facilities shall be of a residential nature and be arranged in such a
manner so as to protect the highway and neighboring properties, whether
contiguous or not, from casting glare, direct light or hazardous interference
of any kind.
§ 205-54.7. Signs.
Signs in the RO Residential Office District shall comply with the provisions
of Article XIX. Where the RO District is not specifically mentioned, the
provisions regulating residential districts shall apply.
§ 205-54.8. Parking and access driveways.
Parking and access driveways will meet the following minimum standards:
D. Where a use, other than a residential use, in this district abuts a singlefamily
residential use or district, the applicant shall install a landscaped
planting strip a minimum of 10 feet in width in accordance with
§ 205-54.9 of this article.196
A. Parking setback. Parking spaces, areas and driveways serving the
spaces shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from the rear property
line and 10 feet from the side property line, except in the case of shared
access driveways or common parking shared by one or more abutting
lots, in which case parking may abut or cross the property lines shared
by the common users. No parking, either paved or unpaved, shall be
permitted in the front yard of an RO District.
B. When an access driveway is shared by two or more lots, the following
standards shall apply:
(1) The driveway may be located along or straddling the common
boundary of the lots.
(2) The driveway shall be a minimum width of 16 feet and shall have a
minimum five-foot planting strip along both sides.
(3) When a shared driveway is used:
(a) Access easements and maintenance agreements or other
suitable legal mechanisms shall be provided which are
acceptable to the Township Solicitor.
(b) Parking will be provided in accordance with Article XVIII of
this Chapter 205, Zoning.
196. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, pertaining to fencing requirements, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 512. See now
§ 205-22.3.
§ 205-54.5 TOWING § 205-54.8
186:735
§ 205-54.9. Planting strips.
Landscaping, including conservation of existing trees and woodlands, street
trees, stormwater basin landscaping and site element screens, shall be
provided in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 175, Subdivision and
Land Development.197
(c) Each lot will be permitted no more than one curb cut for
vehicular access, with the balance of the frontage to a depth of
five feet from the ultimate right-of-way being maintained as a
green buffer strip. However, such green buffer strip shall not
interfere with vehicular sight distance.
197. Editor's Note: Former § 205-54.10, Ingress and egress, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 512.
§ 205-54.8 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-54.9
186:736
ARTICLE XI
IN Institutional District
§ 205-55. Regulations to apply.
In an IN Institutional District, the following regulations shall apply.
§ 205-56. Permitted uses.
A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot or premises may be
used for any of the following purposes and no other:
A. Churches, chapels or other places of worship and their adjunct
residential dwellings.
B. Public and private schools: elementary, junior high, high, colleges and
universities.
C. Mental, medical and surgical hospitals or clinics and sanatoriums.
D. Institutional headquarters for educational, fraternal, professional,
religious and other nonprofit organizations of a similar nature.
E. Governmental purposes.
F. Agriculture and forestry.
G. Noncommercial recreational facilities and open space preservation
areas.
H. Cemeteries.
I. Nonprofit or for-profit institutions for the care of the aged or children,
when so determined or designated by the proper regulatory authorities
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the federal government.
J. Accessory uses as defined in § 205-16. In addition, the following
additional accessory uses shall be permitted for hospital use which may
be located either within the hospital or in separate buildings:
[Amended 3-10-2008 by Ord. No. 505]
(1) Medical office building(s) which may be used by medical staff and
physicians for out-patient services and administration, executive
and professional uses, the normal attributes of which do not involve
the actual storage, warehousing, exchange or delivery of
merchandise on the premises.
(2) Fitness center limited to patients, occupants of temporary living
quarters, employees and medical staff.
(3) Temporary living quarters limited to family members and visitors of
patients, medical staff, physicians and employees directly affiliated
with the hospital operation.
§ 205-55 TOWING § 205-56
186:737
(4) Pharmacy limited to use by patients, visitors of patients,
employees, and medical staff.
(5) Day-care center specifically limited to use by patients, visitors of
patients, employees, and medical staff.
(6) Cafeteria specifically limited to use by patients, visitors of patients,
employees, and medical staff.
(7) Gift shop specifically limited to use by patients, visitors of patients,
employees, and medical staff.
(8) Helipad limited to emergency use for transporting physicians,
emergency medical technician personnel and/or patients for
critical care events subject to the following requirements:
(a) Outbound transport paths of the helicopter, once the patient or
physician has been delivered to the hospital and stabilized, will
not be over residential neighborhoods. Inbound transport
paths of physicians will not be over residential neighborhoods.
Except in the case of the transport of a critically ill patient,
inbound paths of patients will not be over residential
neighborhoods.
(b) The helipad must be at least 400 square feet or a circle with a
sixty-foot diameter and shall be paved, level and maintained
dirt free. Rooftop helipads shall be free of all loose stone and
aggregate.
(c) At least two approach lanes shall be provided and maintained
free of obstructions and shall be located not less than 90°
apart. Each approach lane shall be located within 45° left or
right of the prevailing winds and shall fan out at an angle of
10° from the width of the helipad to a width of 1,000 feet and
shall have a glide angle slope of eight to one measured from
the outer edge of the helipad.
(d) Clear area for emergency landings of the helicopter in the
event of mechanical failure shall be available. These
emergency landing areas shall be located within the normal
glide range of the helicopter with one engine off when
operating in the approved takeoff or landing lane from the
helipad.
(e) The helipad shall be permitted on the roof of a building or on
the ground adjacent thereto. When the helipad is on the roof of
a building, it shall be set back 350 feet or four times the height
of the hospital, whichever is greater, from any residential
zoning district. When the helipad is on the ground, it shall be
set back at least 250 feet from any residential zoning district.
§ 205-56 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-56
186:738
§ 205-57. Special exception uses.
The following uses are permitted when authorized as special exceptions:
§ 205-58. Regulations applicable to hospital use on properties
having 50 acres or greater. [Amended 3-10-2008 by Ord. No. 505]
(f) In addition to the requirements of the Township, a helipad shall
comply with the rules and regulations pertaining thereto of the
Bureau of Aviation, Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation and the Federal Aviation Administration.
(g) The helipad shall not be used before the aforementioned state
and federal agencies have approved the use of the helipad.
K. Day-care centers.
L. Wireless telecommunications facilities, subject to Article XXIX of this
chapter. [Added 2-25-2014 by Ord. No. 550]
M. Municipal uses and police stations.198 [Added 10-27-2015 by Ord.
No. 566]
N. Fire stations and ambulance stations that are occupied by a provider
designated by the East Norriton Township Board of Supervisors to
provide fire or ambulance service to East Norriton Township.199 [Added
10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 566]
A. Golf courses, excluding driving ranges and miniature golf courses.
A. All regulations of § 205-59, General regulations, shall apply except as
specifically modified below.
B. Green area. A minimum of 35% of the lot area shall be maintained as
green area.
C. Height regulation. The maximum building height of any building or
structure shall be 85 feet.
D. Yard requirements adjacent to residential districts. The minimum depth
of all yards adjacent to a residential district shall be equal to a distance
not less than twice the height of the building calculated to its highest
elevation, but in no event less than 100 feet.
E. Parking area setback adjacent to residential districts. Parking areas
shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from a residential district
boundary line.
198. Editor's Note: Subsections M and N were originally enacted as Subsections L and M but
were renumbered to accommodate an existing Subsection L.
199. Editor's Note: Subsections M and N were originally enacted as Subsections L and M but
were renumbered to accommodate an existing Subsection L.
§ 205-56 TOWING § 205-59
186:739
§ 205-59. General regulations.
For all authorized buildings and uses, the following regulations shall apply:
A. Lot area. There shall be a minimum lot area of at least two acres.
B. Building area. No more than 40% of the lot area shall be occupied by
buildings.
C. Height regulation. The maximum height of any building shall be 55 feet.
D. Front yard. The minimum depth of a front yard shall be 100 feet
measured from the ultimate right-of-way line of the street on which the
building fronts.
E. Side yard. For each building, there shall be two side yards of not less
than 40 feet.
F. Rear yard. There shall be established for each building a rear yard of at
least 50 feet.
G. Parking. All off-street parking and loading areas shall be provided for in
accordance with Article XVIII of this chapter. Parking areas shall not be
closer to any building than 20 feet. Parking areas shall be removed at
least 20 feet from all district and property lines and shall be landscaped
according to the provisions of Chapter 175, Subdivision and Land
Development.
H. Signs. Signs shall be permitted only in accordance with the provisions
of Article XIX of this chapter.
I. Lighting. Lighting facilities shall be arranged in a manner which will
protect the highway and neighboring properties, whether contiguous or
not, from unreasonable direct glare or hazardous interference of any
kind.
J. Width requirement. The minimum width at the building line shall be
150 feet.
K. Landscaping, including conservation of existing trees and woodlands,
street trees, stormwater basin landscaping and site element screens,
shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 175,
Subdivision and Land Development.200
200. Editor's Note: Former Subsection L, pertaining to fencing requirements, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 512. See now
§ 205-22.3.
§ 205-59 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-59
186:740
ARTICLE XII
BP Business and Professional District
§ 205-60. Regulations to apply.
In a BP Business and Professional District, the following regulations shall
apply.
§ 205-61. Permitted uses. [Amended 10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 566]
A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot or premises may be
used for any of the following purposes and no other:
A. General office uses: offices for lawyers, architects, engineers, insurance
agents, brokers, or other professional, educational or business offices
which do not involve the actual storage, exchange or delivery of
merchandise on the premises.
(1) The use shall be carried on wholly indoors and within the principal
building.
B. Studios for instruction and the production of music and the arts.
C. Banks or other financial institutions.
D. Radio and television broadcasting, including studios and offices.
E. Day-care centers.
F. Veterinary office for the treatment of domestic animals, provided that
boarding is prohibited.
G. Medical office for medical or dental examination or treatment of
persons as outpatients.
H. Fire stations and ambulance stations that are occupied by a provider
designated by the East Norriton Township Board of Supervisors to
provide fire or ambulance service to East Norriton Township.
I. The following uses when limited to the first floor of a multistory
building:
(1) Retail store: stores engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the
general public for personal or household consumption, including,
without limitation, the sale of antiques, books, gifts, garden
supplies, hardware, household appliances and electronics, jewelry,
notions, periodicals, stationery, tobacco, paint, wearing apparel,
food, beverages, and other similar goods; and rendering services
incidental to the sale of such goods.
(2) Service business: establishments engaged in providing services
involving the care of a person or apparel, such as barber,
beautician, massage therapist business, laundry and dry-cleaning,
shoe repair, or tailor. A service business shall not include psychic
§ 205-60 TOWING § 205-61
186:741
§ 205-62. Conditional uses.
The following uses are permitted when authorized as conditional uses:
§ 205-63. General regulations.
For all authorized buildings and uses, the following regulations shall apply:
readings, massage parlors, body piercing, branding, or tattooing of
persons, all of which are defined and regulated herein as limited
personal service (§ 205-22.4).
(3) Fast-casual restaurants.
A. Undertaking establishments.
B. Accessory uses on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any of
the above permitted uses, including dwellings.
A. Lot area. There shall be a minimum lot area of 30,000 square feet.
B. Building area. No more than 30% of the lot area shall be occupied by
buildings.
C. Building setback from streets. There shall be setback from the ultimate
right-of-way of 50 feet.
D. Side yard. Side yards shall be 20 feet each, except where a BP Business
and Professional District abuts any residential or institutional district,
and then the side yard which abuts the other district shall be increased
to 25 feet.
E. Rear yard. Rear yards shall be 50 feet deep.
F. Height regulation. The maximum height of any building or structure
shall be 35 feet.
G. Parking. Off-street parking and loading areas shall be provided in
accordance with Article XVIII of this chapter.
H. Lighting. Lighting facilities shall be arranged in a manner which will
protect the highway and neighboring properties, whether contiguous or
not, from direct glare or hazardous interference of any kind.
I. Signs. Signs shall be permitted only in accordance with provisions of
Article XIX of this chapter.
J. Width requirement. The minimum width at the building line shall be
100 feet.
K. Landscaping, including conservation of existing trees and woodlands,
street trees, stormwater basin landscaping and site element screens,
shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 175,
Subdivision and Land Development.201
§ 205-61 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-63
186:742
201. Editor's Note: Former Subsection L, pertaining to fencing requirements, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 512. See now
§ 205-22.3.
§ 205-63 TOWING § 205-63
186:743

ARTICLE XIIA
EC Executive Campus District
§ 205-63.1. Intent.
The following is an expansion of the statement of community development
objectives contained in Article I, § 205-3, of this chapter. It is the intent of
this article to provide for offices in a campus setting with certain compatible
commercial uses in districts of at least 10 acres and having at least 800 feet
of frontage along a principal arterial street. Furthermore, it is the intent of
this article to:
§ 205-63.2. Regulations to apply.
In any EC Executive Campus District, the following regulations shall apply.
§ 205-63.3. Permitted uses. [Amended 2-25-2014 by Ord. No. 550;
10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 566]
A building or buildings may be erected, altered or used and a lot may
be occupied for the following purposes or combination of the following
purposes and no other, provided that the requirements of the following
sections are met:
A. Establish standards and certain limitations which encourage orderly
and planned development of an architecturally harmonious office
campus while prohibiting incompatible uses and minimizing community
impact.
B. Provide employment centers in close proximity to existing and future
commercial and residential developments to reduce commuting
distance for the workforce and minimize traffic impact as well as to
enhance the community tax base.
C. Ensure that residential and institutional neighbors will be buffered
against the Executive Campus District and prevent encroachment upon
existing highways by the use of setbacks and encourage the
preservation of natural features and existing foliage.
D. Encourage efficiency from shared planned parking and shared
driveways through the use of an internal driveway network in order to
eliminate uncontrolled access to exterior streets and to reduce
excessive impervious surfaces.
A. The following are the permitted uses in an Executive Campus District:
(1) Offices for administration, executive, business, medical, veterinary,
professional, sales, data processing, financial institutions, research
and other uses of the same general character, including insurance
and real estate offices, the normal attributes of which do not
involve the actual bulk warehousing, exchange or delivery of
inventory on the premises.
§ 205-63.1 TOWING § 205-63.3
186:745
(2) Municipal or governmental offices; educational or conference
center uses.
(3) Educational and academic institutions and studios for instruction
and the production of music and other arts.
(4) Communications broadcasting studios and offices.
(5) Cafeterias, when allied with and contained within permitted office
uses.
(6) Retail uses as follows:
(a) Retail sales when contained within the confines of permitted
office buildings, parking garages or hotels. The total gross
floor area of retail uses permitted by this subsection shall not
exceed 10% of the total gross floor area approved for the entire
executive campus development. In the event that the project is
constructed in phases, the 10% of retail use shall be computed
on fully completed phases.
(b) Retail sales and/or a combination of retail sales and other uses
that are permitted in the Executive Campus district, provided
that the retail sales component shall be limited to a maximum
floor area of 15,000 square feet and that such retail sales is
limited confined to one building in the Executive Campus
District.
(7) Hotels with lodging accommodations of 100 or more rooms,
provided that not more than two such hotel facilities shall be
permitted within any EC District. Hotel restaurants and lounges
shall be exempt from the 10% calculation when located within the
hotel.
(8) Day-care centers and nursery schools, provided that any
mandatory state licensing requirements are met.
(9) Off-street automobile parking facilities.
(10) Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the above
permitted uses.
(11) Full-service restaurants and fast-casual restaurants.
(12) Apartment house or group of apartment houses and related
amenities, including, but not limited to, a fitness center, swimming
pool, and/or community room, provided that such amenities are
designated for use by the residents and guests of the apartment
house(s) and that the apartment houses are a minimum of four
stories in height. A maximum of two apartment houses shall be
permitted in the Executive Campus District.
B. The following uses are permitted by conditional use:
§ 205-63.3 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-63.3
186:746
§ 205-63.4. Development requirements.
The plan for the development of an Executive Campus District shall include
evidence and facts showing that it has considered and made provision for,
and the development shall be executed in accordance with, the following
essential conditions:
§ 205-63.5. General regulations.
(1) A building in excess of eight stories or 110 feet but not exceeding
12 stories or 160 feet, whichever is less, subject to additional
conditions contained within this article.
A. A proposed development shall be constructed in accordance with an
overall preliminary subdivision and land development plan for the
entire site and shall be designed as a unified architectural unit with
appropriate landscaping. If the development of the executive campus is
to be constructed in phases, each phase shall be so planned that the
foregoing requirements and the intent of this chapter shall be fully
complied with at the completion of any phase. The initial phase of the
development shall comprise a total floor area of not less than 30,000
square feet.
B. A subdivision or land development plan which has been granted final
approval by the Board of Supervisors for a proposed development in the
EC District may not be altered without the approval of the Board of
Supervisors. In order to be considered for subdivision for the sole
purpose of facilitating secured financing and subsequent exemption
from setback, coverage, area of tract/open space and fee requirements,
a development in the EC District must provide documentation
satisfactory to the Board of Supervisors and the Township Solicitor
assuring the appropriate covenants are recorded against the affected
parcels requiring all parcels to be operated and maintained in good
order and repair, in a clean and sanitary condition, uniform with the
appearance and maintenance of the Executive Campus District complex
and providing appropriate covenants for driveways, accessways and
easements for shared facilities and improvements.
A. Area of tract. Not less than 10 acres shall be provided for every area to
be used, in whole or in part, as an Executive Campus District.
B. Street frontage. There shall be frontage on at least two public roads,
one of which shall be not less than 800 feet on a four-lane highway
which is classified as a principal arterial street.
C. Building coverage. No more than 20% of the gross lot area shall be
occupied by buildings or structures. The total floor area when divided
by the gross lot area shall not exceed 70%.
D. Building and structure setback.
§ 205-63.3 TOWING § 205-63.5
186:747
(1) Setback from street. The required minimum setback from the
ultimate right-of-way of each street on which an Executive Campus
District abuts shall be at least 100 feet.
(2) Setback from property lines. There shall be a minimum setback
from any property line which the Executive Campus District abuts,
which shall not be less than:
(a) One hundred feet from any residential or institutional district,
except that banks, restaurants, day-care centers and nursery
school uses not exceeding 30 feet in height shall be required to
maintain a setback of 50 feet from residentially zoned property.
(b) Fifty feet from any other district.
E. Additional building and structure setbacks.
(1) Beginning at the minimum required building and structure setback
line, there shall be imposed additional setbacks as follows:
(a) Buildings having a height of not greater than four stories or 55
feet, whichever is less, and structures having a height of not
greater than 55 feet above grade shall be permitted
throughout the balance of the site except as may be further
restricted under Subsection F below, entitled "Parking."
(b) Buildings and structures having a height greater than four
stories or 55 feet shall be subject to additional setbacks as
follows:
[1] For each additional one foot in height above 55 feet, there
shall be added four feet to the required horizontal setback
in addition to the minimum setback previously established.
[2] In the case of a building having a building height of six
stories or less adjacent to a principal arterial street and
principally uses as a hotel, the additional setbacks
required in Subsection E(1)(b)[1] above shall be measured
from the geometric center of the building. The portion of
the building extending into the additional setback
established above shall be positioned so that no perimeter
building wall shall be at an angle less than 30° when
measured from the ultimate right-of-way line of the
adjacent street.
(c) This formula of four feet additional setback for each one foot in
building height above 55 feet shall be applied across the site
until a building reaches a height of eight stories or 110 feet,
whichever is less; this shall be the building height ceiling
(BHC).
F. Parking.
§ 205-63.5 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-63.5
186:748
(1) For all permitted uses, off-street parking shall be provided for and
located within the development at the rate of not less than 3.25
parking spaces per every 1,000 square feet of floor area, except in
the case of an apartment house or group of apartment houses and
related amenities, which shall require 1.5 parking spaces for each
apartment or unit, and except in the case of a hotel, which shall
require 1.25 parking spaces for each hotel room or suite, which
shall include all ancillary services of the hotel. In the event that a
hotel provides for rooms or suites only and may include common
dining facilities limited to hotel overnight guests only, such as a
coffee or breakfast shop, then parking may be permitted at the
ratio of one parking space per room or suite when authorized as a
conditional use. [Amended 12-13-2016 by Ord. No. 570]
(2) Upon request of the Township Board of Supervisors, and when
agreed to by the applicant, up to 20% of the required parking
spaces may be held in reserve and devoted to landscaping at
locations which shall be determined by the Board, in addition to the
requirements of Subsection Q of this § 205-63.5. The reserve area
shall be paved if the applicant so elects, or if directed by the Board.
In the event that the applicant or the then current owner should fail
to construct the reserve parking when directed by the Township,
the applicant or owner shall be subject to the penalties set forth in
this chapter of the Code for violation of provisions of this chapter
and shall further be liable for the payment of the Township's costs
of enforcement, including but not limited to attorney's fees.
(3) Aboveground parking structures or decked parking facilities shall
not be located less than 250 feet from a district boundary line
adjacent to an AR or BR Residential District.
(4) Parking or paved areas shall be placed so as not to interfere with
any service or emergency access area and shall not be less than:
(a) Forty feet from any residential or institutional district property
line to which the Executive Campus District abuts.
(b) Ten feet from any nonresidential district property line to which
the executive campus abuts.
(c) Fifteen feet from the ultimate right-of-way line of any
contiguous public street.
(d) Twenty feet from any building unless said parking is located
within the lines of the building or in an attached parking
structure.
(5) Not less than 5% of the total lot area devoted to parking facilities
shall consist of interior parking lot landscaping, except that this
shall not apply to parking structures. The area of interior parking
for landscaping may be included as nonvehicular open space as
required in § 205-63.5Q, Open space. The ends of each row of
§ 205-63.5 TOWING § 205-63.5
186:749
parking shall contain landscaped islands not less than the size of a
parking space.
G. Height of buildings and structures.
(1) No building shall exceed the height of eight stories or 110 feet,
whichever is less (exclusive of the basement). However, one
building in excess of eight stories or 110 feet, to a maximum of 12
stories or 160 feet, whichever is less (exclusive of the basement),
may be permitted only when authorized as a conditional use.
(2) No structure, other than a building, including parking decks or
garages shall exceed the height of 55 feet, exclusive of the
basement.
(3) When approved by a conditional use and subject to the conditions
listed below, one building within the Executive Campus District
may extend above the building height ceiling (BHC) to a maximum
of 12 stories or 160 feet, whichever is less, above ground elevation.
(a) The building area penetrating the BHC shall not exceed 2% of
the total area (1/10 of the maximum building and structure
coverage permitted within the executive campus
development).
(b) When any portion of a building exceeds eight stories or 110
feet in height, then the floor area of each story eight stories or
110 feet shall be reduced by not less than 8% of the floor area
of the preceding story below.
(c) Existing healthy vegetation and woodland adjacent to
residential and institutional districts shall be preserved and
protected along the entire property line for a minimum width
of not less than 40 feet.
(4) Fencing requirements of § 205-24 shall apply.202
H. All buildings shall have fire protection in accordance with the East
Norriton Township Fire and Building Codes in effect at the time of
construction.
I. Distance between buildings. The minimum distance between buildings
shall be at least 75 feet. The minimum does not apply to parking
structures or decked parking.
J. Signs. Notwithstanding Article XIX, Signs, of this chapter, in the EC
Executive Campus District, signs shall be permitted subject to the
following regulations:
202. Editor's Note: Former § 205-24, Fences, was repealed 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 512. See now
§ 205-22.3.
§ 205-63.5 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-63.5
186:750
(1) One executive campus identification sign displaying only the names
of the executive campus developer, owner or operator but not
building tenants shall be permitted along each street or road
frontage in excess of 500 feet in length subject to the following
regulations:
(a) Along each public street, the total sign area shall not exceed
100 square feet on each face and such signs shall not be
positioned at a height greater than 20 feet and shall not be
greater than 20 feet in length.
(b) Where the executive campus is located at the corner of two
streets, the sign area permitted along both streets may be
combined and the sign may be placed at or near the corner,
provided that it shall not exceed 20 feet in height and shall not
be more than 35 feet in length.
(2) Entry signs displaying the name of the executive campus and
tenants shall be permitted subject to the following regulations:
(a) An entry sign shall be permitted at each entrance to the
executive campus.
(b) The maximum size shall not exceed 150 square feet for
multifaced signs with no one face exceeding 75 square feet.
(3) Wall-mounted signs shall be permitted on any wall of a building
subject to the following regulations:
(a) Wall-mounted signs shall be installed parallel to the supporting
wall and project no more than 18 inches from the face of such
wall and shall not extend above the roofline of a building
having a flat roof or above the eaves of a roof having a slope or
ridged line.
(b) The maximum display area shall not exceed two square feet
per lineal foot of length of wall on which it is mounted or a
maximum of 200 square feet, whichever is less, and to a
maximum of 400 square feet per building.
(c) One sign per building wall identifying the name of the building
or a principal user of the building shall be permitted above the
first floor level. Signs identifying other users within the
building are permitted only at the first floor level.
(d) Where multiple signs are to be located on a wall, their
combined display area shall not exceed the maximum
permitted in Subsection J(3)(b) above.
(4) Ground signs. One individual business sign per non-office use
building which is a ground or freestanding sign is permitted,
subject to the following:
§ 205-63.5 TOWING § 205-63.5
186:751
(a) The area of such sign may not exceed 25 square feet.
(b) Such sign may not exceed three feet in height, except that up
to 25 feet in height may be permitted if the sign is set back a
minimum of 15 feet from the street ultimate right-of-way line
and a minimum of 25 feet from the nearest street access
driveway.
(5) Directional signs identifying the location of buildings or individual
uses within the executive campus shall be permitted subject to the
following regulations:
(a) Directional signs shall be set back at least five feet from the
curb or edge of pavement and shall not extend over either.
(b) Each sign shall not exceed 12 square feet.
(6) Flags of the United States of America, the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, Montgomery County, East Norriton Township, other
government flags and corporate flags of the executive campus or its
tenants shall be permitted and not considered as sign area.
(7) General requirements.
(a) No portion of a freestanding sign shall be positioned at a
height greater than 25 feet above ground elevation.
(b) No portion of a wall-mounted sign shall be positioned at a
height greater than the elevation established for the building
height ceiling.
K. Service. Areas for loading and unloading of delivery trucks and other
vehicles and for the servicing of refuse collection, recycling containers,
fuel and other services shall be provided and shall be adequate in size
and shall be so arranged that they may be used without blockage or
interference with the use of accessways or automobile parking
facilities. These areas shall not be located within the minimum building
setback established for the district and shall be screened from view
from the district boundary.
L. Access. Provisions shall be made for safe and efficient access to and
from public streets and highways serving the executive campus at
predetermined locations and widths approved by the Board of
Supervisors without undue congestion to or interference with normal
traffic flows. In no event shall more than one access per 500 feet of total
road frontage for the entire tract be permitted. Direct access to public
streets and highways at other than approved locations shall be
prohibited.
M. Utilities. All buildings within the executive campus shall be served by a
public sanitary sewage disposal system of public water supply. All utility
lines servicing the executive campus shall be placed underground.
§ 205-63.5 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-63.5
186:752
N. Lighting facilities. Lighting facilities provided shall be arranged in a
manner which will protect the highway and neighboring properties,
whether contiguous or not, from unreasonable direct glare or
hazardous interference of any kind. Lighting facilities shall be required
where deemed necessary for the safety and convenience of the
executive campus. Freestanding light fixtures situated within the
minimum building setback established from an adjacent residential or
institutional district property line shall not exceed a mounting height of
20 feet.
O. Buffer. The Executive Campus District shall have a permanent
landscape buffer area of at least 20 feet in depth and permanently
screened to a height of not less than eight feet when abutting a
residential or institutional district property line and 10 feet in depth
when abutting all other district property lines. Existing vegetation shall
be utilized for said buffer area where practicable. Along any public
road, Subsection P, below, shall apply.
P. Landscaped planning area. A landscaped planning area shall be
provided along each street frontage between the edge of any paving
and the right-of-way line and along all boundaries of the district
between the edge of paving or structures and the property line.
Q. Open space. No less than 35% of the total lot area of a site shall be
provided and maintained as nonvehicular pervious open space. Up to
5% of the required open space may be devoted to impervious walkways
or courtyards used for leisure activities such as sitting areas or walking
trails. In addition, the developer shall be required, where possible, to
preserve or incorporate natural features such as healthy trees and
shrubs, woods, streams and ponds as open space areas which add to the
overall cohesive development of the executive campus and overall
community amenity.
R. In any instance in which the landscape requirements of Chapter 175,
Subdivision and Land Development, shall be more stringent or require
additional landscaping over the requirements of this chapter, the
requirements of Chapter 175 shall apply. A landscape and conservation
plan shall be provided with preliminary plans submitted for the entire
site which shall identify those existing natural and culturally important
features which shall be permanently maintained in addition to
proposals for new plant material and earth shaping. The plan shall
minimize removal or disturbance of natural features. The plan shall
specify the name, size and quantity of plant material for:
(1) A landscaped buffer area planted to a minimum height of eight feet
along all district boundaries adjacent to residential or institutional
districts which are not a street frontage.
(2) Parking lot landscaping, which shall consist of not less than one
shade tree having a size at planting of not less than two-and-one-
§ 205-63.5 TOWING § 205-63.5
186:753
half-inch caliper and a minimum height of 12 feet for every 10
surface parking spaces.
(3) Street tree planting along public streets and highways at regular
intervals or informally arranged consistent with Chapter 175,
Subdivision and Land Development.
(4) Existing trees, shrubs and other natural features to be preserved
and methods employed to assure their protection during and after
construction.
S. Density. For an apartment house or group of apartment houses, density
shall not exceed 35 dwelling units per acre. [Added 10-27-2015 by
Ord. No. 566]
§ 205-63.5 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-63.5
186:754
ARTICLE XIIB
Executive Campus II District
§ 205-63.6. Intent.
The following is an expansion of the statement of community development
objectives contained in Article I, § 205-3, of this chapter. It is the intent
of this article to provide for a mix of office, hotel and residential uses in
districts of at least 10 acres and having at least 600 feet of frontage along a
principal arterial street. Furthermore, it is the intent of this article to:
§ 205-63.7. Regulations to apply.
In any Executive Campus II District, the following regulations shall apply.
§ 205-63.8. Permitted uses.
A building or buildings may be erected, altered or used and a lot or a
combination of lots may be occupied for the following purposes or
A. Establish standards and certain limitations which encourage orderly
and planned development of an architecturally harmonious mixed use
development while prohibiting incompatible uses and minimizing
community impact.
B. Provide employment centers and housing opportunities in close
proximity to existing and future commercial and residential
developments to reduce commuting distance for the workforce and
minimize traffic impact as well as to enhance the community tax base.
C. Ensure that residential neighbors will be buffered against the Executive
Campus II District and prevent encroachment upon existing highways
by the use of setbacks and encourage the preservation of natural
features and existing foliage.
D. Encourage efficiency from shared planned parking and shared
driveways through the use of an internal driveway network connected
to principal arterial streets only at signalized intersections in order to
eliminate uncontrolled access to exterior streets and to reduce
excessive impervious surfaces.
E. The Executive Campus II District differs from the Executive Campus
District and is considered a more appropriate transition between
adjoining low- or moderate-density residential land uses for the
following reasons: buildings over three stories or 40 feet are not
permitted with the exception of hotel use which may be four stories and
55 feet in height unless a conditional use is granted; pursuant to
§ 205-63.8B; residential uses are permitted and encouraged adjacent to
existing single-family land use where practicable, but not greater than
50% of the gross acreage of the district. All roadways in this district
shall have a minimum right-of-way of 50 feet. [Amended 12-12-2017
by Ord. No. 574]
§ 205-63.6 TOWING § 205-63.8
186:755
combination of the following purposes and no other, provided that the
requirements of the following sections are met:
A. The following are the permitted uses in an Executive Campus II District:
[Amended 10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 566]
(1) Offices for administration, executive, business, medical, veterinary,
professional, sales, data processing, financial institutions, banks,
research and other uses of the same general character, including
insurance and real estate offices, the normal attributes of which do
not involve the actual bulk warehousing, exchange or delivery of
inventory on the premises. No office shall have more than three
stories or be more than 40 feet in height.
(2) Storage, office/warehousing, and distribution uses shall have a
maximum of two stories or 30 feet in height and shall abut a
shopping center district only, and all associated buildings or
activities are located a minimum of 100 feet from any residential
district or use, except where such residential use is within the
Executive Campus II District. Self-storage facilities may be allowed
by conditional use limited to the same height restrictions above.
(3) Municipal or governmental offices; educational or conference
center uses.
(4) Cafeterias, when allied with and contained within permitted office
uses.
(5) Barbershops, beauty salons, spas, cleaning and pressing, laundry
pickup stations, travel agencies, concierge services, fitness
centers, ticket centers and such other personal service uses.
(6) Retail sales, excluding gasoline. [Amended 12-12-2017 by Ord.
No. 574]
(7) Full-service restaurants, fast-casual restaurants or taverns.
(8) A hotel, provided that not more than one such hotel facility shall be
permitted within any Executive Campus II District. Uses provided
in § 205-63.8A(1), (5), (6) and (7) above shall be permitted when
located within a hotel and the total area of retail use shall not
exceed 10% of the total gross floor area of the hotel. A hotel shall
have a maximum of four stories or 55 feet in height.
(9) Day-care centers.
(10) Medical, veterinary and surgical facilities.
(11) For-profit assisted living facility, personal-care facility, independent
residential retirement units or a combination thereof in a single
structure, together with ancillary uses for the residents, provided
that the total number of units, beds or residents for all uses does
§ 205-63.8 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-63.8
186:756
§ 205-63.9. Development requirements.
The Executive Campus II District may consist of one or more tracts under
separate ownership. The plan for the development of any tract within the
Executive Campus II District shall include evidence and facts showing that
not exceed 200; and for the purposes of assisted living or personal
care, two beds per room (unit) shall be permitted.
(12) Residential uses which may consist of townhouses, twin houses,
duplexes and triplexes in accordance with the requirements of
§ 205-38 (the CR Residential District), except as specifically
modified in this district. The area devoted to residential land use
shall be subject to the following:
(a) Gross acreage of the area devoted to residential uses shall not
be less than 10 acres and shall not exceed 50% of the total
gross acreage of the district.
(b) The maximum density shall be 3.7 dwelling units per gross
acre of the area devoted to residential uses.
(c) A minimum of two points of ingress/egress shall be provided.
(13) Parking structures located beneath a nonresidential permitted use
are allowed.
(14) Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the above
permitted uses.
(15) No-impact home-based business as defined in Article II herein.
(16) Massage therapist business.
B. The following uses are permitted by conditional use:
(1) A Hotel building may increase its height from four stories or 55 feet
in height, to no greater than six stories or 75 feet in height by
conditional use, conditioned upon the additional setbacks as
follows: For each additional one foot in height above 55 feet, there
shall be added four feet to the required yard setback in addition to
the minimum setback established where abutting a residential
district or use and front yard setback from any contiguous
perimeter street.
(2) Office building may increase its height from three stories or 40 feet
in height, to no greater than four stories or 55 feet in height by
conditional use, conditioned upon the additional setbacks as
follows: For each additional one foot in height above 40 feet, there
shall be added four feet to the required yard setback in addition to
the minimum setback established where abutting a residential
district or use and front yard setback from any contiguous
perimeter street.
§ 205-63.8 TOWING § 205-63.9
186:757
it has made provision for, and the development shall in accordance with, the
following requirements:
§ 205-63.10. General regulations.
A. A proposed development shall be constructed in accordance with an
overall preliminary subdivision and land development plan for the
entire development and shall be designed as a unified plan. If the
development, or of any individual projects within the development, is to
be constructed in phases, each phase shall be so planned that the
foregoing requirements and the intent of this chapter shall be fully
compiled with at the completion of any phase.
B. A subdivision or land development plan which has been granted final
approval is considered a flex plan. The location of buildings and parking
may change without further approval by the governing body provided
that the plan meets all requirements of the Executive Campus II
District. All plan revisions are subject to review by Township staff prior
to recording of the plan. Where the subsequent division of a tract or
part thereof into lots is required to facilitate ownership or financing, the
lots shall be exempt from provisions of the Township Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance203 with respect to setback, coverage,
area of tract, open space and fee requirements, provided a development
in the Executive Campus II District provides documentation satisfactory
to the Board of Supervisors and the Township Solicitor assuring the
appropriate covenants are recorded against the affected parcels
requiring all parcels to be operated and maintained in good order and
repair, in a clean and sanitary condition, uniform with the appearance
and maintenance of the Executive Campus II District complex and
providing appropriate covenants for driveways, accessways and
easements for shared improvement. In the event any provisions
governing use, setback, coverage, area of tract, open space or similar
requirements in the Executive Campus II District conflict with
provisions in other parts of the East Norriton Township Zoning
Ordinance, these provisions of the Executive Campus II District shall
prevail.
A. Area of tract. Not less than 10 acres shall be provided for any area used
or developed pursuant to the Executive Campus II District.
B. Street frontage of tract. There shall be frontage on at least one public
road. Nonresidential development shall be located adjacent to, and be
accessible by, a signalized fill movement access to a principal arterial
street.
C. Service. Areas for loading and unloading of delivery trucks and other
vehicles and for the servicing of refuse collection, recycling containers,
and other services shall be provided and shall be adequate in size and
shall be so arranged that they may be used without blockage or
203. Editor's Note: See Ch. 175, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 205-63.9 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-63.10
186:758
interference with the use of accessways or automobile parking
facilities. These areas shall not be located within the parking setback
envelope established for the nonresidential uses within the district and
shall be screened from view of adjacent residential land uses.
D. Vehicular access. Provisions shall be made for safe and efficient
vehicular access to and from public streets and highways serving the
development at signalized locations and widths approved by the Board
of Supervisors without undue congestion to or interference with normal
traffic flows.
(1) Direct access to public streets and highways at other than at
approved locations shall be prohibited.
(2) All left turn movements to and from a property in this district shall
be prohibited for any nonresidential uses permitted in the
Executive Campus II District unless located at a fully signalized
intersection and approved by the Board of Supervisors.
(3) Vehicular access to Jamestown townhouses and the residential
component of the Executive Campus II District may be permitted,
but pedestrian accessways is required to these areas.
E. Utilities. All buildings within the development shall be served by East
Norriton Township public sanitary sewage and public water supply. All
utility lines servicing the development shall be placed underground.
F. Open space. No less than 20% of the total lot area of the tract within the
Executive Campus II District shall be provided and maintained as
nonvehicular pervious open space. In the residential section of the
district up to 5% of the required open space shall be devoted to
impervious walkways or courtyards used for access to shopping
districts and leisure activities such as walking trails or bicycle trails. In
addition, the developer shall be required, where possible, to preserve or
incorporate natural features such as healthy trees and shrubs, woods,
streams and ponds as open space areas which add to the overall
cohesive development of the site and overall community amenity which
shall be included in the landscaping.
G. Lighting facilities. Lighting facilities provided shall be arranged in a
manner which will protect the highway and neighboring properties,
whether contiguous or not, from unreasonable direct glare or
hazardous interference of any kind. Lighting facilities shall be required
where deemed necessary for the safety and convenience of the
development. Freestanding light fixtures shall not exceed a mounting
height of 20 feet throughout the district.
H. Buffer. The Executive Campus II District shall have a permanent
landscape buffer area of at least 20 feet in depth and screened at initial
new planting to a height of not less than eight feet when abutting a
residential district property line which is used solely for residential
purposes and 10 feet in depth when abutting all other district property
§ 205-63.10 TOWING § 205-63.10
186:759
§ 205-63.11. General regulations for nonresidential uses.
lines. Existing vegetation shall be utilized for said buffer area where
practical.
I. Parking lot landscaping. Parking lot landscaping, which shall consist of
not less than one shade tree having a size at planting of not less than a
two-and-one-half-inch caliper and a minimum height of 12 feet for every
10 surface parking spaces.
J. Street tree planting. Street trees shall be planted along public streets
and highways at regular intervals or informally arranged consistent
with Chapter 175, Subdivision and Land Development.
K. Fencing requirements of § 205-72H(1) shall apply.
A. Building coverage. No more than 25% of the gross lot area shall be
occupied by nonresidential buildings or structures. The total floor area
when divided by the gross lot area of the tract shall not exceed 70%.
B. Building and structure setback.
(1) Setback from street. The required minimum setback from the
ultimate right-of-way of 50 feet from each street on which an
Executive Campus II District abuts shall be 40 feet.
(2) Setback from property lines. There shall be a minimum setback
from any property line which the Executive Campus II District
abuts, which shall not be less than:
(a) From any residential district: 50 feet but not less than 1 1/2 the
actual height of the building.
(b) From any other district: 25 feet.
C. Parking.
(1) For all permitted uses other than residential, day-care, or assistedliving
uses, off-street parking shall be provided for and located
within the development at the rate of not less than 3.5 parking
spaces per every 1,000 square feet of floor area, except in the case
of a hotel, which shall require 1.25 parking spaces for each hotel
room or suite, which shall include all ancillary services of the hotel.
In the event that a hotel provides for rooms or suites only and may
include common dining facilities limited to the hotel overnight
guests only, such as a coffee or breakfast shop, then parking may be
permitted at the ratio of one parking space per room or suite.
Parking for day-care centers shall conform to § 205-21.1B(2), and
assisted living facilities shall require not less than one parking
space for every three beds.
(2) The Township Board of Supervisors may by conditional use grant
the applicant up to 20% of the required parking spaces be held in
§ 205-63.10 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-63.11
186:760
reserve and devoted to landscaping at locations which shall be
agreed to by the Board. The reserve area shall be paved, if
applicant so elects, or if directed by the Board of Supervisors. In
the event that the applicant or the then-current owner should fail
to construct the reserve parking when directed by the Township,
the applicant or owner shall be subject to the penalties set forth in
this chapter of the Code for violation of provisions of this chapter
and shall further be liable for the payment of the Township's costs
of enforcement, including but not limited to attorney's fees.
(3) The Township Board of Supervisors may permit the reduction of the
aggregate amount of required parking spaces upon determination
that greater efficiency is effected by joint use of a common parking
area such as in the case of a shopping center of two or more
contiguous uses, but in no case shall the required number of offstreet
parking spaces be reduced more than 25%. The applicant
shall have the burden of providing credible testimony to support
the allowance of shared parking based upon alternating times for
peak demand (such as weekday, day and evening; weekend day and
evening; or nighttime 12:00 midnight to 6:00 a.m.)
(4) Parking and paved areas shall be placed so as not to interfere with
any service or emergency access area and shall not be less than:
(a) Twenty-five feet from any residential district or use property
line.
(b) Ten feet from any nonresidential district property line to which
the Executive Campus II abuts.
(c) Fifteen feet from the ultimate right-of-way line of any
contiguous public street.
(d) Five feet from the ultimate right-of-way line of any interior
public or private street.
(e) (Intentionally left blank) [Amended 12-12-2017 by Ord. No.
574204]
(5) Not less than 5% of the total lot area devoted to parking facilities
shall consist of interior parking lot landscaping. The area of interior
parking for landscaping may be included as nonvehicular open
space. The ends of each row of parking shall contain landscaping
islands not less than the size of a parking space.
D. Except as otherwise specified herein, the height of buildings and
structures shall not exceed three stories or 40 feet in height. For the
purpose of measuring height in this district, measurements shall be
taken from the lowest point of the first floor elevation.
204. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection C(4)(e), as amended, which
prohibited the placement of parking and paved areas less than 20 feet from any building
unless such parking was located under the building.
§ 205-63.11 TOWING § 205-63.11
186:761
§ 205-63.12. General regulations for residential uses.
Residential uses within the Executive Campus II District shall meet the
development requirements applicable to the CR District as set forth in
§ 205-38 of the Zoning Ordinance, except as modified as follows:
E. All buildings shall have fire protection in accordance with the East
Norriton Township Fire and Building Codes in effect at the time of
building permit application.205
F. Distance between buildings. The minimum distance between buildings
shall be at least 50 feet.
A. Residential development within the district shall not be located within
800 feet of the ultimate right-of-way of a principal arterial street. Uses
permitted in § 205-16 are strictly prohibited with the exception of an
attached garage.
B. The face of each garage door shall be set back 25 feet from the edge of
the ultimate right-of-way of a privately owned street.
C. The horizontal distance between any two buildings shall not be less
than:
(1) For any two exterior facing walls, the building of which is oriented
front-to-front, front-to-side, front-to-rear or rear-to-rear, the
minimum distance apart shall be 50 feet.
(2) For any two exterior facing walls, the building of which are
oriented side-to-side or rear-to-side, the minimum distance apart
shall be 30 feet.
D. No combination of dwellings shall contain more than three dwellings
attached or connected to one another in any manner.
E. Setbacks. In addition to the setback requirements set forth in
§ 205-38H, all residential buildings within the Executive Campus II
District shall be set back at least 35 feet from an abutting zoning
district.
F. Buffer. A buffer area is not required along the perimeter of the
residential component, provided a minimum setback from the rear of
the dwelling unit to abutting property lines is 45 feet or greater.
G. Open space. The Board of Supervisors may waive the minimum open
space percentage for the residential component if individual fee-simple
lots are created for the attached and/or twin dwelling units, and the
individual dwelling units have a minimum width of 30 feet and a
minimum lot area of 2,500 square feet, and further provided that the
final land development and/or subdivision plan preserves stream
corridors, wetlands and floodplains, and provides walking trails to the
205. Editor's Note: See Ch. 95, Fire Prevention.
§ 205-63.11 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-63.12
186:762
§ 205-63.13. Sign regulations.
Notwithstanding Article XIX, Signs, of this chapter, in the Executive Campus
II District, signs shall be subject to § 205-63.5J and the residential
component shall be allowed one sign per entrance in accordance with
§ 205-110F.
satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors, there shall not be a minimum
open space percentage required for such a development. Park and
recreation land or fee in lieu of dedication regulations shall apply.
H. Building coverage for the residential component shall be based upon
the gross site area of the parcel being developed, rather than a
percentage of individual fee-simple lots.
I. Parking. The residential component shall require a minimum of two
parking spaces per dwelling unit excluding the garage.
§ 205-63.12 TOWING § 205-63.13
186:763

ARTICLE XIII
C Commercial District
§ 205-64. Regulations to apply.
In a C Commercial District, the following shall apply.
§ 205-65. Permitted uses. [Amended 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 512;
1-3-2011 by Ord. No. 533; 10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 566]
A. A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot or premises may be
used for any of the following purposes and no other:
(1) Retail store: stores engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the
general public for personal or household consumption, including,
without limitation, the sale of antiques, books, gifts, garden
supplies, hardware, household appliances and electronics, jewelry,
notions, periodicals, stationery, tobacco, paint, wearing apparel,
food, beverages, and other similar goods; and rendering services
incidental to the sale of such goods.
(2) Service business: establishments engaged in providing services
involving the care of a person or apparel, such as barber,
beautician, massage therapist business, laundry and dry-cleaning,
shoe repair, or tailor. A service business shall not include psychic
readings, massage parlors, body piercing, branding, or tattooing of
persons, all of which are defined and regulated herein as limited
personal service (§ 205-22.4).
(3) Repair service: shops for small appliances, watches, bicycles, or
personal items, but excluding repairs of cars, machinery, or
engines.
(4) Fast-food restaurants, fast-casual restaurants, full-service
restaurants, brewpubs and microbreweries.
(5) Clubs, fraternal organizations and lodges; health clubs or fitness
centers.
(6) Greenhouses and nursery sales yards.
(7) Indoor theaters, bowling alleys, billiard rooms or similar indoor
amusements.
(8) Wholesaling and sale of lumber, plumbing and other building
materials and supplies.
(9) Accessory uses on the same lot with and customarily incidental to
any of the above permitted uses, including dwellings, provided that
such accessory uses shall be located at or above the second-story
level.
(10) The following uses, when authorized as special exceptions:
§ 205-64 TOWING § 205-65
186:765
§ 205-66. General regulations.
(a) Any use of the same general character as any of the above
permitted uses that is not specifically prohibited elsewhere in
this article.
(b) Gasoline filling stations or public garages and automobile
repair shops.
(c) Outdoor theaters.
(d) Undertaking establishments.
(e) Animal hospitals and kennels.
(f) Hand or automatic self-service laundries, provided that there
are adequate provisions made for water disposal.
(g) Automobile sales and service agencies.
(h) Hotels or motels.
(i) Taprooms, bars, taverns and liquor stores.
(11) Day-care centers, provided that any state licensing requirements
are met.
(12) The following uses when authorized as conditional uses:
(a) (Reserved)206
(b) Offices for administration, executive, professional, insurance
or other similar uses which do not involve the actual storage,
warehousing, exchange or delivery of merchandise on the
premises.
(13) The following uses shall not be permitted: storage or warehousing
of materials or supplies unless such items are associated with a
business or operations located at the property which is a use
permitted in this zoning district.
(14) Municipal uses and police stations.
(15) Fire stations and ambulance stations that are occupied by a
provider designated by the East Norriton Township Board of
Supervisors to provide fire or ambulance service to East Norriton
Township.
A. Lot area. There shall be a minimum lot area of 15,000 square feet.
B. Building area. No more than 40% of the lot area shall be occupied by
buildings.
206. Editor's Note: For current fencing provisions, see § 205-22.3.
§ 205-65 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-66
186:766
C. Building setback from streets. There shall be a setback from the
ultimate right-of-way of 50 feet.
D. Side yard. Side yards shall be 20 feet each, except where a C
Commercial District abuts any residential or institutional district, and
then the side yard which abuts the other district shall be increased to
60 feet.
E. Rear yard. Rear yards shall be 50 feet deep.
F. Height regulation. The maximum height of any building or structure
shall be 35 feet.
G. Parking. Off-street parking and loading areas shall be provided in
accordance with Article XVIII of this chapter.
H. Lighting. Lighting facilities shall be arranged in a manner which will
protect the highway and neighboring properties, whether contiguous or
not, from unreasonable direct glare or hazardous interference of any
kind.
I. Signs. Signs shall be permitted only in accordance with the provisions
of Article XIX of this chapter.
J. (Reserved)207
K. Width requirement. The minimum width at the building line shall be
100 feet.
L. The minimum distance between buildings shall be at least 30 feet.
M. Landscaping, including conservation of existing trees and woodlands,
street trees, stormwater basin landscaping and site element screens,
shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 175,
Subdivision and Land Development.208
207. Editor's Note: Former Subsection J, Outdoor Sales, was repealed 4-28-2009 by Ord. No.
515.
208. Editor's Note: Former Subsection N, pertaining to fencing requirements, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 512. See now
§ 205-22.3.
§ 205-66 TOWING § 205-66
186:767

ARTICLE XIIIA
C-1 Commercial District
§ 205-66.1. Declaration of legislative intent.
In expansion of the statement of community development objectives
contained in Article I, § 205-3, of this chapter and pursuant to the East
Norriton Township Comprehensive Plan, 1994, it is hereby declared to be
the intent of this article with respect to the C-1 Commercial District to allow
for professional and business offices and certain commercial uses, adjacent
to commercial and residential areas along major highways, which would be
compatible with the uses in such areas. Specifically, it is the intent of this
article to:
§ 205-66.2. Permitted uses. [Amended 10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 566]
A. Allow professional and commercial uses adjacent to residential areas
which would be compatible with residential uses and less intense and of
a smaller scale than uses typically associated with the C Commercial
District.
B. Encourage small scale professional, business and certain commercial
uses in existing structures, especially occupant-operated enterprises.
C. Encourage the reuse of noteworthy structures, now or lately used as
residences, and discourage the demolition of such structures.
D. Encourage the preservation of the residential character of
neighborhoods adjacent to the district.
E. Provide for services generally useful to and in harmony with adjacent
residential neighborhoods.
A. A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot or premises may be
used for any of the following purposes and no other:
(1) Retail stores engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the
general public for personal or household consumption, including,
without limitation, the sale of antiques, books, gifts, garden
supplies, hardware, household appliances and electronics, jewelry,
notions, periodicals, stationery, tobacco, paint, wearing apparel,
food, beverages, and other similar goods; and rendering services
incidental to the sale of such goods.
(2) Service business: establishments engaged in providing services
involving the care of a person or apparel, such as barber,
beautician, massage therapist business, laundry and dry-cleaning,
shoe repair, or tailor. A service business shall not include psychic
readings, massage parlors, body piercing, branding or tattooing of
persons, all of which are defined and regulated herein as limited
personal service (§ 205-22.4).
§ 205-66.1 TOWING § 205-66.2
186:769
§ 205-66.3. General regulations.
(3) Fast-casual restaurants.
(4) Business or professional offices, studios, banks and financial
institutions, telephone exchanges or other public utility offices,
passenger stations for public transportation, municipal buildings
and firehouses.
(5) Clubs or fraternal organizations.
(6) Greenhouses and nursery sales yards.
(7) Accessory uses on the same lot with and customarily incidental to
any of the above permitted uses, including dwellings, provided that
such accessory uses shall be located at or above the second-story
level.
(8) The following uses, when authorized as special exceptions:
(a) Any use of the same general character as any of the above
permitted uses.
(b) Undertaking establishments.
(c) Day-care centers, provided that any state licensing
requirements are met.
(9) Single-family detached dwelling in accordance with the regulations
of § 205-30 (the BR Residential District).
(10) Municipal uses and police stations.
(11) Fire stations and ambulance stations that are occupied by a
provider designated by the East Norriton Township Board of
Supervisors to provide fire or ambulance service to East Norriton
Township.
B. No use which is specifically permitted in the I Industrial District shall
be permitted in the C-1 Commercial District, with the exception of uses
defined as "artisanal manufacturing," which shall be a conditional use
when the artisanal manufacturing use includes the on-site retail sale of
products.
A. Lot area. There shall be a minimum lot area of 15,000 square feet.
B. Building area. No more than 40% of the lot area shall be occupied by
buildings.
C. Building setback from streets. There shall be a setback from the
ultimate right-of-way of 50 feet.
D. Side yard. Side yards shall be 20 feet each, except where a C-1
Commercial District abuts any residential or institutional district, and
§ 205-66.2 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-66.3
186:770
then the side yard which abuts the other district shall be increased to
60 feet.
E. Rear yard. Rear yards shall be 50 feet deep.
F. Height regulation. The maximum height of any building or structure
shall be 35 feet.
G. Parking. Off-street parking and loading areas shall be provided in
accordance with Article XVIII of this chapter.
H. Lighting. Lighting facilities shall be arranged in a manner which will
protect the highway and neighboring properties, whether contiguous or
not, from unreasonable direct glare or hazardous interference of any
kind.
I. Signs. Signs shall be permitted only in accordance with the provisions
of Article XIX of this chapter.
J. Outdoor sales. No outdoor sales shall be permitted, and all business
shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building, except for offstreet
parking and the sale of specialty items such as Christmas trees
and living plants which by their nature require outdoor sales. The
outdoor sale of such specialty items shall require a special use permit
issued by the Zoning Officer and be subject to the following conditions:
(1) Sales events must be temporary in nature, not to exceed 30 days.
(2) No sales event shall use more than 25% of the usable lot area.
(3) Application for the special use permit must be made, in writing, to
the Zoning Officer and must be executed by both the property
owner and the proposed land user.
(4) A nonrefundable permit fee of $100 and an escrow fee of $200 to
ensure restoration of the area to its former condition must
accompany the application. The escrow fee is not required when
the outdoor sale is conducted by the property owner.
(5) No temporary structures, no vehicles or parts of vehicles may be
used to store merchandise for sale.
(6) All applicants shall provide safe and adequate off-street parking
and adequate traffic and crowd control.
(7) All appropriate Township licenses, taxes and permits must be
obtained from the Township prior to issuance of this special use
permit.
K. Width requirement. The minimum width at the building line shall be
100 feet.
L. The minimum distance between buildings shall be at least 30 feet.
§ 205-66.3 TOWING § 205-66.3
186:771
§ 205-66.4. (Reserved)210
M. Landscaping, including conservation of existing trees and woodlands,
street trees, stormwater basin landscaping and site element screens,
shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 175,
Subdivision and Land Development.209
209. Editor's Note: Former Subsection N, pertaining to fencing requirements, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 512. See now
§ 205-22.3.
210. Editor's Note: Former § 205-66.4, was repealed 10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 566.
§ 205-66.3 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-66.4
186:772
ARTICLE XIV
SC Shopping Center District
§ 205-67. Regulations to apply.
In an SC Shopping Center District, the following regulations shall apply.
§ 205-68. Permitted uses. [Amended 12-13-2008 by Ord. No. 512;
4-28-2009 by Ord. No. 515; 10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 566]
In an SC Shopping Center District, a building or combination of buildings
may be erected or used and a lot area may be used or occupied for any of
the following purposes and no other:
A. Retail stores, including retail outlets or showrooms for uses permitted
in Subsection I hereof, but not including automobile sales agencies,
provided that no goods shall be displayed outside the building area or
on that lot, except pursuant to Article IV, § 205-20, and provided that
only incidental storage, including floor samples, shall be permitted.
"Building area" shall be defined as that area covered by the principal
roof of the building.
B. The following personal service shops, dealing directly with customers:
beauty parlors, barbershops, massage therapist businesses, clothes
cleaning establishments (not including cleaning and dyeing plants),
automatic self-service laundries, dressmaking, millinery or similar
shops, provided that all repair or processing work is conducted in
accordance with Subsection I below.
C. Theaters, not including outdoor motion-picture establishments,
assembly halls or community buildings, indoor recreational
establishments, fitness centers or libraries.
D. Fast-food restaurants, fast-casual restaurants, full-service restaurants,
brewpubs and microbreweries.
E. Bakeries, confectionery or custom shops for the production of articles
sold at retail on the premises, provided that all baking or processing is
conducted in accordance with Subsection I below.
F. Banks, financial advisors, tutoring and educational uses.
G. Passenger bus stations, electric substations and utility buildings.
H. Day-care centers, pursuant to the requirements of § 205-22.1.
I. The following uses, provided that, if such uses are located on the
ground floor, they shall not be located within 20 feet of the front of the
building, and provided that they shall be effectively screened from the
front portion of the building by a wall or partition:
(1) General servicing or repair.
§ 205-67 TOWING § 205-68
186:773
(2) Upholstering.
(3) Carpentry or woodworking.
(4) Electrical, radio and television repair.
(5) Hand laundering, dry-cleaning or pressing, provided that no
flammable fluids are used.
(6) Tailoring, dressmaking or repair.
(7) Millinery repair.
(8) Baking, confectionery making or similar processing.
(9) Any similar use involving repair, processing or storage activity, not
including painting or body and fender repairs.
J. Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses,
including fencing in accordance with § 205-22.3.
K. Any use of the same general character as any of the above permitted
uses, when authorized as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing
Board, provided that such use shall be permitted subject to such
reasonable restrictions as the Zoning Hearing Board may determine,
and further provided that no trade or business shall be permitted which
is either noxious or hazardous.
L. Signs, when erected and maintained in accordance with Article XIX of
this Zoning Ordinance.
M. If the development of the center is to be carried out in stages, each
stage shall be so planned that the foregoing requirements and the
intent of this chapter shall be fully complied with at the completion of
any stage. The initial stage of development shall comprise a total
ground-floor area of not less than 4,000 square feet.
N. Additionally, the following uses, when authorized as special exceptions
by the Zoning Hearing Board, shall be permitted in this district:
(1) Bars, taverns and taprooms.211
(2) Liquor stores, beer distributors or any similar uses.
O. Residential units located above the first floor of a nonresidential use,
subject to the following standards:
(1) Residential uses shall be permitted only on the second floor and
above.
(2) Residential uses shall not be located on the same floor with other
permitted uses.
211. Editor's Note: Former Subsection N(1), pertaining to fencing, was repealed 12-23-2008 by
Ord. No. 512. see now § 205-22.3.
§ 205-68 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-68
186:774
§ 205-69. Development requirements.
The general plan for a shopping center or any additions thereto shall
include evidence and facts showing that it has considered and made
provision for, and the development shall be executed in accordance with,
the following essential conditions:
(3) Second-story residential construction shall be permitted to extend
to the limits of the existing building footprint and only beyond
where required setbacks can be maintained.
(4) Each second-story dwelling shall contain a minimum of 650 square
feet of gross floor area.
(5) Site plan approval shall be required prior to the issuance of any
building permit to construct a second-story dwelling.
(6) Second-story dwellings shall be limited to a maximum of two
bedrooms.
(7) Parking shall be located within 300 feet of the building entrance.
(8) Ingress and egress for residences shall be separate from
nonresidential uses.
P. Offices for administration, executive, professional, insurance or other
similar uses which do not involve the actual storage, warehousing,
exchange or delivery of merchandise on the premises.
A. The development shall consist of harmonious selection of uses and
grouping of buildings, service and parking areas, circulation and open
spaces, planned and designed as an integrated unit, in such manner as
to constitute a safe, efficient and convenient retail shopping center.
B. The proposed development shall be constructed in accordance with an
overall plan with appropriate landscaping.
C. The total area shall be not less than two acres.
D. No more than 20% of the lot area shall be occupied by buildings. The
total allowable floor area when divided by the lot area shall not exceed
0.4 (40%).
E. The distance at the closest point between any two buildings or groups
or units of attached buildings shall not be less than 30 feet.
F. The maximum height of any building or structure erected in this district
shall be 35 feet.
G. Adequate area shall be provided for loading and unloading of delivery
trucks and other vehicles; servicing of shops by refuse collection, fuel,
fire and other service vehicles; and automobile accessways. The
requirements of Article XVIII of this chapter shall also apply.
§ 205-68 TOWING § 205-69
186:775
§ 205-70. Additional requirements.
In addition to the requirements of the East Norriton Township Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance,212 the following requirements shall be
submitted for approval:
H. Provision shall be made for safe and efficient ingress and egress to and
from public streets and highways serving the center without undue
congestion to or interference with normal traffic flow. All points of
vehicular access to and from public streets shall be located not less
than 200 feet from the intersection of any public street lines. The
Planning Commission shall satisfy itself as to the adequacy of the
thoroughfares to carry the additional traffic engendered by the
shopping center.
I. No building may be located closer than 50 feet to the ultimate right-ofway
of any public street, no closer than 50 feet of a side or rear property
line adjacent to a residential or institutional district or within 25 feet of
any property line.
J. No parking, access or service area may be located closer than 25 feet of
a side or rear property line adjacent to a residential or institutional
district.
K. Lighting facilities shall be arranged in a manner which will protect the
highway and neighboring properties, whether contiguous or not, from
unreasonable direct glare or hazardous interference of any kind.
L. (Reserved)
M. Landscaping, including conservation of existing trees and woodlands,
street trees, stormwater basin landscaping and site element screens,
shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 175,
Subdivision and Land Development.
N. No shopping center permitted in an SC District shall be erected or used
that is not adequately served with both sanitary sewers and public
water.
O. For the purpose of calculating the minimum area lot dimension and
yard requirements established by this section, a single planned
shopping center district cannot lie on two sides of a public street or
alley. Any area designated as being an SC District and lying on both
sides of a public street shall be deemed to be two SC Districts, and all
minimum requirements shall be met by buildings on each side of said
public street as separate districts.
A. Architectural plans for any proposed buildings.
212. Editor's Note: See Ch. 175, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 205-69 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-70
186:776
B. The location, size in square feet, dimensions and arrangement of areas
and buildings devoted to any purpose.
C. A description of the commercial uses proposed, including approximate
number of employees, and an indication of the number of customers in
sufficient detail to indicate the effects of those operations in producing
traffic congestion, noise, glare, air pollution, water pollution, fire
hazards or safety hazards.
§ 205-70 TOWING § 205-70
186:777

ARTICLE XV
I Industrial District
§ 205-71. Regulations to apply. [Amended 7-26-2011 by Ord. No.
538]
§ 205-72. Permitted uses.
A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot or premises may be
used for any of the following purposes and no other:
A. The following legislative intent shall be established for the provision of
billboards within the I Industrial District:
(1) The regulations herein are designed to prevent the over
concentration, improper placement, and excessive height, bulk,
number and area of billboards. It is recognized that, unlike onpremises
signs which are actually a part of a business, billboards
are a separate and distinct use of the public thoroughfare.
(2) It is intended that billboards be regulated to protect the character
of the area in which billboards are located and to conserve property
values in the area.
(3) The Board of Supervisors of East Norriton Township hereby finds
that billboards may be allowed in limited areas, but that a
proliferation of such use endangers the Township relative to public
safety and its neighborhoods of visual blight. Billboards, with their
potential periodically changing content, present special aesthetic
and traffic safety problems to the traveling public.
B. In an I Industrial District, the following regulations shall apply.
A. Heavy commercial uses as follows: [Amended 2-25-2014 by Ord. No.
550; 10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 566]
(1) Wholesale business establishments.
(2) Distribution stations; express, carting or hauling stations; and
package delivery services.
(3) Repair and maintenance of office equipment, computers, electronic
products and household items.
(4) Monument yards.
(5) Printing, publishing, lithographic and similar establishments.
(6) Storage or warehouses and packing and crating.
(7) Wireless telecommunications facilities, subject to Article XXIX of
this chapter.
§ 205-71 TOWING § 205-72
186:779
(8) General services, including plumbing or other building supplies,
provided that such storage of product or merchandise shall be
within a fully enclosed building, and further excluding interior or
exterior storage and sale of coal, petroleum distillates or highly
flammable materials of any kind.
(9) Laboratories for scientific, medical, agricultural or light industrial
research and development, training or product development, and
manufacturing, after review and approval from the Board of
Supervisors.
(10) Communications stations, studios, transmitting facilities and
antennas/towers.
(11) Yards for storage, sale and distribution of ice, coal, fuel oil or
building materials, but not including junkyards, salvage,
automobile or other wrecking yards.
(12) Metalworking, extrusion of small metals, welding, plating,
laundering, cleaning and dyeing, excluding bleaching, when
proposed as a principal use in a building or on a lot.
(13) Public and private utility facility.
(14) Art studios that incorporate production, display, and sales.
(15) Municipal uses and police stations.
(16) Fire stations and ambulance stations that are occupied by a
provider designated by the East Norriton Township Board of
Supervisors to provide fire or ambulance service to East Norriton
Township.
(17) Community centers, indoor and outdoor recreational facilities.
B. The following uses when authorized as special exceptions: [Amended
2-25-2014 by Ord. No. 550; 10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 566]
(1) Adult bookstores, adult motion-picture theaters, adult
entertainment cabarets or massage parlors.
(2) Limited personal service establishments as described in § 205-22.4.
(3) Any use of the same general character as any permitted use.
C. Manufacturing or processing as follows: [Amended 10-27-2015 by
Ord. No. 566]
Art needlework
Assembly of computer products, components and electrical equipment,
Bottling establishments
Carpet and rug cleaning
§ 205-72 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-72
186:780
Combining or processing of food products, excluding meat and fish
Creameries
Manufacture of beverages (nonalcoholic), ceramic products, clothing,
cosmetics, electrical appliances, electrical supplies, ice cream,
silverware, tobacco products, tools and hardware, toys and umbrellas
Manufacture of jewelry, watches, clocks, optical goods, musical,
professional and scientific instruments
Manufacture and assemblage of products from the following prepared
materials: bone, canvas, cork, feathers, felt, fur, glass, hair, horn,
leather, paper, plastics, shells, small rubber products and synthetic
treated fabrics (excluding all rubber and synthetic processing and
wood processing)
Metal finishing, plating, grinding, sharpening, polishing, cleaning,
rustproofing and heat treatment
Mirror silvering and glass cutting
Products from previously prepared paper, rubber and plastic products
Textile manufacture or processing, excluding bleaching
Tool, dye and patternmaking and other similar machine shops
Upholstering, bulk
Medical and dental equipment
Microbreweries
Pharmaceutical goods
Photographic reproduction and films
Studios for the production, display, and sale of art
D. The following uses, notwithstanding production operated as artisanal
manufacturing, shall not be permitted: [Amended 7-26-2011 by Ord.
No. 538; 10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 566]
Abattoirs and meat-processing plants
Acetylene gas manufacture
Acid manufacture
Ammonia bleaching powder or chlorine manufacture
Arsenal
Asphalt manufacture or refining
Auto dismantling or junk establishments
Brewery
Candle manufacture
Celluloid manufacture
Coke ovens
§ 205-72 TOWING § 205-72
186:781
Creosote treatment or manufacture
Dead animal and offal reduction
Disinfectants manufacture
Distillation of bones, coal or wood
Dyestuff manufacture
Emery cloth and sandpaper manufacture
Extermination and insect poison, fungicide and herbicide manufacture
Fat rendering
Fertilizer manufacture
Fireworks or explosive manufacture or storage
Fish smoking and curing
Forging
Glue, size or gelatin manufacture
Lampblack manufacture
Manufacture or storage of illuminating gas
Match manufacture
Oilcloth or linoleum manufacture
Oiled or rubber goods manufacture
Ore reduction
Paint, oil, shellac, turpentine or varnish manufacture
Petroleum refining or storage, except when an accessory use to a
permitted industrial use
Potash works
Printing ink manufacture
Pyroxylin manufacture
Quarrying
Ready-mixed concrete or cement works
Rolling mill
Rubber caoutchouc or gutta-percha manufacture or treatment
Saltworks
Sauerkraut manufacture
Shoe-blackening manufacture
Smelters and metal casting
Soap manufacture
Soda and compound manufacture
Solid waste transfer station
Solvent manufacture or processing
§ 205-72 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-72
186:782
Stockyards
Stove polish manufacture
Sulphuric, nitric or hydrochloric acid manufacture
Tallow, grease or lard manufacture or refining
Tanning, curing or storage of leather, rawhide or skins
Tar distillation or manufacture
Tar roofing or waterproofing manufacture
Vinegar manufacture
Wool pulling or scouring
Yeast plant
Any use similar or related to the above nonpermitted uses
E. Any uses of the same general character as any of the above permitted
uses when authorized as special exceptions by the Zoning Hearing
Board, provided that such uses shall not create any danger to health or
safety in the surrounding area or any amount of offensive noise,
vibration, smoke, dust, odor, heat, illumination or other objectionable
influences.
F. Accessory uses on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any of
the above permitted uses, including fencing in accordance with
§ 205-24.213
G. The above uses are permitted only when meeting the following
conditions:
(1) No kiln is fired except by oil, gas or electricity, and no individual
kiln capacity exceeds 200 cubic feet.
(2) No blast or reverberatory furnaces or foundries are used.
(3) No punch or stamping presses are used until the type, size or use is
first approved, authorized and permitted as a special exception by
the Zoning Hearing Board.
(4) No drop hammers are used and no blasting permitted.
H. Construction/demolition waste landfills when proposed, operated and
maintained in accordance with § 205-72.1 of this article and when
authorized by conditional use in accordance with § 205-72.2 of this
article. [Amended 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 512; 4-28-2009 by Ord.
No. 515; 1-3-2011 by Ord. No. 533]
I. Solar and wind-power energy devices shall be permitted in multiple
numbers as a principal use and shall comply with all applicable yards,
213. Editor's Note: Former § 205-24, Fences, was repealed 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 512. See now
§ 205-22.3.
§ 205-72 TOWING § 205-72
186:783
setbacks, and zoning standards that would apply to an industrial
building. [Added 1-3-2011 by Ord. No. 533]
J. Billboards subject to the following specific standards and regulations:
[Added 7-26-2011 by Ord. No. 538]
(1) In addition to uses permitted, billboards along with their required
support structures shall be permitted on properties having at least
one acre in size which shall provide frontage along West
Germantown Pike or Trooper Road and shall meet all of the
following criteria. Only freestanding billboard sign structures shall
be permitted. Such billboard structures shall be permitted to have
one sign face visible from any direction and in no event shall there
be more than two sign faces. No individual sign face shall exceed a
maximum of 200 square feet per face.
(2) Height. The maximum overall height of a billboard sign structure
shall not exceed 25 feet measured from the elevation of the center
line of the grade of the road directly in front of the billboard sign to
the highest portion of the sign structure.
(3) Yard setbacks.
(a) No billboard sign structure or any part thereof shall be erected
or maintained within 25 feet of any ultimate right-of-way of a
public street or road or the side or rear lot line of an individual
property.
(b) No billboard sign structure or any part thereof shall be erected
or maintained within 200 feet of the perimeter of an AR, BR,
BR-1, or CR Residential District.
(4) No billboard sign structure shall be erected or maintained within
500 feet of any other billboard sign structure.
(5) The image, copy, or message of a billboard shall not change more
frequently than once per 30 seconds. The change of an image,
message, copy, color or brilliance of a billboard shall be
instantaneous. All changeable copy on a billboard shall change
uniformly and completely. Once changed, the copy of any part of
the billboard shall not change again in less than 30 seconds.
(a) No image shall be transferred by any means beyond the
perimeter of the billboard sign face.
(b) Billboards having internal illuminance shall have a pixel pitch
or equivalent resolution of not greater than 12 millimeters. The
light source shall be equipped to automatically adjust
brilliance levels based on ambient light conditions. White or
light color backgrounds shall not exceed 50% of the surface
area of the sign face of the billboard.
§ 205-72 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-72
186:784
§ 205-72.1. Construction/demolition waste landfills. [Amended
1-3-2011 by Ord. No. 533]
(c) No sign image shall be interactive, display interactive
messages or three-dimensional images; nor shall any sign or
any part of a billboard structure produce sound of any kind.
(d) No billboard sign shall flash, scroll, fade, revolve, move, have
intermittent lighting or movable characters or animated parts.
(e) Billboards having floodlighting shall be so shielded that the
source of the light shall not be visible from any point off the lot
on which the sign is erected and so that only the sign is directly
illuminated thereby.
(6) Maintenance. Every billboard sign and support structure shall be
constructed of durable materials and kept in good condition and
repaired at all times.
A. This section shall be known and may be cited as the "East Norriton
Township Ordinance for Licensing and Regulation of Construction/
Demolition Waste Landfills."
B. Definitions and word usage.
(1) Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases
in this section, whether capitalized or in lowercase letters, shall
have the following meanings.
ACT — The Act of July 7, 1980 (P.L. 380, No. 97),214 known as the
"Solid Waste Management Act."
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors of East Norriton Township.
CONSTRUCTION/DEMOLITION WASTE — Solid waste resulting
from the construction or demolition of buildings and other
structures, including, but not limited to, wood, plaster, metals,
asphaltic substances, bricks, block and unsegregated concrete. The
term also includes dredging waste. The term does not include the
following if they are separate from other waste and are used as
clean fill:
CONSTRUCTION/DEMOLITION WASTE LANDFILL — A facility
using land exclusively for the disposal of construction/demolition
waste. The term includes land affected during the lifetime of the
operations, including, but not limited to, areas where disposal
Uncontaminated soil, rock, stone, gravel, unused brick and
block and concrete.
(a)
Waste from land clearing, grubbing and excavation, including
trees, brush, stumps and vegetative material.
(b)
214. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 205-72 TOWING § 205-72.1
186:785
activities actually occur, support facilities, borrow areas, offices,
equipment sheds, air and water pollution control and treatment
systems, access roads, associated on-site or contiguous collection,
transportation and storage facilities, closure and postclosure care
and maintenance activities and other activities in which the natural
land surface has been disturbed as a result of or incidental to the
operation of the facility. This term is also referred to as "landfill" in
this section.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Environmental Protection of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and its authorized
representatives.
LICENSEE — A person who possesses a permit from the
Department and a license from East Norriton Township to
construct and/or operate a construction/demolition waste landfill.
PERMITTEE — A person who possesses a permit to dispose of
construction/demolition waste into the earth pursuant to the Act.
PERSON — Includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership or
other legal entity, and any unincorporated association, and shall
include both singular and plural.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of East Norriton, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP ADMINISTRATION — The Board of Supervisors,
Township Manager, Secretary/Treasurer, Engineer, Solicitor,
Zoning Officer, Permit Officer or any other person designated by
the Board of Supervisors to administer, police, enforce and
prosecute any violation of this or any ordinance of the Township.
(2) In this section, the singular shall include the plural, and the
masculine shall include the feminine and neuter.
C. License required.
(1) No person shall maintain or continue to maintain, whether for
commercial purposes or otherwise, any place within the Township
for disposing construction/demolition waste unless such place is
licensed by the Board as a construction/demolition waste landfill.
Licensing shall be completed only after a permit to operate a
construction/demolition waste landfill has been issued by the
Department pursuant to the Act and an application for a license is
submitted to and approved by the Board. An application for such
license shall contain the following information:
(a) The name and address of the applicant.
(b) A plan drawn to scale indicating by metes and bounds the land
upon which the construction/demolition waste landfill is to be
maintained and the permit for the operation of the
§ 205-72.1 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-72.1
186:786
construction/demolition waste landfill issued by the
Department.
(c) A list of equipment available for use in maintaining the landfill
site.
(d) The name and address of each individual, directly responsible
to the licensee, who shall be present at and in charge of the
landfill site at all times during operation of the landfill.
(e) Certificate of insurance, including liability for pollution,
together with a copy of insurance policy satisfactory to the
Board.
(2) All applications shall be reviewed by the Board or its designee for
completeness within 60 days of receipt of such application. All
applications shall be acted upon by the Board within 90 days after
an application is deemed complete. No license shall be effective
until approved by the Board at a regular meeting.
D. Escrow. [Amended 10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 566]
(1) No license shall be issued, or effective, unless there is on file with
the Township financial security in a form and amount acceptable to
the Township to assure:
(a) That the licensee, licensee's agents and servants shall comply
with all the terms, conditions, provisions, requirements and
specifications contained in this section.
(b) That the licensee, licensee's agents and servants shall hold
harmless the Township from any expense incurred through the
failure of the licensee, licensee's agents and servants to
operate and maintain the construction/demolition waste
landfill as required by this section, including any expense the
Township may be put to for correcting any condition or
violation of this section by the Township's own labor and
equipment, whenever the Township administration determines
it is necessary for the Township to correct any condition in
violation of this section or from any damages growing out of
the negligence of the licensee, a permittee or their respective
agents or servants.
(2) Before acceptance, all financial security shall be approved by the
Township. If a cash escrow is offered, it shall be deposited with the
Township, which shall give an official receipt therefor, reciting that
said cash has been deposited in compliance with and subject to the
provisions of this section.
E. Term of license. A license issued for a construction/demolition waste
landfill hereunder shall be valid for the calendar year for which it is
§ 205-72.1 TOWING § 205-72.1
186:787
issued and upon application may be renewed on a year-to-year basis
thereafter.
F. Revocation and refusal. The Board may revoke or refuse any license
previously issued for the operation of a construction/demolition waste
landfill if the Board finds, after reasonable investigation, that the
landfill has been operated in violation of the regulations set forth in this
section, or any other section of the Township, or any pertinent laws or
regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or of the United
States of America.
G. License fee. The license fee for the operation of a construction/
demolition waste landfill shall be established by resolution of the Board,
which resolution shall set forth such fee for each calendar year or for
each month or portion thereof in the case of a licensee for less than a
calendar year, payable in full at the time of application.
H. Regulations. All operation and maintenance of any construction/
demolition waste landfill shall comply with the following rules and
regulations:
(1) Any person may submit an application for a permit to operate a
construction/demolition waste landfill in two phases, known as
"Phase I" and "Phase II," in accordance with the provisions of 25 Pa.
Code § 277.101. Such applications must be submitted to the
Department in accordance with the applicable regulations under
the Act.
(2) All Phase I applications shall conform to the requirements of 25 Pa.
Code §§ 277.111 through 277.120.
(3) All Phase II applications must conform to the following
requirements:
(a) General Provisions: 25 Pa. Code §§ 277.131 through 277-138.
(b) Cover and Revegetation: 25 Pa. Code §§ 277.141 and 277.142.
(c) Water Quality Protection and Monitoring: 25 Pa. Code
§§ 277.151 and 277.152.
(d) Liners and Leachate Management: 25 Pa. Code §§ 277.161
through 277.164.
(e) Gas Management: 25 Pa. Code § 277.171.
(f) Emergency Planning: 25 Pa. Code § 277.181.
(g) Closure Provisions: 25 Pa. Code §§ 277.191 and 277.192.
(4) All construction/demolition waste landfills shall conform to the
following operating requirements:
(a) General Provisions: 25 Pa. Code §§ 277.201 through 277.203.
§ 205-72.1 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-72.1
186:788
(b) Daily Operations: 25 Pa. Code §§ 277.211 through 277.220.
(c) Cover and Revegetation: 25 Pa. Code §§ 277.231 through
277.235.
(d) Water Quality Protection: 25 Pa. Code §§ 277.241 through
277.246.
(e) Liner System: 25 Pa. Code §§ 277.251 through 277.260.
(f) Leachate Treatment: 25 Pa. Code §§ 277.271 through 277.277.
(g) Water Quality Monitoring: 25 Pa. Code §§ 277.281 through
277.288.
(h) Minerals and Gas: 25 Pa. Code §§ 277.291 and 277.292.
(i) Emergency Procedures: 25 Pa. Code §§ 277.301 through
277.303.
(j) Recordkeeping and Reporting: 25 Pa. Code §§ 277.311 and
277.312.
(k) Closure Provisions: 25 Pa. Code §§ 277.321 and 277.322.
(5) The provisions set forth above regarding applications and
operating requirements shall be in addition to any applicable
requirements set forth in 25 Pa. Code Chapter 271 relating to
municipal waste management insofar as they relate to the
operation of a construction/demolition waste landfill.
(6) The Township reserves the right to impose more stringent
requirements than those placed upon a person under any
applicable provision or regulation set forth above.
(7) The licensee shall only accept construction/demolition waste that
has first been processed at a transfer station permitted by the
Department to process such waste.
(8) To the extent not provided for in the regulations under the Act, all
persons licensed to operate a construction/demolition waste landfill
shall also comply with the following:
(a) The licensee shall comply with all pertinent laws and
regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and of the
United States of America or any department, agency or
authority thereof.
(b) The licensee shall comply with all applicable requirements of
any Township zoning, subdivision or land development
ordinance.
(c) The licensee shall name the Township as an additional
beneficiary on any financial assurance instrument required to
§ 205-72.1 TOWING § 205-72.1
186:789
be submitted to the Department. [Amended 10-27-2015 by
Ord. No. 566]
(d) An attendant, who shall be a competent adult individual
directly responsible to the licensee, shall be present at and in
charge of the landfill at all times during operation.
(e) A daily register shall be kept containing the full name and
address of each person bringing construction/demolition waste
to the landfill, containing the license number of any vehicle
involved, specifying the type and quantity of construction/
demolition waste, place of origin of such waste and the weight
of each individual load of waste.
(f) The daily register required in Subsection H(8)(e) above shall
be open to inspection by the Board or its duly authorized
representative at all times during business hours.
(g) The Township administration shall have the right to enter the
landfill during hours of normal operation to determine whether
the licensee is complying with all requirements of this section.
Any unreasonable delay in allowing access to the landfill shall
constitute a violation of this section.
(h) Except in the case of any emergency because of adverse
weather conditions, in which case reasonable notice shall be
given to the Township, the hours of operation of the landfill
shall be restricted to 7:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m. Monday through
Friday, except that there shall be no operation of the landfill on
officially recognized federal or state holidays.
(i) The property on which the landfill is located shall be enclosed
by fencing and vegetation screening as provided by Chapter
175, Subdivision and Land Development (regardless of
whether or not subdivision or land development review is
required), and closed by a locked gate at each entrance and
exit when the landfill is not open or in operation.
(j) There shall be no fires or burning of any waste at the landfill
site.
(k) There shall be no uncovered material at the landfill site at the
close of each working day.
(l) The licensee shall provide to the Board the results of any and
all tests which are conducted voluntarily or required by the
Department and/or the United States Environmental
Protection Agency.
(m) The licensee shall remove and clean any material spilled upon
any public or private road or property within the Township
from any vehicle carrying material to the landfill within 24
§ 205-72.1 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-72.1
186:790
hours and shall have equipment and personnel available at all
times for such cleaning and removal. The Township specifically
reserves the right to remove and clean any such material at
any time, including within the twenty-four-hour time period. If
the Township takes any such action under this subsection, the
licensee shall be fully responsible for all charges incurred by
the Township.
(n) The licensee shall prevent any material disposed, stored or
treated at its landfill from blowing, leaking, seeping or
otherwise escaping the construction/demolition waste landfill
onto any other public or private property in the Township. In
the event of a violation of this regulation, and in addition to the
other penalties provided herein, the licensee shall remove and/
or clean any such material within 24 hours unless prevented
from doing so in an emergency caused by adverse weather
conditions. If such adverse weather conditions exist, the
licensee shall remove and/or clean such material as soon as
conditions permit.
(o) All vehicles transporting construction/demolition waste to a
construction/demolition waste landfill within the Township
shall utilize only such public roads or streets as shall be
designated by the Board.
(p) All vehicles must have valid permits issued by the Township to
gain entrance into the landfill. The form of such permits shall
be subject to the approval of the Township Manager and shall
be issued on a calendar-year basis. Such permits shall be
issued for $50 and shall fully identify the vehicle and its
operator or operators. All vehicles and vehicle operators shall
conform to all Department requirements applicable to the
transport of construction/demolition waste.
(q) All vehicles entering the landfill shall check in with the
attendant, present a valid permit and notify the attendant of
the type, quantity and source of the material being disposed of
at the landfill.
(r) Traffic within the landfill shall be restricted to roads
established for the landfill operation only, and such roads shall
be paved in such a manner to prevent any dust, dirt or other
material caused by such traffic from blowing or migrating onto
any other public or private property in the Township.
(s) Removal of material from the landfill is prohibited.
(t) Persons under 18 years of age must remain in vehicles on
landfill property.
(u) Bare feet are not allowed on landfill property.
§ 205-72.1 TOWING § 205-72.1
186:791
(v) The speed limit on landfill roads is 10 miles per hour.
(w) Signs must be posted in conspicuous locations around the
landfill, including the landfill entrance, which shall state, at a
minimum, the hours of operation and the permitted uses of the
landfill.
(x) The licensee shall install and maintain any signs or warning
signs deemed necessary by the Township in connection with
the operation of the landfill.
I. Hazardous substances; hazardous waste. No person shall dispose of any
hazardous substance or hazardous waste or any material containing
any hazardous substance or hazardous waste in any construction/
demolition waste landfill in the Township. The terms "hazardous
substance" and "hazardous waste" as used in this section shall be
interpreted in accordance with their definitions in 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et
seq. and 42 U.S.C. § 9601 et seq.
J. Fees. A written schedule of fees, including, but not limited to, host and
license fees imposed by the Township for use of the landfill shall be
established by resolution of the Board. No person shall use the landfill
without paying all applicable fees.
K. Removal. Any person violating this section or the directions of the
licensee's attendant shall, in addition to all other applicable penalties,
remove all unacceptable material or pay the Township the cost of such
removal.
L. Dumping refuse, garbage or other material.
(1) It shall be unlawful to dump or dispose of any waste material other
than construction/demolition waste into any landfill in the
Township. Notwithstanding this provision or any other provision in
this section, nothing shall preclude a construction/demolition
landfill from accepting the following, if they are separate from
other waste and are used as clean fill, so long as the acceptance of
such material does not conflict with any regulation of the
Department:
(a) Uncontaminated soil, rock, stone, gravel, unused brick and
block and concrete.
(b) Waste from land clearing, grubbing and excavation, including
trees, brush, stumps and vegetative material:
(2) All provisions of this section governing construction/demolition
waste shall also be fully applicable to the foregoing material.
M. Enforcement. The Township administration shall be charged with the
enforcement of this section and shall make any inspection necessary to
that end.
§ 205-72.1 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-72.1
186:792
§ 205-72.2. Conditional use procedures for construction/demolition
waste landfills. [Added 1-3-2011 by Ord. No. 533]
N. Violations and penalties. Any person who violates any of the provisions
of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, in addition to any other
charges or penalties imposed by this section, pay a fine of not more
than $1,000, in addition to any other costs allowed by law. A separate
and distinct offense shall be deemed to have been committed for each
day such violation exists. Nothing shall preclude the Township from
imposing any other penalty for any violation if authorized by federal or
state law.
A. Any person seeking to operate a construction/demolition waste landfill
pursuant to § 205-72.1 must file an application for such use pursuant to
§ 205-137.1.
B. In addition to complying with the procedures set forth in § 205-137.1,
any person seeking to operate a construction/demolition waste landfill
pursuant to § 205.72.1 shall also demonstrate compliance with each of
the following requirements by a fair preponderance of credible
evidence as part of its request for conditional use:
(1) Floodplain. The construction/demolition waste landfill will not be
located in the one-hundred-year floodplain of waters of this
commonwealth.
(2) Wetland.
(a) The construction/demolition waste landfill will not be located
in or within 300 feet of an exceptional value wetland, as
defined in 25 Pa. Code § 105.17 (relating to wetlands).
(b) The construction/demolition waste landfill will not be located
in or within 100 feet of a wetland other than an exceptional
value wetland, unless storage, processing and disposal will not
occur within that distance and one of the following applies:
[1] If the operation is in or along the wetland, the operator has
received a permit from the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection under 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 105
(relating to dam safety and waterway management).
[2] If the operation is not in or along the wetland, no adverse
hydrologic or water quality impacts will result.
(3) Valley, ravine or head of hollow. The construction/demolition waste
landfill will not be located in a valley, ravine or head of hollow
where the operation would result in the elimination, pollution or
destruction of a portion of a perennial stream.
(4) Limestone or carbonate formation. The construction/demolition
waste landfill will not be located in areas underlain by limestone or
§ 205-72.1 TOWING § 205-72.2
186:793
carbonate formations where the formations are greater than five
feet in thickness and present at the topmost geological unit. The
areas include an area mapped by the Pennsylvania Geological
Survey as underlain by these formations, unless competent
geologic studies demonstrate the absence of limestone and
carbonate formations under the site.
(5) Occupied dwelling (existing facility). Except as provided in
Subsection B(6) and (7), the construction/demolition waste landfill
will not be located within 300 feet measured horizontally from an
occupied dwelling, unless the current owner of the dwelling has
provided a written waiver consenting to the facility being closer
than 300 feet. Except as provided in Subsection B(6) and (7), the
disposal area of the construction/demolition waste landfill will not
be within 500 feet measured horizontally from an occupied
dwelling, unless the current owner has provided a written waiver
consenting to the disposal area being closer than 500 feet. A waiver
shall be knowingly made and separate from a lease or deed unless
the lease or deed contains an explicit waiver from the current
owner.
(6) Occupied dwelling (expansion). For a permitted construction/
demolition waste landfill that was operating and not closed as of
December 23, 2000, an expansion permitted on or after December
23, 2000, may not be operated within 900 feet measured
horizontally from an occupied dwelling, unless one or both of the
following conditions are met:
(a) The owner of the dwelling has provided a written waiver
consenting to the facility or disposal area being closer than 900
feet. A waiver shall be knowingly made and separate from a
lease or deed unless the lease or deed contains an explicit
waiver from the owner.
(b) The applicant owned or entered into an enforceable option
contract to purchase the land on which the expansion would
operate on or before December 23, 2000, and still holds the
option rights, still owns the land or owns the land pursuant to
the option rights contract when the permit expansion is issued.
Even if the requirement of this Subsection B(6)(b) is met, the
expansion may not be operated within 300 feet measured
horizontally from an occupied dwelling, and the disposal area
may not be within 500 feet measured horizontally from an
occupied dwelling.
(7) Occupied dwelling (new landfill). A new construction/demolition
waste landfill permitted on or after December 23, 2000, may not be
located within 900 feet measured horizontally from an occupied
dwelling, unless the owner of the dwelling has provided a written
waiver consenting to the facility being closer than 900 feet. A
waiver shall be knowingly made and separate from a lease or deed
§ 205-72.2 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-72.2
186:794
unless the lease or deed contains an explicit waiver from the owner.
A closed landfill that submits an application to reopen and expand
shall also be subject to this Subsection B(7).
(8) Occupied dwelling (access road). Notwithstanding the prohibitions
in Subsection B(6) and (7), an access road to a construction/
demolition waste landfill may not be located within 300 feet
measured horizontally from an occupied dwelling, unless the owner
of the dwelling has provided a written waiver consenting to the
access road being closer than 300 feet. A waiver shall be knowingly
made and separate from a lease or deed unless the lease or deed
contains an explicit waiver from the owner.
(9) Perennial stream. The construction/demolition waste landfill will
not be located within 100 feet of a perennial stream, unless
storage, processing and disposal will not occur within that distance
and no adverse hydrologic or water quality impacts will result.
(10) Property line. The construction/demolition waste landfill will not be
located within 100 feet of a property line, unless one of the
following applies:
(a) Actual disposal of waste will not occur within that distance.
(b) The current owner has provided a written waiver consenting to
the facility being closer than 100 feet. The waiver shall be
knowingly made and separate from a lease or deed unless the
lease or deed contains an explicit waiver from the current
owner.
(11)Water source. The construction/demolition waste landfill will not be
located within 1/4 mile upgradient, and within 300 feet
downgradient, of a public or private water source for disposal,
processing and storage areas.
(12) School, park or playground. For a construction/demolition waste
landfill permit issued on or after December 23, 2000, other than an
expansion of a construction/demolition waste landfill that was
permitted prior to December 23, 2000, a construction/demolition
waste landfill will not be located within 300 yards of:
(a) A building which is owned by a school district or school and
used for instructional purposes.
(b) A park.
(c) A playground.
(13) Traffic impact study.
(a) A traffic impact study shall be required for any proposed
construction/demolition waste landfill. Such study shall enable
the Board to assess the likely impact of the construction/
§ 205-72.2 TOWING § 205-72.2
186:795
§ 205-73. Smoke control.
§ 205-74. Emission control.
demolition waste landfill in the various components of the
transportation system in the Township. The purpose of said
study shall be to identify any traffic problems which may result
from the construction/demolition waste landfill, and to
determine its impact on public transportation and pedestrian
and nonvehicular circulation in the area. The applicant shall
retain a qualified professional traffic engineer to prepare the
traffic impact study.
(b) The study area shall be the road network as defined by the
traffic engineer, which represents the area that is likely to be
affected (from a traffic impact standpoint) by the construction/
demolition waste landfill. Prior to identifying the study area,
the traffic engineer shall discuss possible study area
boundaries with the applicant and the Township. Specific
intersections to be included in the study shall be mutually
agreed upon prior to initiating work.
(14) Obstruction. For areas permitted on or after December 23, 2000, a
construction/demolition waste landfill will not be located in a
manner in which any portion of the landfill would be an obstruction
to air navigation under 14 CFR 77.23(a)(5) (relating to standards
for determining obstructions).
A. No smoke shall be emitted from any chimney or other source visible
gray greater than No. 1 on the Ringelmann Chart as published by the
United States Bureau of Mines.
B. Smoke of a shade not darker than No. 2 on the Ringelmann Smoke
Chart may be emitted for not more than four minutes in any 30 minutes.
C. These provisions, applicable to visible gray smoke, shall also apply to
visible smoke of a different color but with an equivalent apparent
opacity.
A. No emission shall be made which can cause any damage to health,
animals or vegetation or other form of property or which can cause any
excessive soiling at any point.
B. No emission of liquid or solid particles from any chimney or otherwise
shall exceed 0.3 grain per cubic foot of the covering gas at any point.
C. For measurement of the amount of particles in gases resulting from
combustion, standard correction shall be applied to a stack
temperature of 500° F. and 50% excess air.
§ 205-72.2 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-75
186:796
§ 205-75. Noise control.
At no point on the boundary of a residential or commercial district shall
the sound-pressure level of any operation exceed the described levels in the
designated octave bands shown below for the districts indicated.
Sound Levels
Octave Band
(cycles per second)
Along Residential
District Boundaries
Maximum Permitted
Sound Level
(decibels)
At any Other Point on
the Lot Boundary
Maximum Permitted
Sound Level
(decibels)
0 to 75 72 79
75 to 150 67 74
150 to 300 59 66
300 to 600 52 59
600 to 1,200 46 53
1,200 to 2,400 40 47
2,400 to 4,800 34 41
Above 4,800 32 39
§ 205-76. Control of odors.
There shall be no emission of odorous matter in such quantities as to
be offensive along a lot boundary line. Any process which may involve
the creation or emission of any odors shall be provided with a secondary
safeguard system so that control will be maintained if the primary
safeguard system should fail. There is hereby established as a guide in
determining such quantities of offensive odors, Table III (Odor Thresholds)
in Chapter 5 of the Air Pollution Abatement Manual, copyright 1951, by the
Manufacturing Chemists Association, Inc., Washington D.C., or the latest
revised edition thereof.
§ 205-77. Control of glare and heat.
Any operation producing intense glare or heat shall be performed within
an enclosed building or behind a solid fence in such manner as to be
completely imperceptible from any point along the lot lines.
§ 205-78. Control of vibration.
No vibration which is discernible to the human sense of feeling shall be
perceptible without instruments at any point on the lot line.
§ 205-75 TOWING § 205-79
186:797
§ 205-79. Radioactivity or electrical disturbances.
There shall be no activities which emit dangerous radioactivity at any point.
There shall be no electrical disturbance (except from domestic household
appliances) adversely affecting the operation at any point or any equipment
other than that of the creator of such disturbance.
§ 205-80. Outdoor storage of materials; disposal.
§ 205-81. through § 205-83. (Reserved)215
§ 205-84. General regulations.
A. No flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be stored in
bulk above the ground; provided, however, that tanks or drums of fuel
are excluded from this provision.
B. All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, raw materials and products stored
outdoors shall be concealed from any adjacent properties.
C. No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or
manner that may be transferred off the lot by natural causes or forces.
D. All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust which
constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible or otherwise be
attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors in closed
containers.
A. Lot area. The industrial lot area shall be a minimum of 80,000 square feet, and a
lot width of not less than 200 feet at the building line shall be provided
for every building or other structure erected or used for any use
permitted in this district.
B. Building area. No more than 40% of the lot area shall be occupied by
buildings.
C. Front yard. The minimum required depth of the front yard shall be 50
feet measured from the ultimate right-of-way line.
D. Side yards. There shall be two side yards, each of which shall not be
less than 30 feet in width.
E. Rear yard. The required minimum depth of the rear yard shall not be
less than 50 feet.
F. In no case shall any building or structure erected or used in an I
Industrial District be located closer than 200 feet to any residential or
institutional zoning district, nor any parking area be closer than 100
feet to any residential or institutional zoning district.
215. Editor's Note: Former §§ 205-81, Power service lines, 205-82, Waste disposal, and 205-83,
Water requirements, were repealed 4-28-2009 by Ord. No. 515.
§ 205-79 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-84
186:798
§ 205-85. Adult uses.
G. Height regulation. The maximum height of any building or structure
shall be 35 feet.
H. Parking. All off-street parking and loading areas shall be provided for in
accordance with Article XVIII of this chapter.
I. Lighting. Lighting facilities shall be arranged in a manner which will
protect the highway and neighboring properties, whether contiguous or
not, from unreasonable direct glare or hazardous interference of any
kind.
J. Signs. Signs shall be permitted only in accordance with the provisions
of Article XIX of this chapter.
K. Landscaping, including conservation of existing trees and woodlands,
street trees, stormwater basin landscaping and site element screens,
shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 175,
Subdivision and Land Development.
A. Restrictions.
(1) No such adult uses shall be allowed within 1,000 feet of another
existing adult use.
(2) No such adult use shall be located within 1,000 feet of any zoning
district which is zoned for residential use.
(3) No such adult use shall be located within 1,000 feet of a preexisting
school or place of worship.
(4) No such adult use shall be located in any zoning district except an I
Industrial zoned area.
(5) No such adult use shall be deemed to be a permissible change of
use as set forth in § 205-129 of this chapter.
B. Exterior display. No adult use shall be conducted in any manner that
permits the observation of any material depicting, describing or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas from
any public way or from any property not registered as an adult use. This
provision shall apply to any display, decoration, sign, show window or
other opening.
C. Any adult use permitted by special exception must be contained in a
freestanding building which has no other use than those listed herein as
adult bookstore, adult motion-picture theater, adult entertainment
cabaret and/or massage parlor.
§ 205-84 TOWING § 205-85
186:799

ARTICLE XVI
LI Limited Industrial District
§ 205-86. Intent.
The following is an expansion of the statement of community development
objectives contained in Article I, § 205-3 of this chapter. It is the intent of
this article to provide for nonpolluting light industry, office and certain light
manufacturing operations, in districts of at least 20 acres. Furthermore, it
is the intent of this article to:
§ 205-87. Permitted uses.
A building or group of buildings may be erected, altered or used and a lot
may be used or occupied for any of the following purposes and no other:
A. Establish standards and certain limitations which encourage orderly
and planned development of industrial parks, including an internal road
network, while prohibiting polluting or noxious uses.
B. Provide employment centers in close proximity to existing and future
residential development to reduce commuting distance for the work
force as well as to enhance the community tax base.
C. Ensure that residential and institutional development will be buffered
against Limited Industrial Districts and prevent encroachment upon
existing highways by the use of setbacks and installation of new
landscape material and/or require the preservation of existing natural
features to accomplish the same effect.
D. Provide to the Board of Supervisors, in order to assist in the evaluation
of a proposed Master Plan, the option of requiring a traffic impact study
to be prepared by the applicant and subject to the review and
evaluation of the Township.
A. Any use permitted in the BP Business Professional Zoning District.
B. General services, including plumbing or other building supplies,
provided that such storage of product or merchandise shall be within a
fully enclosed building, and further excluding interior or exterior
storage and sale of coal, petroleum distillates or highly flammable
materials of any kind.
C. Offices for administration, executive, professional, sales and other
similar uses.
D. Laboratories for scientific, medical, agricultural or light industrial
research and development, training or product development, and
manufacturing after review and approval from the Board of
Supervisors.
E. Printing, publishing, lithographing and similar processes.
§ 205-86 TOWING § 205-87
186:801
F. Wholesaling, warehousing and distributing, provided that the handling
or exchange of highly flammable or explosive materials shall be
prohibited, and further provided that satisfactory provisions are made
to prevent traffic congestion and hazard.
G. Light manufacturing, fabricating, assembling or processing of scientific
and precision instruments and controls; computer products and
components, electronics and parts assembly; pharmaceutical and
optical goods; medical and dental equipment; photographic
reproduction and films; musical instruments, toys, cosmetics and
tobacco products; jewelry and timepieces; hardware, tools and
appliances, ceramics, clothing and textile products; products from
previously prepared paper, rubber and plastics (see exceptions);
beverages, confections, cream and all food products (exclusive of meat
and fish). [Amended 10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 566]
H. The manufacture and assemblage of products from the following
previously prepared materials; wood, glass, textiles, cork, leather, bone,
shell, fur, feathers, hair, sheet rubber, paper.
I. Repair and maintenance of office equipment, computers, electronic
products and household items.
J. Accessory uses on the same lot and incidental to any permitted use,
which shall include:
(1) Cafeteria facilities for employees.
(2) Recreational facilities for employees and occupants; provided,
however, that there shall be no exterior lighting for such facilities.
(3) Storage within completely screened area but not within the
minimum required front yard or within 100 feet of any other zoning
district, in conjunction with a permitted use.
(4) Incidental retail sales of products assembled or manufactured on
the premises, or repair and replacement items or items distributed
or used by the occupant. Special sales events are permitted and
subject to the following specific limitations: Special sales shall be
limited to a period of 10 calendar days per year, not more than four
events per year and allowed only after a special permit is first
obtained from the Township Zoning Officer.
(5) Repair and maintenance of vehicles for only those such vehicles
used on the same property and/or in connection with a foregoing
permitted use.
(6) Electrical substations, provided that the use shall be permanently
screened to a height of 10 feet from any existing dwelling adjacent
thereto.
(7) Educational, trade, technical and professional schools or institutes,
not incompatible with this district.
§ 205-87 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-87
186:802
§ 205-88. Prohibited uses.
The following uses or activities are specifically prohibited:
(8) Metalworking, extrusion of small metals, welding, plating,
laundering, cleaning and dyeing, excluding bleaching, in
connection with a foregoing permitted use.
(9) Fencing in accordance with § 205-24.216
K. The following uses when permitted by special exception:
(1) Metalworking, extrusion of small metals, welding, plating,
laundering, cleaning and dyeing, excluding bleaching, when
proposed as a principal use in a building or on a lot.
(2) The following indoor recreational uses: gymnastics, racquetball,
squash and tennis, ice-skating rink.
(3) Any use of the same general character as any permitted use.
L. 217Solar and wind-power energy devices shall be permitted in multiple
numbers as a principal use and shall comply with all applicable yards,
setbacks, and zoning standards that would apply to an industrial
building. [Added 1-3-2011 by Ord. No. 533]
M. Wireless telecommunications facilities, subject to Article XXIX of this
chapter. [Added 2-25-2014 by Ord. No. 550]
N. Artisanal manufacturing. [Added 10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 566]
O. Indoor and outdoor recreational facilities. [Added 10-27-2015 by
Ord. No. 566]
P. Municipal uses and police stations. [Added 10-27-2015 by Ord. No.
566]
Q. Fire stations and ambulance stations that are occupied by a provider
designated by the East Norriton Township Board of Supervisors to
provide fire or ambulance service to East Norriton Township. [Added
10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 566]
R. Microbreweries. [Added 10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 566]
A. Truck terminals or freight stations; express, carting or hauling stations.
B. Tire and rubber tube products; rubber, synthetic and wood processing.
C. General vehicle engine or body repair.
216. Editor's Note: Former § 205-24, Fences, was repealed 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 512. See now
§ 205-22.3.
217. Editor's Note: Former Subsection L, pertaining to conditional uses, was repealed
12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 512.
§ 205-87 TOWING § 205-88
186:803
§ 205-89. Applicability; utilities; parking; setbacks; access.
D. Broadcasting stations, antennas or towers. [Amended 2-25-2014 by
Ord. No. 550]
E. Uses enumerated in § 205-87C, except for uses authorized herein.
F. Public and private utility facility.
A. The regulations of §§ 205-87 and 205-88, inclusive, shall apply to the LI
Limited Industrial District.
B. (Reserved)
C. (Reserved)
D. Parking and driveway setbacks shall be as follows:
(1) From a building; 20 feet.
(2) From the ultimate right-of-way line of a new internal road: 25 feet.
(3) From the ultimate right-of-way line of an existing peripheral road:
50 feet when opposite a residential district, otherwise 35 feet.
(4) From lot lines within the proposed subdivision: 10 feet, unless
common or shared parking is utilized as provided in § 205-103.
(5) From a residential district line not adjacent to a street: 100 feet.
(6) Parking shall not be permitted along public access and peripheral
public roads.
E. Storage and loading setbacks shall be as follows:
(1) From the ultimate right-of-way line of a new internal public road:
25 feet.
(2) When closer than 200 feet to an existing peripheral road which
abuts a residential zoning district, no loading, loading docks,
outdoor storage, trucks or trucking shall be permitted on that
portion of a lot between the closest point of a building and the
ultimate right-of-way line of the road or along the building wall
facing the road, but in no event less than 100 feet from the ultimate
right-of-way line.
(3) From lot lines within the proposed subdivision: 10 feet.
(4) From a residential district line not adjacent to a street: 100 feet.
F. Access.
(1) An interior street system shall be created to serve any LI
subdivision, and all lots shall have access onto the interior streets
only. Intersections shall be limited to not more than one per
§ 205-88 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-89
186:804
§ 205-90. General regulations.
highway, having at least 600 feet of frontage to the LI site, unless
specifically waived by the Board.
(2) A driveway and/or street system for access to buildings within the
industrial park may be located not less than 35 feet from the
ultimate right-of-way of an existing peripheral road.
A. Area of zoning district. Not less than 20 acres shall be provided for
every zoning district to be used in whole or in part as a Limited
Industrial District.
B. Lot area. Each individual lot created herein shall be a minimum lot area
of 80,000 square feet, and lot width of not less than 100 feet at the
building line shall be provided for every building or other structure
erected or used for any use permitted in this district.
C. Building area. No more than 40% of the lot area shall be occupied by
buildings.
D. Front yard. Minimum required depth of the front yard shall be 50 feet
measured from the ultimate right-of-way line.
E. Side yards. There shall be two side yards, each of which shall not be
less than 30 feet in width.
F. Rear yard. The required minimum depth of the rear yard shall not be
less than 50 feet.
G. Buffer yards from residential zoning districts. In no case shall any
building or structure erected or used in an LI Industrial District be
located closer than 100 feet to any residential zoning district nor closer
than 100 feet from the ultimate right-of-way line of an existing
peripheral road.
H. Height regulation. Maximum height of any building or structure shall
be 35 feet.
I. Parking. All off-street parking and loading areas shall be provided for in
accordance with Article XVIII of this chapter.
J. Lighting. Lighting facilities shall be arranged in a manner which will
protect the highway and neighboring properties, whether contiguous or
not, from any direct glare or hazardous interference of any kind.
K. Signs. Signs shall be permitted only in accordance with the provisions
of Article XIX of this chapter.
L. Maximum impervious surfaces. The maximum impervious surfaces shall
be not greater than 70% of each lot.
M. Landscaping, including conservation of existing trees and woodlands,
street trees, stormwater basin landscaping and site element screens,
§ 205-89 TOWING § 205-90
186:805
shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 175,
Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 205-90 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-90
186:806
ARTICLE XVII
Floodplain Conservation District
[Added 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 569218]
§ 205-91. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978,219 delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Pursuant to that obligation, the following regulations are enacted.
§ 205-92. General provisions.
A. Intent. The intent of this article is to:
(1) Protect areas of the floodplain necessary to contain floodwaters.
(2) To permit only those uses in the floodplain that are compatible with
preserving natural conditions and stream flow.
(3) Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community
by preventing development in areas prone to flooding.
(4) Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in
order to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
(5) Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
(6) Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its
governmental units, and its residents by preventing excessive
development in areas subject to flooding.
(7) Comply with federal and state floodplain management
requirements.
B. Applicability.
(1) The Floodplain Conservation District is defined and established as
a district applicable to those areas of East Norriton Township
subject to inundation by the waters of the one-percent annual
chance flood as delineated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) for Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, as prepared by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, dated March 2, 2016,
and subsequent revisions thereto. Said floodplain areas shall
consist of the following specific areas:
218. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. XVII, Floodplain Conservation
District, as amended.
219. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 205-91 TOWING § 205-92
186:807
(a) Those areas established as special flood hazard areas (SFHAs)
according to FEMA's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for
East Norriton Township. Areas constituting SFHAs include the
following:
[1] Zone A: areas subject to inundation by the one-percent
annual chance flood event generally determined using
approximate methodologies. Because detailed hydraulic
analyses have not been performed, no base flood
elevations (BFEs) or flood depths are known. Mandatory
flood insurance purchase requirements and floodplain
management standards apply.
[2] Zone AE: areas subject to inundation by the one-percent
annual chance flood event determined by detailed
methods. BFEs are shown. Mandatory flood insurance
purchase requirements and floodplain management
standards apply.
(b) Soils with a frequency of flooding of 1% or greater per year, as
delineated by the Natural Resources Conservation Service,
United States Department of Agriculture Web-Based Soil
Survey (available online at
http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/), including the following
soils:
[1] Bowmansville (Bo).
[2] Knauers (Bo).
[3] Gibraltar (Gc).
[4] Hatboro (Ha).
[5] Rowland (Rt).
[6] Rowland (RwA).
[7] Rowland (RwB).
[8] Urban land occasionally flooded (UlA).
(2) In lieu of the above, East Norriton Township may require the
applicant to determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic
engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be
undertaken only by professional engineers or others of
demonstrated qualifications, licensed in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, who shall certify that the technical methods used
correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies,
analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail
to allow a thorough technical review by the Township.
§ 205-92 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-92
186:808
§ 205-93. Definitions; word usage.
(3) The Floodplain Conservation District shall be delineated according
to FEMA's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for East Norriton
Township, which is hereby made a part of this article, and
additional area based on soils as described in § 205-92B(1)(b). The
FIRM is available for inspection at the municipal office.
(4) The Floodplain Conservation District shall be deemed an overlay on
any zoning district now or hereafter applicable to any lot.
(5) It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or
corporation to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any
construction or development anywhere within East Norriton
Township unless a permit has been obtained from the Floodplain
Administrator.
(6) A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing
buildings or structures.
C. Abrogation and greater restrictions. This article supersedes any other
conflicting provisions which may be in effect in the Floodplain
Conservation District. However, any other ordinance provisions shall
remain in full force and effect to the extent that those provisions are
more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the provisions of
this article, the more restrictive provision shall apply.
D. Severability. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or
phrase of this article shall be declared invalid for any reason
whatsoever, such a decision shall not affect the remaining portions of
this article, which shall remain in full force and effect, and for this
purpose the provisions of this article are hereby declared to be
severable.
E. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
(1) The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this
article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is
based on acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods
may occur or flood heights may be increased by man-made or
natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by
debris. This article does not imply that areas outside the Floodplain
Conservation District or that land uses permitted within such areas
will be free from flooding or flood damages.
(2) This article shall not create liability on the part of East Norriton
Township or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages
that result from reliance on this article or any administrative
decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 205-92 TOWING § 205-93
186:809
A. Word usage. Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used
in this article shall be interpreted so as to give this article its most
reasonable application.
B. Specific definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundredyear
flood").
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, and A1-30 that indicates
the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a onepercent
or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year. The BFE is also shown on the FIS profile, and can be determined
for Zone A Floodplains.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground
level on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to subdivision of land;
construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair, expansion, or
alteration of buildings or other structures; the placement of
manufactured homes; streets and other paving; utilities; fill; grading
and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations; or storage of
equipment or materials.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXISTING STRUCTURE/EXISTING CONSTRUCTION — A structure for
which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of
the FIRM.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction
of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
§ 205-93 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-93
186:810
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance
Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards
and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood
Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject
to partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream,
river or watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid
accumulation of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than one foot.
FLOODWAY FRINGE — That part of the floodplain adjacent to and
extending from the floodway and subject to inundation by the onehundred-
year flood.
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a
flood level for purposes of floodplain management.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURES — Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Pennsylvania Historical and
Museum Commission (PHMC) as meeting the criteria for individual
listing on the National Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Pennsylvania
Historical and Museum Commission (PHMC) as contributing to the
historical significance of a National Register historic district or a
district preliminarily determined by the PHMC to be eligible to
qualify for listing in the National Register; or
(2)
(3) Designated as historic by a municipal ordinance:
§ 205-93 TOWING § 205-93
186:811
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant, partially enclosed
area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental
storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered the
lowest floor of a building, provided that such space is not designed and
built so that the structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation
design requirements of this article.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational
vehicles and other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more
than 180 consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured
home lots for rent or sale.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep; minor
repairs shall not include the cutting away of any wall, partition or
portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or
bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of
egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the exitway
requirements; nor shall minor repairs include addition to, alteration
of, replacement of or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer,
drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent, or similar piping, electric
wiring or mechanical or other work affecting public health or general
safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective start date of this floodplain
management article and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures. Any construction started after September 30, 1977,
and before the effective start date of this floodplain management article
is subject to the ordinance in effect at the time the permit was issued,
provided the start of construction was within 180 days of permit
issuance. The base floor elevation of any building deemed new
construction shall be one foot six inches above the base flood elevation.
Identified individually or as part of a local historic district by
a zoning ordinance under the authority of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code;220 or
(a)
Located in a local historic district that has been certified by the
Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission as meeting
the requirements of the Pennsylvania Historic District Act.221
(b)
220. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
221. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 8001 et seq.
§ 205-93 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-93
186:812
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community. The base floor
elevation of any new manufactured home shall be one foot six inches
above the base flood elevation.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Also referred to
as the "one-percent frequency flood," or the "base flood," as defined by
FEMA in the Flood Insurance Study for East Norriton Township.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility, or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law
as the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974, or on
or after the community's initial FIRM dated September 30, 1977,
whichever is later, and, as such, would be required to be compliant with
the regulations of the NFIP.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974, or
before the community's initial FIRM dated September 30, 1977, and, as
such, would not be required to be compliant with the regulations of the
NFIP.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REDEVELOPMENT AREA — A census tract or group of census tracts
eligible for the Montgomery County Revitalization Program and
identified in the adopted municipal revitalization plan.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The regulatory flood elevation
is the elevation to which development is regulated for purposes of
elevation and/or dry floodproofing. It is equal to the base flood elevation
(BFE) plus a freeboard of one foot six inches.
(1) Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
(2)
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a lightduty
truck;
(3)
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
(4)
§ 205-93 TOWING § 205-93
186:813
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood-related damages sustained by a structure
on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost
of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or
exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before the damages
occurred.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
It is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
SPECIAL FLOOD PLAIN AREA — The areas identified as Zone AE in the
Flood Insurance Study, where one-hundred-year flood elevations have
been provided, but no floodway has been delineated.
SPECIAL PERMIT — A special approval which is required for hospitals,
nursing homes, jails, and new manufactured home parks and
subdivisions and substantial improvements to such existing parks,
when such development is located in all, or a designated portion, of a
floodplain.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and
other proposed new development and means the date the permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within
180 days from the date of the permit and shall be completed within 12
months after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time extension
is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The "actual
start" means either the first placement of permanent construction of
a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond
the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation,
such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation
of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a
basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary
forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory
buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units
or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
"actual start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building
or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by lease
of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres,
§ 205-93 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-93
186:814
§ 205-94. Identification of floodplain areas.
not involving any new street or easement of access or any residential
dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage (or repetitive loss when a repetitive
loss provision is used) regardless of the actual repair work performed.
The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a
structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary,
building or safety code specifications which have been identified by the
local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary
to assure safe living conditions. For alteration of historic structures, see
§ 205-95D(5).
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building
code adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable
to new construction in all municipalities, whether administered by the
municipality, a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry.
Applicable to residential and commercial buildings, the code adopted
the International Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building
Code (IBC), by reference, as the construction standard applicable with
the state floodplain construction. For coordination purposes, references
to the above are made specifically to various sections of the IRC and the
IBC.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the community's floodplain management
regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation
certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance
required in 44 CFR 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or
(e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
A. Identification.
(1) The Floodplain Conservation District shall be any areas of East
Norriton Township classified as special flood hazard areas (SFHAs)
in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the accompanying Flood
Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated March 2, 2016, and issued by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), or the most
recent revision thereof, including all digital data developed as part
of the Flood Insurance Study.
§ 205-93 TOWING § 205-94
186:815
(2) The Floodplain Conservation District shall also include areas with
soils listed in § 205-92B(1)(b), along with any community-identified
flood hazard areas.
(3) The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent
revisions and amendments, are hereby adopted by East Norriton
Township and declared to be a part of this article.
B. Description and special requirements of the Floodplain Conservation
District. The Floodplain Conservation District shall consist of the
following specific areas/districts:
(1) The Floodway Area/District shall be those areas identified as
floodway on the FIRM as well as those floodway areas which have
been identified in other available studies or sources of information
for those special floodplain areas where no floodway has been
identified in the FIS. The floodway represents the channel of a
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing
the water surface elevation by more than one foot at any point.
(a) Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill,
new construction, substantial improvements, or other
development, shall be permitted unless it has been
demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses
performed in accordance with standard engineering practice
that the proposed encroachment would not result in any
increase in flood levels within the community during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(b) No new construction or development shall be allowed, unless a
permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection regional office.
(2) The AE Area/District shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone
on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which
base flood elevations have been provided.
(a) The AE Area adjacent to the floodway shall be those areas
identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS
prepared by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been
provided and a floodway has been delineated.
(b) The AE Area without floodway shall be those areas identified as
an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by
FEMA for which base flood elevations have been provided but
no floodway has been determined.
[1] No permit shall be granted for any construction,
development, use, or activity within any AE Area/District
without floodway unless it is demonstrated that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development would not,
§ 205-94 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-94
186:816
together with all other existing and anticipated
development, increase the BFE more than one foot at any
point.
[2] No new construction or development shall be located
within the area measured 50 feet landward from the topof-
bank of any watercourse unless the appropriate permit
is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection regional office.
(3) A Area/District.
(a) The A Area/District shall be the areas identified as an A Zone
on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for
which no one-percent annual chance flood elevations have
been provided. For these areas, elevation and floodway
information from other federal, state, or other acceptable
sources shall be used when available. Where other acceptable
information is not available, the elevation shall be determined
by using the elevation of a point on the boundary of the
Floodplain Conservation District which is nearest the
construction site.
(b) In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant
to determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic
engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses
shall be undertaken only by professional engineers licensed in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or others of demonstrated
qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods
used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts.
Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in
sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the
municipality.
(4) The Shallow Flooding Area/District shall be those areas identified
as Zones AO and AH on the FIRM and in the FIS. These areas are
subject to inundation by one-percent annual chance shallow
flooding where average depths are between one and three feet. In
Zones AO and AH, drainage paths shall be established to guide
floodwaters around and away from structures on slopes.
(5) Community-identified flood hazard areas shall be those areas
where East Norriton Township has identified local flood hazard or
ponding areas, as delineated and adopted on a Local Flood Hazard
Map using the best available topographic data and locally derived
information such as flood of record, historic high water marks, soils
or appropriate study methodologies.
C. Changes in identification of area. The Floodplain Conservation District
may be revised or modified by the East Norriton Board of Supervisors
where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or person
documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any such
§ 205-94 TOWING § 205-94
186:817
§ 205-95. Uses permitted in Floodplain Conservation District.
change, approval must be obtained from FEMA. Additionally, as soon
as practicable, but not later than six months after the date such
information becomes available, a community shall notify FEMA of the
changes by submitting technical or scientific data.
D. Boundary disputes. Should a dispute concerning any identified
floodplain boundary arise, an initial determination shall be made by the
East Norriton Township Planning Commission, and any party aggrieved
by this decision or determination may appeal to the East Norriton
Township Board of Supervisors. The burden of proof shall be on the
appellant.
E. Corporate boundary changes. Prior to development occurring in areas
where annexation or other corporate boundary changes are proposed
or have occurred, the community shall review flood hazard data
affecting the lands subject to boundary changes. The community shall
adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in areas subject to annexation
or corporate boundary changes which meet or exceed those in 44 CFR
60.3.
A. Uses permitted by right. The following uses are permitted by right in
the Floodplain Conservation District in compliance with the
requirements of this article:
(1) Up to half of any required yard setback area on an individual
residential lot may extend into the Floodplain Conservation
District.
(2) Open space uses that are primarily passive in character shall be
permitted to extend into the floodplain, including:
(a) Wildlife sanctuaries, nature preserves, forest preserves,
fishing areas, passive areas of public and private parklands,
and reforestation.
(b) Streambank stabilization.
(3) Forestry operations reviewed by the Montgomery County
Conservation District.
(4) The following floodplain crossings are permitted, provided
disturbance to any existing woodlands and degradation of water
quality are minimized to the greatest extent practicable:
(a) Agricultural crossings by farm vehicles and livestock.
(b) Driveways serving single-family detached dwelling units,
roadways, recreational trails, railroads, and utilities.
(5) Agricultural uses conducted in compliance with methods
prescribed in the latest version of the Department of
§ 205-94 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-95
186:818
Environmental Protection's Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Manual. In the event that the municipality has a Riparian Corridor
Conservation District or similar regulation, the more restrictive
regulation shall apply.
(6) Public sewer and/or water lines and public utility transmission lines
running along the corridor. Utility crossings shall be made
perpendicular to the direction of flow, or as near as practical.
(7) Development of elevated and floodproofed buildings on brownfield
sites in redevelopment areas encouraging economic revitalization,
in compliance with § 205-99B. The base floor elevation shall be one
foot six inches above the flood elevation.
B. Uses prohibited in Floodplain Conservation District. Any use or activity
not authorized within § 205-95A herein shall be prohibited within the
Floodplain Conservation District, and the following activities and
facilities are specifically prohibited, except for as part of a
redevelopment project in compliance with § 205-95A(7) herein:
(1) No new construction, alteration, or improvement of buildings and
any other type of permanent structure, including fences, shall be
permitted in the floodway or the one-hundred-year floodplain.
(2) New construction of buildings or placement of fill within the onehundred-
year floodplain is prohibited.
(3) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse.
(4) Clearing of all existing vegetation, except where such clearing is
necessary to prepare land for a use permitted under § 205-95A
herein and where the effects of these actions are mitigated by
reestablishment of vegetation.
(5) Use of fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, and/or other chemicals in
excess of prescribed industry standards.
(6) Roads or driveways, except where permitted as corridor crossings
in compliance with § 205-94A herein.
(7) Motor or wheeled vehicle traffic in any area not designed to
accommodate adequately the type and volume.
(8) Parking lots.
(9) Subsurface sewage disposal areas.
(10) Sod farming.
(11) Stormwater basins, including necessary berms and outfall
facilities.
§ 205-95 TOWING § 205-95
186:819
(12) The storage of chemicals, oils, greases, gasoline, or other products
as listed in § 205-97C(1) or that would be harmful to the
environment or water.
C. Nonconforming structures and uses in Floodplain Conservation
District. The provisions of this article do not require any changes or
improvements to be made to lawfully existing structures. However,
when an improvement is made to any existing structure, the provisions
of § 205-95D of this article shall apply.
D. Improvements to existing structures in Floodplain Conservation
District. The following provisions shall apply whenever any
improvement is made to an existing structure located within any
Floodplain Conservation District:
(1) No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be
allowed within any floodway area that would cause any increase in
the elevation of the base flood elevation. Any expansion or
enlargement of an existing structure shall be at an elevation of one
foot six inches above the base flood elevation.
(2) No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be
allowed within any AE Area/District with floodway, as defined in
§ 205-94B(2), which would, together with all other existing and
anticipated development, increase the BFE more than one foot at
any point. Any expansion or enlargement of an existing structure
shall be an elevation of one foot six inches above the base flood
elevation.
(3) No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be
undertaken in the direction of the streambank.
(4) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of 50% or
more of its market value, shall constitute a substantial
improvement and shall be undertaken only in full compliance with
the provisions of this article.
(5) Historic structures undergoing repair or rehabilitation that would
constitute a substantial improvement as defined in this article must
comply with all ordinance requirements that do not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure.
Documentation that a specific ordinance requirement will cause
removal of the structure from the National Register of Historic
Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places must be obtained
from the Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation
Officer. Any exemption from the ordinance requirements will be the
minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design
of the structure.
(6) The above activity shall also address the requirements of the 34 Pa.
Code, as amended, and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC.
§ 205-95 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-95
186:820
§ 205-96. Variances.
(7) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind that meets the definition of "repetitive loss" shall be
undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this
article.
A. General. If compliance with any of the requirements of this article
would result in an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder,
developer or landowner, East Norriton Township may, upon request,
grant relief from the strict application of the requirements.
B. Variance procedures and conditions.
(1) For a use other than those permitted in § 205-95, an application
seeking approval by variance shall be forwarded to the Zoning
Hearing Board along with required studies or information and the
findings of the Zoning Officer.
(2) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any floodway area that would cause any
increase in the BFE.
(3) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any AE Area/District without floodway that
would, together with all other existing and anticipated
development, increase the BFE more than one foot at any point.
(4) No variance shall be granted for any of the other requirements
pertaining specifically to development regulated by § 205-98D
(pertaining to special technical requirements for activities
requiring a special permit) or to development which may endanger
human life [§ 205-97C(1)].
C. Special requirements for subdivisions. All subdivision proposals and
development proposals containing at least 50 lots or at least five acres,
whichever is the lesser, in flood hazard areas where base flood elevation
data are not available, shall be supported by hydrologic and hydraulic
engineering analyses that determine base flood elevations and floodway
information. The analyses shall be prepared by a licensed professional
engineer in a format required by FEMA for a conditional letter of map
revision or letter of map revision.
D. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
(1) Within the Floodplain Conservation District, manufactured homes
shall be prohibited within the area measured 100 feet landward
from the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
(2) Where permitted by variance within the Floodplain Conservation
District, all manufactured homes, and any improvements thereto,
shall be:
§ 205-95 TOWING § 205-96
186:821
(a) Placed on a permanent foundation.
(b) Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is
at least 1 1/2 feet above the base flood elevation.
(c) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
(d) Constructed with all ductwork and utilities, including HVAC
condensing unit/heat pump, elevated to the regulatory flood
elevation.
(3) Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance
with the manufacturer's installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above
information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009
International Residential Building Code or the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development's Permanent Foundations for
Manufactured Housing, 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision
thereto, shall apply, and 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401 through 405.
(4) Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2009 IBC, and the 2009 IRC or the most recent revisions thereto,
and 34 Pa. Code, as amended, where appropriate and/or applicable
to units where the manufacturer's standards for anchoring cannot
be provided or were not established for the proposed installation.
E. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
(1) Recreational vehicles in Zones A1-30, AH and AE must either:
(a) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and
(b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(c) Meet the permit requirements for manufactured homes in
§ 205-96D.
F. Variance conditions.
(1) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
(2) In granting any variance, the Zoning Hearing Board shall attach
the reasonable conditions and safeguards outlined herein. These
conditions and safeguards are necessary in order to protect the
public health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the
municipality.
(3) Whenever a variance is granted, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
notify the applicant in writing that:
(a) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
§ 205-96 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-96
186:822
§ 205-97. Technical provisions in event of variance being granted.
(b) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
(4) In reviewing any request for a variance, the Zoning Hearing Board
shall consider, at a minimum, the following:
(a) That there is good and sufficient cause, including:
[1] That there are unique physical circumstances or
conditions, including irregularity, narrowness, or
shallowness of lot size or shape, or exceptional
topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the
particular property, and that the unnecessary hardship is
due to such conditions and not the circumstances or
conditions generally created by the provisions of the
zoning ordinance in the neighborhood or district in which
the property is located.
[2] That because of such physical circumstances or
conditions, there is no possibility that the property can be
developed in strict conformity with the provisions of the
zoning ordinance and that the authorization of a variance
is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the
property.
[3] That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by
the appellant.
[4] That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the
property is located, nor substantially or permanently
impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent
property, nor be detrimental to the public welfare.
(b) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(c) That the granting of the variance will:
[1] Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense; nor
[2] Create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public,
or conflict with any other applicable state or local
ordinances and regulations.
(5) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall
be maintained by East Norriton Township. In addition, a report of
all variances granted during the year shall be included in the
biennial report to FEMA.
§ 205-96 TOWING § 205-97
186:823
A. General. In granting any variance, East Norriton Township shall attach
the following technical provisions to the proposal for which the
variance has been granted. These conditions and safeguards are
necessary in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of
the residents of the municipality.
(1) Pertaining to the alteration or relocation of a watercourse:
(a) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall
be made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities
which may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have
been first obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection Regional Office.
(b) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall
be made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the
activity will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of
the watercourse in any way.
(c) In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of
Community and Economic Development shall be notified prior
to any alteration or relocation of any watercourse.
(2) The municipality shall require technical or scientific data to be
submitted to FEMA for a letter of map revision (LOMR) within six
months of the completion of any new construction, development, or
other activity resulting in changes in the BFE. A LOMR or
conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) is required for:
(a) Any development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations
within the floodway; or
(b) Any development occurring in Zones A1-30 and Zone AE
without a designated floodway which will cause a rise of more
than one floor in the base flood elevation; or
(c) Alteration or relocation of a stream (including but not limited
to installing culverts and bridges).
(3) Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed by
variance within any Floodplain Conservation District shall be
undertaken in strict compliance with the provisions contained in
this article and any other applicable codes, ordinances and
regulations. In addition, when such development is proposed within
the area measured 100 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any
watercourse, a permit shall be obtained from the Department of
Environmental Protection Regional Office.
B. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
(1) Residential structures.
§ 205-97 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-97
186:824
(a) In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, any new construction or
substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood
elevation. The design and construction standards and
specifications contained in the 2009 International Building
Code (IBC) and in the 2009 International Residential Code
(IRC), or the most recent revisions thereof, and ASCE 24 and
34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405, as amended) shall be
used.
(b) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified
on the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to,
or above, the regulatory flood elevation determined in
accordance with § 205-94B(4) of this article.
(c) In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) at or above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the number specified
on the FIRM.
(d) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in
the 2009 International Residential Code (IRC), or the most
recent revisions thereof, and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code
(Chapters 401 through 405, as amended) shall be utilized.
(2) Nonresidential structures.
(a) In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or
substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or
above, the regulatory flood elevation, or be designed and
constructed so that the space enclosed below the regulatory
flood elevation:
[1] Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
and
[2] Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of
buoyancy.
(b) In A Zones, where no base flood elevations are specified on the
FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or
completely floodproofed up to, or above, the regulatory flood
elevation determined in accordance with § 205-94B(4) of this
article.
§ 205-97 TOWING § 205-97
186:825
(c) In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have its lowest floor elevated or completely floodproofed
above the highest adjacent grade to at least as high as the
depth number specified on the FIRM.
(d) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing
Regulations" published by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
(June 1972, as amended March 1992) or with some other
equivalent standard. All plans and specifications for such
floodproofing shall be accompanied by a statement certified by
a registered professional engineer or architect which states
that the proposed design and methods of construction are in
conformance with the above-referenced standards.
(e) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in
the 2009 International Residential Code (IRC), or the most
recent revisions thereof, and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code
(Chapters 401 through 405, as amended) shall be used.
(3) Space below the lowest floor.
(a) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding
basements) which will be used solely for the parking of a
vehicle, building access, or incidental storage in an area other
than a basement, shall be designed and constructed to allow
for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters for the purpose
of equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior walls. The term
"fully enclosed space" also includes crawl spaces.
(b) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect, and meet or
exceed the following minimum criteria:
[1] There shall be a minimum of two openings having a net
total area of not less than one square inch for every square
foot of enclosed space.
[2] The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
[3] Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or
other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
[4] The space shall be designed to drain toward the
watercourse as floodwaters recede.
(4) Accessory structures.
§ 205-97 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-97
186:826
(a) Structures accessory to a principal building need not be
elevated or floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
[1] The structure shall not be designed or used for human
habitation, but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles,
or to the storage of tools, material, and equipment related
to the principal use or activity.
[2] Floor area shall not exceed 100 square feet.
[3] The structure will have a low damage potential.
[4] The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the
least obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
[5] Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the
regulatory flood elevation.
[6] Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such
as furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
[7] Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
[8] The storage of chlorine, gas, oil, fertilizer and/or other
chemicals is prohibited.
[9] The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation or movement and shall be designed to
automatically provide for the entry and exit of floodwater
for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on the
walls. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
[a] There shall be a minimum of two openings having a
net total area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed space.
[b] The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one
foot above grade.
[c] Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc.,
or other coverings or devices, provided that they
permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
C. Special technical requirements.
(1) Development which may endanger human life. In accordance with
the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,222 and the
regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
222. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 205-97 TOWING § 205-97
186:827
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or
substantially improved structure which will be used for the
production or storage of any of the following dangerous materials
or substances; or will be used for any activity requiring the
maintenance of a supply of more than 550 gallons, or other
comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous materials or
substances on the premises; or will involve the production, storage,
or use of any amount of radioactive substances shall be subject
to the provisions of this section, in addition to all other applicable
provisions. The following is a list of materials and substances that
are considered dangerous to human life. The material listed below
shall be stored in accordance with the strictest industry standards
that may apply.
(a) Acetone.
(b) Ammonia.
(c) Benzene.
(d) Calcium carbide.
(e) Carbon disulfide.
(f) Celluloid.
(g) Chlorine.
(h) Hydrochloric acid.
(i) Hydrocyanic acid.
(j) Magnesium.
(k) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(l) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.),
(m) Phosphorus.
(n) Potassium.
(o) Sodium.
(p) Sulfur and sulfur products.
(q) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and
rodenticides).
(r) Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
(2) Any structure of the kind described in Subsection C(1), above, shall
be prohibited within any floodway area. Where permitted by
variance within any identified floodplain area, any new or
§ 205-97 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-97
186:828
substantially improved residential structure of the kind described
in § 205-97C(1), above, shall be elevated to remain completely dry
up to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation and built in
accordance with § 205-97B.
(3) Within any identified floodplain area, any new or substantially
improved structure of the kind described in § 205-97C(1), above,
shall be prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward from
the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
(4) Where permitted by a variance within the floodplain area, any new
or substantially improved structure of the kind described in
§ 205-97C(1), above, shall be:
(a) Elevated or designed and constructed to remain completely
dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above the base flood elevation; and
(b) Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity
during the course of a base flood elevation.
(5) Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards for completely dry floodproofing
contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing Regulations" (U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972, as amended, March 1992), or
with some other equivalent watertight standard.
D. Design and construction standards. The following minimum standards
shall apply for all construction and development proposed within any
Floodplain Conservation District:
(1) Fill.
(a) If fill is used, it shall:
[1] Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line
from all points;
[2] Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary
landfills shall not be permitted;
[3] Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and
resistance to erosion, scouring, or settling;
[4] Be no steeper than one vertical to three horizontal feet
unless substantiated data, justifying steeper slopes, are
submitted to and approved by the Floodplain
Administrator; and
[5] Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect
adjacent properties.
(b) The area shall be stabilized in accordance with PADEP erosion
control standards.
§ 205-97 TOWING § 205-97
186:829
(2) Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner.
The system shall insure proper drainage along streets and provide
positive drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be
designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent
properties.
(3) Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(a) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer
facilities and systems shall be located, designed and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages and the
infiltration of floodwaters.
(b) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to
prevent the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(c) No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within
any Floodplain Conservation District except in strict
compliance with all state and local regulations for such
systems. If any such system is permitted, it shall be located so
as to avoid impairment to it, or contamination from it, during a
flood.
(d) The rim elevations of a settling tank and process areas shall be
a minimum of one foot six inches above the flood elevation.
(e) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA
No. 348, Protecting Building Utilities from Flood Damages, and
the International Private Sewage Disposal Code shall be
utilized.
(4) Other utilities. All other utilities, such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems, shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
(5) Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more
than one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
(6) Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in
times of flooding could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life,
and not listed in § 205-97C(1) Development which may endanger
human life, shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood
elevation and/or floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
(7) Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the
minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to
have a minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
(8) Anchoring.
§ 205-97 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-97
186:830
(a) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in
accordance with accepted engineering practices to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
(b) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar
objects or components located below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be securely anchored or affixed to prevent
flotation.
(9) Floors, walls and ceilings.
(a) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation
shall be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the
flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain, without causing
structural damage to the building.
(b) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(c) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation
shall be designed and constructed of materials that are waterresistant
and will withstand inundation.
(d) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be made of metal or other
water-resistant material.
(10) Paints and adhesives.
(a) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
(b) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(c) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) shall be
finished with a marine or water-resistant paint or other
finishing material.
(11) Electrical components.
(a) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above
the base flood elevation.
(b) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
(12) Equipment.
(a) Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating units,
and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or
apparatus shall be located at an elevation of one foot six inches
above the regulatory flood elevation.
§ 205-97 TOWING § 205-97
186:831
§ 205-98. Activities requiring special permits.
(13) Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be
designed to prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system
and discharges from the system into floodwaters. Additional
provisions shall be made for the drainage of these systems in the
event that floodwater infiltration occurs.
(14) Uniform Construction Code coordination.
(a) The standards and specifications contained 34 Pa. Code
(Chapters 401 through 405), as amended, and not limited to
the following provisions, shall apply to the above and other
sections and subsections of this article, to the extent that they
are more restrictive and/or supplement the requirements of
this article.
[1] International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest
edition thereof: Sections 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605,
1612, 3402, and Appendix G.
[2] International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the
latest edition thereof: Sections R104, R105, R109, R323,
Appendix AE101, Appendix E and Appendix J.
A. General. In accordance with the administrative regulations
promulgated by the Department of Community and Economic
Development to implement the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management
Act,223 the activities indicated in Subsections A(1) and (2) shall be
prohibited within any Floodplain Conservation District unless a special
permit has been issued by East Norriton Township. In order to apply for
a special permit, a variance must first be obtained, as outlined in
§ 205-96.
(1) The commencement of any of the following activities, or the
construction, enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
(a) Hospitals.
(b) Nursing homes.
(c) Jails or prisons.
(2) The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or
manufactured home subdivision.
B. Application requirements for special permits. Applicants for special
permits shall provide five copies of the following items:
223. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 205-97 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-98
186:832
(1) A written request, including a completed special permit application
form.
(2) A small scale map showing the vicinity in which the proposed site is
located.
(3) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale and date;
(b) Topography based upon the North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) of 1988, showing existing and proposed contours at
intervals of two feet;
(c) All property and lot lines, including dimensions, and the size of
the site expressed in acres and square feet;
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives, other accessways,
and parking areas, with information concerning widths,
pavement types and construction, and elevations;
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
buildings, structures and other public or private facilities,
including railroad tracks and facilities, and any other natural
and man-made features affecting, or affected by, the proposed
activity or development;
(f) The location of the floodplain boundary line, information and
spot elevations concerning the base flood elevation, and
information concerning the flow of water, including direction
and velocities;
(g) The location of all proposed buildings, structures, utilities, and
any other improvements; and
(h) Any other information which the municipality considers
necessary for adequate review of the application.
(4) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, clearly and legibly drawn at suitable scale showing
the following:
(a) Sufficiently detailed architectural or engineering drawings,
including floor plans, sections, and exterior building
elevations, as appropriate;
(b) For any proposed building, the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) and, as required, the elevation of any
other floor;
(c) Complete information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces, and other factors
associated with the base flood elevation;
§ 205-98 TOWING § 205-98
186:833
(d) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures;
(e) Cross-section drawings for all proposed streets, drives, other
accessways, and parking areas, showing all rights-of-way and
pavement widths;
(f) Profile drawings for all proposed streets, drives, and vehicular
accessways, including existing and proposed grades; and
(g) Plans and profiles of all proposed sanitary and storm sewer
systems, water supply systems, and any other utilities and
facilities.
(5) The following data and documentation:
(a) Certification from the applicant that the site upon which the
activity or development is proposed is an existing separate and
single parcel, owned by the applicant or the client he
represents;
(b) Certification from a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect licensed in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania that the proposed construction
has been adequately designed to protect against damage from
the base flood elevation;
(c) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, landscape architect, or other qualified person, which
contains a complete and accurate description of the nature and
extent of pollution that might possibly occur from the
development during the course of a base flood elevation,
including a statement concerning the effects such pollution
may have on human life;
(d) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect, which contains a complete
and accurate description of the effects the proposed
development will have on base flood elevation and flows;
(e) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect, which contains a complete
and accurate description of the kinds and amounts of any loose
buoyant materials or debris that may possibly exist or be
located on the site below the base flood elevation and the
effects such materials and debris may have on base flood
elevation and flows;
(f) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development";
§ 205-98 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-98
186:834
(g) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control;
(h) Any other applicable permits such as, but not limited to, a
permit for any activity regulated by the Department of
Environmental Protection under Section 302 of Act
1978-166;224 and
(i) An evacuation plan which fully explains the manner in which
the site will be completely safely evacuated, including all
patients, inmates, etc., before or during the course of a base
flood.
C. Application review procedures. Upon receipt of an application for a
special permit by East Norriton Township, the following procedures
shall apply in addition to those of § 205-99.
(1) Within three working days following receipt of the application, a
complete copy of the application and all accompanying
documentation shall be forwarded to the County Planning
Commission by registered or certified mail for its review and
recommendations. Copies of the application shall also be
forwarded to the East Norriton Township Planning Commission and
East Norriton Township Engineer for review and comment.
(2) If an application is received that is incomplete, East Norriton
Township shall notify the applicant in writing, stating in what
respect the application is deficient.
(3) If East Norriton Township decides to disapprove an application, it
shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the
disapproval.
(4) If East Norriton Township approves an application, it shall file
written notification, together with the application and all pertinent
information, with the Department of Community and Economic
Development, by registered or certified mail, within five working
days after the date of approval.
(5) Before issuing the special permit, East Norriton Township shall
allow the Department of Community and Economic Development
30 days, after receipt of the notification by the Department, to
review the application and decision made by East Norriton
Township.
(6) If East Norriton Township does not receive any communication
from the Department of Community and Economic Development
224. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.302.
§ 205-98 TOWING § 205-98
186:835
§ 205-99. Administration.
during the thirty-day review period, it may issue a special permit to
the applicant.
(7) If the Department of Community and Economic Development
should decide to disapprove an application, it shall notify East
Norriton Township and the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for
the disapproval, and East Norriton Township shall not issue the
special permit.
D. Special technical requirements.
(1) In addition to the requirements of § 205-97 of this article, the
following minimum requirements shall also apply to any proposed
development requiring a special permit. If there is any conflict
between any of the following requirements and those in § 205-97 of
this article or in any other code, ordinance, or regulation, the more
restrictive provision shall apply.
(2) No application for a special permit shall be approved unless it can
be determined that the structure or activity will be located,
constructed and maintained in a manner which will:
(a) Fully protect the health and safety of the general public and
any occupants of the structure. At a minimum, all new
structures shall be designed, located, and constructed so that:
[1] The structure will survive inundation by waters of the base
flood elevation without any lateral movement or damage to
either the structure itself, or to any of its equipment or
contents below the BFE.
[2] The lowest floor (including basement) will be elevated to at
least 1 1/2 feet above the base flood elevation.
[3] The occupants of the structure can remain inside for an
indefinite period of time and be safely evacuated at any
time during the base flood elevation.
(b) Prevent any significant possibility of pollution, increased flood
levels or flows, or debris endangering life and property.
(3) All hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications,
who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect
currently accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses,
computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a
thorough technical review by East Norriton Township and the
Department of Community and Economic Development.
A. Designation of Floodplain Administrator. The Zoning Officer within the
East Norriton Township Administrative Office is hereby appointed to
§ 205-98 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-99
186:836
administer and enforce this article and is referred to herein as the
"Floodplain Administrator."
B. Permits required. A permit shall be required before any construction or
development is undertaken within the Floodplain Conservation District.
In the case of a proposed hospital, nursing home, jail, prison, or
manufactured home park, the permit referred to here would be the
special permit of § 205-98.
C. Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
(1) The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has
been determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be
in conformance with the requirements of this article and all other
applicable codes and ordinances.
(2) Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator
shall review the application for the permit to determine if all other
necessary government permits required by state and federal laws
have been obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania
Sewage Facilities Act (Act 1966-537, as amended);225 the
Pennsylvania Dam Safety and Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as
amended);226 the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394,
as amended);227 and the U.S. Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33
U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be issued until this determination
has been made.
(3) In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
development permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the
history of repairs to the subject building, so that any repetitive loss
issues can be addressed before the permit is issued.
(4) During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or
other authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine
that the work is progressing in compliance with the information
provided on the permit application and with all applicable
municipal laws and ordinances. The Floodplain Administrator shall
make as many inspections during and upon completion of the work
as are necessary.
(5) In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator
shall have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises
or development in the Floodplain Conservation District, upon
presentation of proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to
enforce the provisions of this article.
(6) In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work
does not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws
225. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
226. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
227. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 205-99 TOWING § 205-99
186:837
and ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator
shall revoke the permit and report such fact to the East Norriton
Township Board of Supervisors for whatever action it considers
necessary.
(7) The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain all records associated
with the requirements of this article, including, but not limited to,
permitting, inspection and enforcement.
(8) The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of
the 34 Pa. Code and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC or latest
revisions thereof.
D. Application procedures and requirements.
(1) Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms supplied by East Norriton
Township. Such application shall contain the following:
(a) Name, address and contact name of the applicant.
(b) Name, address and contact name of the owner of land on which
proposed construction is to occur.
(c) Name, address and contact name of the contractor.
(d) Site location, including address.
(e) Listing of other permits or variances required.
(f) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost,
including a breakout of flood-related cost and the market value
of the building before the flood damage occurred, where
appropriate.
(2) If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any Floodplain Conservation District, applicants for
permits shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient
detail and clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to
determine that:
(a) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage and conform with the requirements of this article
and all other applicable codes and ordinances.
(b) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems, are located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage.
(c) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to
flood hazards.
§ 205-99 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-99
186:838
(d) Structures will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement.
(e) Building materials are flood-resistant.
(f) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been
used.
(g) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed
and/or located one foot six inches above the base flood
elevation to prevent water entry or accumulation.
(3) Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any
other pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain
Administrator to make the above determination:
(a) A completed permit application form.
(b) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of
one inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
[1] North arrow, scale, and date;
[2] Topographic contour lines, at two-foot intervals;
[3] The location of all existing and proposed buildings,
structures, and other improvements, including the location
of any existing or proposed subdivision and development;
[4] The location of all existing streets, drives, and other
accessways;
[5] The location of any and all utilities both above and below
ground.
[6] The location of any existing bodies of water or
watercourses, the Floodplain Conservation District, and, if
available, information pertaining to the floodway, and the
flow of water, including direction and velocities.
(c) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at a scale of one inch being equal to 100
feet or less, showing the following:
[1] The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed
building based upon North American Vertical Datum of
1988;
[2] The elevation of the base flood;
[3] Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34
Pa. Code and the currently adopted editions of the IBC and
IRC for both commercial and residential construction.
§ 205-99 TOWING § 205-99
186:839
(d) The following data and documentation:
[1] Detailed information concerning any proposed
floodproofing measures and corresponding elevations.
[2] If available, information concerning flood depths,
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other
factors associated with a base flood elevation, and detailed
information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations.
[3] Documentation, certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of
any proposed development within an AE Area/District
without floodway, when combined with all other existing
and anticipated development, will not increase the base
flood elevation more than one foot at any point.
[4] A document, certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect, which states that the proposed
construction or development has been adequately
designed to withstand the pressures, velocities, impact
and uplift forces associated with the base flood elevation.
Such statement shall include a description of the type and
extent of floodproofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
[5] Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 205-97D(6), Storage, and § 205-97C(1), Development
which may endanger human life, including:
[a] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§ 205-97C(1) and
205-97D(6) which are intended to be used, produced,
stored or otherwise maintained on site.
[b] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or
spills of the dangerous materials or substances listed
in § 205-97C(1) during a base flood.
[6] The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development."
[7] Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan
meeting the requirements of the Department of
Environmental Protection to implement and maintain
erosion and sedimentation control.
§ 205-99 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-99
186:840
(4) Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to
the municipality, based upon the estimated cost of the proposed
construction as determined by the Floodplain Administrator.
E. Review by County Conservation District. A copy of all applications and
plans for any proposed construction or development in any Floodplain
Conservation District to be considered for approval shall be submitted
by the Floodplain Administrator to the County Conservation District for
review and comment prior to the issuance of a permit. The
recommendations of the Conservation District shall be considered by
the Floodplain Administrator for possible incorporation into the
proposed plan.
F. Review of Application by others. A copy of all plans and applications for
any proposed construction or development in any Floodplain
Conservation District to be considered for approval may be submitted
by the Floodplain Administrator to any other appropriate agencies and/
or individuals, including the Planning Commission and/or Township
Engineer, for review and comment if deemed necessary.
G. Changes. After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain
Administrator, no changes of any kind shall be made to the application,
permit or any of the plans, specifications or other documents submitted
with the application without the written consent or approval of the
Floodplain Administrator. Requests for any such change shall be in
writing, and shall be submitted by the applicant to Floodplain
Administrator for consideration.
H. Placards. In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall
issue a placard which shall be displayed on the premises during the
time construction is in progress. This placard shall show the number of
the permit and the date of its issuance and shall be signed by the
Floodplain Administrator.
I. Start of construction.
(1) Work on the proposed construction shall begin within 180 days
after the date of issuance and shall be completed within 12 months
after the date of issuance of the permit, or the permit shall expire
unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain
Administrator. The term "start of construction" shall be understood
as defined in § 205-93B of this article.
(2) Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is
submitted by the applicant which sets forth sufficient and
reasonable cause for the Floodplain Administrator to approve such
a request and the original permit is compliant with the ordinance
and FIRM/FIS in effect at the time the extension is granted.
J. Enforcement.
§ 205-99 TOWING § 205-99
186:841
(1) Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized municipal representative determines that there are
reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provisions of this article, or of any regulations adopted pursuant
thereto, the Floodplain Administrator shall give notice of such
alleged violation as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
(a) Be in writing;
(b) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(c) Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for
the performance of any act it requires;
(d) Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case
may require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall
be deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or
agent when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by
any other method authorized or required by the laws of this
state;
(e) Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this article.
(2) Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this article or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order or direction of the Floodplain
Administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality
shall pay a fine to East Norriton Township of not less than $1,000
nor more than $10,000 for each day of violation, plus costs of
prosecution. In addition to the above penalties, all other actions are
hereby reserved, including an action in equity, for the proper
enforcement of this article. The imposition of a fine or penalty for
any violation of, or noncompliance with, this article shall not excuse
the violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue, and all such
persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and
noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development
initiated or any structure or building constructed, reconstructed,
enlarged, altered, or relocated, in noncompliance with this article
may be declared by the East Norriton Township Board of
Supervisors to be a public nuisance and abatable as such. Any
structure so designated may be demolished if deemed a threat to
the public safety. The cost of the demolition shall be passed onto
the property owner.
K. Appeals.
(1) Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of
this article may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal
must be filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision,
determination or action of the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 205-99 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-99
186:842
§ 205-100. through § 205-101. (Reserved)
(2) Upon receipt of such appeal the Zoning Hearing Board shall
consider the appeal in accordance with the Municipal Planning
Code and any other local ordinance.
(3) Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board
may seek relief therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the
laws of this state, including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain
Management Act.228
228. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 205-99 TOWING § 205-100
186:843

ARTICLE XVIII
Parking and Loading
§ 205-102. Required off-street parking facilities.
Any building or structure erected, altered or used, and any lot used or
occupied, for any of the following purposes shall be provided with minimum
off-street parking spaces, either within a structure or in the open, as set
forth below, together with adequate passageways or driveways or other
means of circulation with proper and safe access from a street or way.
A. Dwellings in residential and nonresidential districts. For each dwelling
unit in a residential district or a nonresidential district, two off-street
parking spaces shall be provided. All driveways and parking spaces
shall be all-weather, properly graded for drainage, surfaced with
asphalt and maintained in good condition, free of weeds, dust, trash,
debris, snow and ice. A garage shall not be counted as a parking space.
B. In all zoning districts except for AR Residential, BR Residential and
BR-1 Residential Zoning Districts, the following regulations shall apply:
(1) Standards. All parking lots and spaces in these districts shall be
constructed, operated and maintained in accordance with the
following conditions:
(a) Parking lots and spaces shall be all-weather, properly graded
for drainage, surfaced with concrete or asphalt and maintained
in good condition, free of weeds, dust, trash, debris, snow and
ice.
(b) All accessways to any public street or highway shall be located
at least 200 feet from the intersection of any street lines and
shall be designed in a manner conducive to safe ingress and
egress. The developer shall be responsible for the construction
of any necessary traffic control devices or additional
acceleration lanes required by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
(c) Interior drives shall be designed so as to prevent blockage or
vehicles entering or leaving the site.
(d) There shall be areas provided for loading and unloading of
delivery trucks and other vehicles and for the servicing of
shops by refuse collection, fuel and other service vehicles and
shall be adequate in size and shall be so arranged that they
may be used without blockage or interference with accessways
or automobile parking facilities.
(e) (Intentionally left blank) [Amended 12-12-2017 by Ord. No.
574229]
(2) Parking space formula.
§ 205-102 TOWING § 205-102
186:845
(a) Churches, schools, public auditoriums, meeting rooms or
similar place of public or private assembly: one parking space
for every four seats.
(b) Hospitals: one parking space for every four beds.
(c) Community centers, libraries or museums: one parking space
for every 800 square feet of floor area in public use.
(d) Clubs: one parking space for every four members.
(e) Retail stores or other shops: one parking space for every 100
square feet of total store sales floor space.
(f) Department stores or supermarkets: one parking space for
every 50 square feet of store sales floor area.
(g) Indoor theaters: one parking space for every four seats.
(h) Hotels, tourist homes, motels or auto courts: one parking space
for each rental unit.
(i) Office buildings or wholesale establishments: one parking
space for every 200 square feet of ground floor area, plus one
parking space for every 400 square feet of floor area above the
ground floor.
(j) Restaurants, cafes or other eating or drinking establishments:
one parking space for every 75 square feet of floor area
including outdoor seating areas. Restaurants, cafes or other
eating or drinking establishments offering drive-thru service
shall provide a twelve-foot-wide drive-thru lane that is capable
of providing stacking for up to six vehicles without interfering
with other required parking facilities or vehicle circulation.
[Amended 5-25-2010 by Ord. No. 526]
(k) Other commercial and industrial buildings: one parking space
for every 1,000 square feet of floor area, or fraction thereof,
except when otherwise authorized as a special exception
consistent with the requirements set forth herein for
comparable establishments.
(l) Open areas used for commercial purposes: one parking space
for every 15,000 square feet of area, or fraction thereof.
(m) Apartments and townhouses: two parking spaces for each
dwelling unit.
(n) Nursing homes: one space for every three beds.
229. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection B(1)(e), which stated:
“Except in the case of individual on-lot parking in a CR Residential District, no parking
shall be located less than 20 feet from any building unless said parking is located within
the lines of the building walls or in an attached parking garage.”
§ 205-102 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-102
186:846
§ 205-103. Special exception parking requirements.
The parking spaces required in § 205-102 herein may be located elsewhere
than on the same lot when authorized as a special exception, subject to the
following conditions:
§ 205-104. Reduction of facilities.
(o) When the uses set forth in Subsection B(2)(e) and (f) are
developed as part of a project on one parcel having five or
more establishments sharing common parking and access and
providing a total of at least 75,000 square feet of total building
area, overall parking calculated for these uses may be reduced
to a ratio of five spaces per every 1,000 square feet of total
floor area which shall be inclusive of employee parking.
(p) Personal care homes (assisted living): one space for every two
beds.
(q) Medical office: one parking space for every 200 square feet of
floor area. [Added 5-25-2010 by Ord. No. 526]
A. The owners of two or more establishments shall submit, with their
application for special exception, a site plan showing joint use and
location of a common off-street parking area.
B. Some portion of the common off-street parking area lies within 200 feet
of an entrance regularly used by patrons into the building served
thereby.
A. Off-street parking facilities existing at the effective date of this chapter
shall not subsequently be reduced to an amount less than required
hereunder for a similar new building or new use. Off-street parking
facilities provided to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall not
subsequently be reduced below the requirements of this chapter.
B. The Zoning Hearing Board may, by special exception, reduce the
required aggregate amount of required parking spaces upon
determination that greater efficiency is effected by joint use of a
common parking area such as in the case of a shopping center or two or
more contiguous commercial uses, but in no case shall the required
number of off-street parking spaces be reduced more than 25%.
C. The developer may set aside up to 15% of the required parking spaces,
which shall be planted, landscaped and reserved for future parking
needs. The reserved parking shall be constructed at the sole expense of
the property owner or tenant, in total or in part, at the election of the
property owner or if so ordered by the Township Board of Supervisors.
Such reserved parking shall be fully engineered, and such areas shall
not be counted as any open space otherwise required, and the location
and design must conform to all other applicable Township standards.
The applicant shall provide financial security in the form of a cash
§ 205-102 TOWING § 205-104
186:847
§ 205-105. Restriction of on-street parking.
In all residential zoning districts, on-street parking shall be limited to
passenger vehicles. At no time shall a commercial vehicle or truck which
exceeds a gross vehicle weight of 9,000 pounds be parked on a residential
street.
§ 205-105.1. Green area requirements.
An area amounting to 10% of all paved parking areas in excess of 2,000
square feet per each lot, whether constructed immediately or reserved for
future needs, shall be devoted to permanent green areas, which must be
interspersed within the paved parking areas to channel traffic or divide
parking spaces, and shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions
of Chapter 175, the Subdivision and Land Development. The exact design
and location of the green areas, as well as the landscape material therein,
shall be disclosed on the land development, subdivision or site plan and be
permanently maintained as such.
escrow in the amount determined by the Township Engineer to be
sufficient for completion of the parking spaces held in reserve. The
escrow shall not be released until such time as the reserved parking
spaces are completed in accordance with Township requirements and
approved by the Township Engineer.
§ 205-104 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-105.1
186:848
ARTICLE XIX
Signs
§ 205-106. Regulations to apply.
Any sign erected or maintained after the effective date of this chapter shall
conform to the following regulations.
§ 205-107. Additional definitions.
A. The following definitions shall control with respect to any sign question.
In the event of a conflict between these definitions and any definitions
contained in Article II of this chapter, those in Article II shall control
with the exception of sign-related questions.
B. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING FRONTAGE — For the purposes of calculating the allowable
total sign area:
LOT, CORNER — A lot which abuts on at least two intersecting public
streets. In a shopping center district, driveways, public parking areas
containing a minimum of six vehicle parking places, pedestrian malls
and public walkways shall be considered public streets for the purpose
of this definition. Frontage upon a service driveway to an unloading
area shall not be considered in determining corner lot status.
SIGN — Any name, nameplate, emblem, painting, banner, pennant,
balloon, placard, billboard, poster, panel, display, illustration, structure
or other device, illuminated or nonilluminated, used for visual
communication which is affixed, painted or represented, directly or
indirectly, upon a building or other outdoor surface or is painted or
affixed to or propelled or towed by a vehicle, other than one licensed
by the Public Utilities Commission, for the purpose of bringing the
subject thereto to the attention of the public or advertising a business,
commodity, service, product or political candidate or candidates or for
identifying a business, structure or use of land. Bumper stickers of one
square foot or less and vehicles used regularly in association with a
The linear footage of the building face which serves as a principal
approach to a building and which building face fronts upon a
public street, a shopping center driveway, parking area containing
a minimum of six parking spaces or pedestrian mall or walkway.
(1)
For corner lots, such footage may be calculated separately for the
principal approach and one adjacent face, if such face also fronts
on a public street, a shopping center driveway, public parking area
containing a minimum of six vehicle parking places, pedestrian
mall or public walkway. A sign area calculated for each frontage
shall be erected on that frontage only and shall not be increased by
the sign area calculated for another frontage.
(2)
§ 205-106 TOWING § 205-107
186:849
§ 205-108. Height.
No sign which is affixed, painted or otherwise represented upon a building
shall extend above the building height as defined in § 205-5 or above 35
feet, whichever is less. No freestanding or ground sign shall extend above a
height of 25 feet.
§ 205-109. Projection.
No sign shall project more than 24 inches over a public walkway, and the
lower edge of any projecting sign shall not be less than 10 feet above the
finished grade.
§ 205-110. Signs permitted in residential districts.
The following types of signs shall be permitted in AR Residential, MR
Medium-Density Residential, BR Residential, GA Garden Apartment
Residential, CR Residential, HR High-Rise Residential, RP Residential and
Professional and IN Institutional Zoning Districts, as well as in any other
area where the uses permitted in these districts are located:
specific business that have advertising affixed, painted or represented
directed upon the vehicle pertaining to the business are not considered
signs under this article, provided that said vehicles are operable and
display current inspection and registration and are not parked within
50 feet of the curbline.
SIGN AREA — The area of the largest single face of the sign within
a perimeter which forms the outside shape, including any frame, and
forms an integral part of the display, but excluding the necessary
supports or uprights on which the sign may be placed, subject to the
following:
For double-faced signs or V-type signs, the interior angle of which
does not exceed 45°, only one face shall be applicable in computing
sign area.
(1)
For V-type signs, the interior angle of which exceeds 45°, both faces
shall be applicable in computing sign area.
(2)
The area of an irregularly shaped sign, including signs consisting
of separate modules, figures or letters, shall be deemed to be the
total square footage of the smallest single square or rectangle
into which all of the separate modules, figures or letters which
comprise the irregularly shaped and/or modular sign would fit. The
background area of a freestanding sign cannot exceed 25% of the
allowable total sign area.
(3)
A. One professional, home occupation or name sign per residence,
indicating the name, profession or activity of the occupant of the
residence, not exceeding one square foot.
§ 205-107 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-110
186:850
§ 205-111. Temporary real estate and public auction signs.
One sign which advertises the sale, rental, auction or other conveyance of
the entire premises or any portion thereof shall be permitted in all zoning
districts, while a property is actually for sale, rent or auction. All such signs
shall be unlighted and shall be removed promptly when the property is no
longer available for sale, rent or auction, or, in the case of new construction
of multiple dwelling or occupancy units, when 95% of the proposed units or
floor space is no longer available for sale or rent. The following regulations
apply:
B. One identification sign or bulletin board of a school, college, church,
hospital, sanatorium, municipal building, farm, estate, club or any
permitted use other than a dwelling, not exceeding 24 square feet in
area.
C. Trespassing signs indicating private ownership of a driveway or
property, not to exceed one square foot in size, which signs shall be
spaced at intervals of not less than 100 feet apart on street frontage and
not less than 50 feet apart on other boundaries.
D. For apartment buildings:
(1) Each property may have one sign on each street frontage,
containing only the name and/or address of the property, each sign
not to exceed 24 square feet.
(2) With more than one building on a property, each building may have
one name and/or number sign not to exceed six square feet.
E. For residential and professional and residential office district uses: one
freestanding sign, not to exceed 20 square feet, which shall be placed a
minimum of 10 feet from the ultimate right-of-way. Such signs may not
exceed six feet in height and shall only be illuminated by an external
source which shall be shielded from view in accordance with
§ 205-122C. [Amended 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 512; 4-28-2009 by
Ord. No. 515]
F. One sign identifying the name of the residential development with more
than 10 dwellings is allowed not to exceed 24 square feet of total area,
including only the name of the development, street address, ornamental
logo, border and background, which shall be placed a minimum of 10
feet from the ultimate right-of-way. Such sign shall not exceed six feet in
height and may not be interiorly or exteriorly illuminated.
A. In all residential districts:
(1) For properties less than two acres: six square feet.
(2) For property of two to five acres: 16 square feet.
(3) For properties of five to 15 acres: 24 square feet.
§ 205-110 TOWING § 205-111
186:851
§ 205-112. Temporary contractors' signs.
Temporary signs which identify only the name, address, phone number and
specialty of contractors, mechanics, painters and artisans placed on the
premises where the work is performed shall be permitted in all districts,
limited in size to the following:
(4) For properties of 15 acres or more: 32 square feet.
B. In all other districts:
(1) For properties less than five acres: 16 square feet.
(2) For properties of five to 15 acres: 32 square feet.
(3) For properties of 15 acres or more: 48 square feet.
C. Real estate directional signs. Directional real estate signs will be
permitted in all zoning districts, subject to the following conditions:
(1) One off-site directional sign for each property for sale only.
(2) Saturdays and Sundays between the hours of 12:00 noon and 4:00
p.m. only.
(3) Permission must be obtained in advance from the property owner
where the sign is to be placed.
(4) Size restrictions as outlined in Subsections A and B of this East
Norriton Township Zoning Ordinance shall apply.
D. All signs shall be placed a minimum of 10 feet behind the face of the
curb or edge of pavement in noncurbed areas.
A. In residential districts:
(1) For new construction, additions, renovations, etc., of individual
residential properties, one sign per contractor, limited to six square
feet.
(2) For two or more contractors, signs shall be mounted on a common
surface, each sign not to exceed six square feet, total sign area not
to exceed 32 square feet.
B. In all other districts:
(1) For new construction, additions, renovations, etc., of individual,
nonresidential properties, one sign per contractor, limited to 12
square feet.
(2) For two or more contractors, signs shall be mounted on a common
surface, each sign not to exceed 12 square feet, total sign area not
to exceed 64 square feet.
§ 205-111 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-112
186:852
§ 205-113. Incidental signs.
Signs erected off the public right-of-way for the convenience or safety of
the public while on the subject's private property, containing no advertising,
shall be permitted in all zoning districts, subject to the following:
§ 205-114. Business signs.
Individual business signs shall be permitted in BP, C, SC, IN, C-1, LI and I
Zoning Districts, subject to the following:
C. All such signs shall be unlighted and shall be promptly removed when
the contractor has completed or otherwise discontinued work on the
premises.
D. All signs shall be placed a minimum of 10 feet behind the face of the
curb or edge of pavement in noncurbed areas.
A. In all residential districts, such signs shall be permitted, not to exceed
one square foot in area, subject to the approval of the Zoning Officer.
B. In all other zoning districts, such signs shall be permitted, not to exceed
four square feet in area, subject to the approval of the Zoning Officer.
C. All such signs shall be spaced no less than 50 feet apart unless special
conditions warrant less separation, subject to the approval of the
Zoning Officer.
A. One sign affixed or otherwise represented upon a building, having a
maximum total area of one square foot for every linear foot of building
frontage, except in the case of individual businesses having less than 30
lineal feet of building frontage, which shall be allowed 25% more total
sign area.
B. On corner lots, one additional sign affixed or otherwise represented
upon the additional street frontage of a building, having a maximum
total area of one square foot for every linear foot of building frontage on
the additional side.
C. In BP, C, LI and I Zoning Districts, one multiple directory sign is
permitted in addition to the building sign(s) permitted in Subsections A
and B of this section as further regulated in § 205-116.
D. In the IN Institutional District, seasonal business signs measuring no
larger than 24 square feet per sign and no more than 16 signs per
ballfield shall be permitted for fund-raising activities with the written
permission of the property owner.
§ 205-112 TOWING § 205-115
186:853
§ 205-115. Ground signs. [Amended 1-3-2011 by Ord. No. 533;
12-13-2016 by Ord. No. 570]
One individual business sign per building which is a ground or freestanding
sign is permitted in BP, C, IN, C-1, LI, HI, I and SC Zoning Districts, subject
to the following;
§ 205-116. Multiple directory signs.
A sign listing the name of various industrial, commercial or business
establishments within a defined contiguous area as determined by the
Zoning Officer to be erected primarily as a service to the motoring or the
pedestrian public shall be permitted in BP, C, SC, LI and I Zoning Districts,
subject to the following regulations:
A. The area of such signs may not exceed 25 square feet.
B. Such signs may not exceed three feet in height, except that up to 25 feet
in height may be permitted if the sign is set back a minimum of 15 feet
from the street line and is a minimum of 25 feet from the nearest street
access driveway.
C. All ground or freestanding signs must be located on the property of the
business which the sign is identifying.
D. In the I Industrial District only, billboards are permitted subject to the
specific provisions and standards at § 205-72J. [Added 7-26-2011 by
Ord. No. 538]
A. Multiple directory signs shall be located on a property serviced by the
sign.
B. Such signs shall be ground signs only.
C. If more than five businesses, firms, companies, etc., are listed on the
directory, a pull-off lane shall be provided to allow vehicles to safely
stop while drivers are reviewing the sign (minimum 10 feet wide, 75
feet long).
D. Multiple directory signs may list only the name, address and primary
product or service of each firm or business and may contain a graphic
directory (street map) to assist in locating destinations.
E. The respective permitted areas of information on multiple directory
signs shall be limited to no more than three square feet per firm listed,
no more than 10 square feet per graphic directory and no more than
three square feet for a general sign title, provided that the total sign
area does not exceed 36 square feet.
F. Multiple directory signs shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from the
ultimate right-of-way, except, where pull-offs are provided, multiple
directory signs shall be located a minimum of five feet from the pull-off
curb.
§ 205-115 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-116
186:854
§ 205-117. Additional signs permitted in SC Shopping Center
District.
In addition to the signs mentioned above, in SC Shopping Center Districts,
the following additional signs may be erected: one entrance sign identifying
the shopping center, for each street frontage, and containing no advertising,
provided that:
§ 205-117.1. Public transportation shelters.
Public transportation shelters (hereinafter referred to as "shelters") shall be
permitted under this chapter as signs, so long as all criteria set forth in this
section is complied with.
G. Multiple directory signs shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from the
nearest paved edge of any street access driveway intersection.
H. Multiple directory signs shall not extend above a height of six feet.
I. One such sign shall be permitted for each vehicular entrance to office
or industrial developments or subdivisions, with the exception that not
more than a total of three such signs may be permitted in any one
development or subdivision or other permitted contiguous area.
A. Such signs are ground or freestanding signs.
B. The vertical size of such signs measured from the top edge to the
bottom edge of the sign area shall not exceed 12 feet.
C. Total area of such signs shall not exceed 150 square feet for the primary
street frontage entrance and 75 square feet for any secondary
entrance.
D. Such signs are set back a minimum of 15 feet from the ultimate right-ofway
and a minimum of 25 feet from the nearest street access driveway
intersection.
A. Size and structure.
(1) No shelter shall exceed the following dimensions and construction
standards:
(a) Height: 108 inches.
(b) Rear wall: 108 inches high by 112 inches length.
(c) Two side walls: 108 inches high by 60 inches depth.
(d) Concrete pad: 118 inches length by 66 inches depth.
(2) A larger sized shelter, not to exceed 140 square feet, upon
application and approval of a conditional use by the Board of
Supervisors.
§ 205-116 TOWING § 205-117.1
186:855
§ 205-118. Political signs. [Amended 12-15-2009 by Ord. No. 523]
Political signs shall not require a permit and shall not exceed 32 square feet.
(3) The front of the shelter (which is the vertical plain closest to the
street upon which the rear wall faces) shall be open and
unobstructed. The rear and side walls shall be made of safety glass,
such as lexan, acrylic, plexiglass or similar material. The frame of
the structure shall be aluminum. The foundation/flooring shall be a
concrete pad. All shelters shall be covered with a roof. All
construction shall be in accordance with applicable Township, state
and federal building codes, rules and regulations.
B. Illumination. Lighting shall be provided under the roof of the shelter.
Lighting shall be adequate for the safety of waiting transportation
users, but shall not cast illumination or glare on adjacent roads or
properties. During times of darkness, the advertisements shall be
internally illuminated.
C. Advertisements. Advertisements, maps or other informational displays
may only be placed on the two surfaces of one side wall of the shelter.
There shall be no advertisements for alcohol or tobacco products or of a
sexually explicit or violent nature.
D. Location of shelters.
(1) Shelters shall be permitted in all zoning districts. If placed in the
public right-of-way, a shelter shall be no less than five feet from the
curbline or edge of highway. Placement upon private property shall
require compliance with all of the criteria set forth herein. The
installer/owner of any shelter agrees on behalf of themselves, their
heirs, successors and assigns that they will record a written
agreement providing for the placement and/or removal of the
shelter, whether in the public right-of-way or on private property,
when specifically requested to do so by the Township Supervisors,
for any reason whatsoever. The form of this recorded document
shall be approved by the Township.
(2) Placement shall be at a conspicuous location with a clear sight
distance in the direction of all traffic of no less than 300 feet and
shall not interfere with ingress or egress to any property. Except
where shelters may be on opposite sides of the same street, no
shelter shall be closer to another shelter than 350 feet.
E. Maintenance. The installer/owner of the shelter shall be responsible to
maintain it in a first class, clean and safe manner. All lighting shall be
regularly serviced by the installer/owner, who shall also be responsible
for providing receptacles for trash and emptying them regularly.
§ 205-117.1 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-119
186:856
§ 205-119. Temporary directional signs.
Off-site temporary directional signs providing traffic direction to the
temporary location of special events will be permitted only when approved
by the Township Zoning Officer, who will determine number, size, posted
duration and escrow fee guaranteeing removal of such directional signs
after the special event has ended.
§ 205-120. Temporary sign permit. [Amended 12-15-2009 by Ord.
No. 523]
A temporary sign permit may be granted to any person or organization in
the Township to permit the erection of a temporary sign, other than those
discussed in §§ 205-111, 205-112 and 205-119.
§ 205-121. Placement of signs.
All signs shall be placed with regard to the public's safety and shall be
governed by the following regulations:
A. A thirty-day nonrenewable permit may be issued for public or
community events, charitable fund-raising events, conventions or any
similar notice of general public interest, subject to the following:
(1) Such signs shall not exceed 16 square feet in area.
(2) Such signs will be permitted either on or off site.
(3) Such signs will be limited to four in number.
B. A seven-day temporary sign permit may be issued for business or
commercial signs for advertising, on the premises, such events that are
considered to be necessary for the conduct of business beyond the
normal day-to-day operations, such as grand openings and going-out-ofbusiness,
bankruptcy or fire sales, subject to the following:
(1) Such signs shall not exceed 16 square feet in area.
(2) Such signs will be permitted on site only.
(3) Such signs will be limited to one in number.
(4) Such signs shall not exceed a height of six feet.
(5) Advertising devices such as large, inflated balloons, searchlights
and banners erected across public streets are prohibited in all
zoning districts.
A. No sign shall be erected or maintained as to prevent free ingress or
egress to or from any door, window or fire escape.
B. Only instructional signs shall be attached to a standpipe or fire escape.
§ 205-119 TOWING § 205-121
186:857
§ 205-122. Restrictions and prohibitions for all signs. [Amended
7-26-2011 by Ord. No. 538]
Where permitted, the illumination of signs shall be subject to the National
Electrical Code and to the following regulations:
§ 205-123. Additional signs permitted for fuel and service stations.
Gasoline service and/or filling stations, being of unique and particular
significance to the driving public, shall be permitted signs as defined in
§§ 205-114 and 205-115 and the following additional signs: one ground or
freestanding sign per station for each building frontage for purposes of
advertising current fuel prices only, subject to the following:
C. No sign shall be placed in such a position as to endanger pedestrians or
traffic on a street by obscuring a clear view or by confusion with official
street signs or signals by virtue of position or color.
D. No signs may be placed on property owned by the Township. [Added
12-15-2009 by Ord. No. 523]
E. No signs may be placed within 10 feet from the edge of any roadway.
[Added 12-15-2009 by Ord. No. 523]
A. The image, copy, or message of a sign shall not change more frequently
than once per 30 seconds. The change of an image, message, copy, color
or brilliance of a sign shall be instantaneous. All changeable copy shall
change uniformly and completely. Once changed, the copy of any part of
the sign shall not change again in less than 30 seconds.
B. No image shall be transferred by any means beyond the perimeter of
the sign face. No sign image shall be interactive, display interactive
messages or three-dimensional images; nor shall any sign or portion of
a billboard structure produce sound of any kind. No sign shall flash,
scroll, fade, revolve, move, have intermittent lighting or movable
characters or animated parts.
C. A sign which is animated by means of flashing, scintillating, blinking or
traveling lights or any other means not providing constant illumination
shall be deemed to be a flashing sign and shall not be permitted.
Illuminated revolving barber poles shall be permitted in conjunction
with the permitted use of a barbershop in any district.
D. Floodlighting shall be so shielded that the source of the light shall not
be visible from any point off the lot on which the sign is erected and so
that only the sign is directly illuminated thereby.
A. The area of such signs may not exceed 16 square feet on each side.
B. When fuel prices are displayed by means of changeable lettering, such
lettering shall be a minimum of eight inches and a maximum of 18
inches high to allow ease of viewing by passing motorists.
§ 205-121 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-123
186:858
§ 205-124. Permit required; conditions.
§ 205-125. Permit fee.
No permit to erect a sign shall be issued until the required fee has been
paid to the Zoning Officer, which fee shall be established from time to time
by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.230
§ 205-126. Nonconforming signs.
Any lawful sign existing on the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance,
which does not conform to the revisions of this chapter shall be considered
a lawful nonconforming sign and may be continued. Nonconforming signs
may be repaired or repainted but shall not be altered or changed in overall
dimensions except to conform to the provisions of this chapter. Any
nonconforming sign which is destroyed shall not be reerected.
§ 205-127. Exemptions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to official federal, state or
municipal signs erected within East Norriton Township. In addition, the
trade names, emblems or directions on service facilities or product
dispensers, including but not limited to gasoline pumps, telephone booths
and vending machines, shall not be considered as a sign when such trade
name, emblem or single group of words or symbols are not more than three
square feet in area.
C. Both sides of such signs may be used for advertising fuel prices only.
D. Such signs shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from the street line
and a minimum of 25 feet from the nearest street access driveway.
A. Every sign permitted by this chapter shall be constructed of durable
materials and shall be maintained in good condition and repair at all
times. A sign permit shall be required for all signs unless otherwise
provided. Applications for sign permits shall be filed on forms furnished
by the Zoning Officer and shall be accompanied by detailed plans and
specifications and any other information deemed necessary by the
Zoning Officer to determine the location and details of construction of
such sign.
B. All signs for which a permit has been issued must be completely
constructed within six months after the date of issuance of the permit.
Upon written request, the Zoning Officer may grant one extension for
an additional three-month period, provided that the applicant presents
reasonable grounds for the extension request.
C. Upon a change of use on any property, a sign must be removed or
painted over within 60 days after the change in occupancy.
230. Editor's Note: See § 205-148, Fee schedule established.
§ 205-123 TOWING § 205-127
186:859

ARTICLE XX
Nonconforming Uses
§ 205-128. Nonconforming land; buildings.
§ 205-129. Change in use.
§ 205-130. Extension of use.
A. Any land, the existing lawful use of which at the time of passage of this
chapter does not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is
located shall have such use considered as a nonconforming use, which
may continue on such land but shall be subject to the regulations
covering nonconforming uses. Any land which constituted a lawful
nonconforming use under the East Norriton Township Zoning
Ordinance of 1963 shall be governed by this article as of the date it first
became a lawful nonconforming use under the 1963 Ordinance.231
B. Any lawful building or the lawful use of any building existing at the time
of the passage of this chapter that does not conform to use, height,
location, size or bulk or to the regulations of the district in which it is
located shall be considered a nonconforming building or use and may
continue such use in its present location but shall be subject to the
regulations covering nonconforming uses. Any building which
constituted a lawful nonconforming use under the East Norriton
Township Zoning Ordinance of 1963 shall be governed by this article as
of the date it first became a lawful nonconforming use under the 1963
Zoning Ordinance.
A. A nonconforming building or use shall be considered as such unless and
until it complies with the regulations of the district in which it is
located. Such use shall not be changed to a use designated for a district
having less restrictive regulations, and such use shall be of the same
class of use as the prior nonconforming use.
B. A nonconforming use, when discontinued, may be resumed or changed
anytime within one year from such discontinuance, but not after.
A. Any lawful nonconforming use of a portion of a building may be
extended throughout the building, and any lawful nonconforming
building or any building of which a lawful nonconforming use is made
may be extended upon the lot occupied by such building and held in
single and separate ownership on the effective date of this chapter,
except in case of nonconforming uses which existed prior to the
effective date of this chapter, and, in those cases, the nonconformity
shall be determined as of the date the use first became nonconforming,
provided that the floor area of such building shall not be increased by
more than a total of 50% of the area of such building existing on the
231. Editor's Note: The Zoning Ordinance of 1963, Ord. No. 40, was superseded 9-11-1978 by
Ord. No. 96.
§ 205-128 TOWING § 205-130
186:861
§ 205-131. Board to determine change or resumption of use.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall have discretion to determine what
resumption or change of nonconforming use is permissible in accordance
with this article.
§ 205-132. Reconstruction of use.
A building containing a nonconforming use and a building nonconforming
as to area and height, destroyed by fire, legally condemned or in need of
restoration, may be reconstructed and used for the same nonconforming
use, provided that building reconstruction is commenced within one year
and carried on to completion without interruption, and provided that the
building, when rebuilt, does not exceed in height and area the building
so destroyed, condemned or restored, subject also to other regulations of
nonconforming uses herein contained.
§ 205-133. Nonconforming signs.
Every lawful nonconforming sign may be continued or replaced with a sign
similar in size and character so long as such lawful nonconforming use
continues but may not be enlarged or otherwise substantially altered (nor
may the illumination or lack of illumination thereof be changed), except in
accordance with the regulations applicable to the district in which such lot
is located.
§ 205-134. (Reserved)
date it first became a lawful nonconforming building or a building of
which a lawful nonconforming use is made, and provided further that
any structure, alteration, extension or addition shall conform to all the
height, area, width, yard and coverage requirements for the district in
which it is located.
B. Any lawful nonconforming use of a portion of a building may be
extended throughout the building, and any lawful nonconforming
building or any building of which a lawful nonconforming use is made
may be extended upon the lot occupied by such building and held in
single and separate ownership on the effective date of this chapter,
except in cases of nonconforming uses which existed prior to the
effective date of this chapter, and, in those cases, the nonconformity
shall be determined as of the date the use first became nonconforming;
in excess of the 50% allowed by the preceding subsection up to a
maximum of 100% increase in floor area by special exception granted
by the Zoning Hearing Board. Any such special exception shall provide
that any structural alteration, extension or addition shall conform to all
the height, area, width, yard and coverage requirements for the district
in which it is located.
§ 205-130 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-135
186:862
§ 205-135. Applicability.
Any subdivision and/or land development plan, whether preliminary or final,
approved prior to the adoption of this chapter, shall be governed by the
ordinances in effect at the time of such approval, provided that the applicant
completes development in accordance with such approval within three
years from date of such approval. Otherwise, the present regulations and
ordinances shall apply.
§ 205-135 TOWING § 205-135
186:863

ARTICLE XXI
Administration
§ 205-136. Zoning Officer.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by an agent, to be appointed
by the Board of Township Supervisors, who shall be known as the "Zoning
Officer." The Zoning Officer shall be appointed at the first meeting of the
Supervisors following the adoption of this chapter, to serve until the first
day of January next following, and shall thereafter be appointed annually
to serve for a term of one year and/or until his successor is appointed.
The Zoning Officer may succeed himself. He shall receive such fees or
compensation as the Township Supervisors may, by resolution, provide.
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to keep a record of all plans
and applications for zoning permits and of all zoning permits issued with
notation of all special conditions attached thereto, all of which records shall
be open for public inspection. The Zoning Officer shall have authority to
issue zoning permits only for construction and uses which are in accordance
with the general requirements of this chapter. Zoning permits for
construction and uses which are permitted by variance or special exception
to such general requirements shall be issued by the Zoning Officer only
upon order of the Zoning Hearing Board. The Zoning Officer shall issue
no permits for the construction or use of any land or building unless it
also conforms to the requirements of all other ordinances of East Norriton
Township and with the laws of the commonwealth. The Zoning Officer shall
not hold any elective office in the Township. The Zoning Officer shall be able
to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Township a working knowledge
of municipal zoning. The Zoning Officer is authorized to institute civil
enforcement proceedings as a means of enforcement when acting within the
scope of his employment.
§ 205-137. Permits.
A. No building shall be constructed or altered in the Township nor the use
of any building changed, until a zoning permit has been secured from
the Zoning Officer. No building or lot shall be used or occupied after
construction or change of use until a use and occupancy permit has
been secured from the Zoning Officer. Upon completion of the work
authorized by any permit, the applicant for the permit shall notify the
Zoning Officer of such completion. No permit shall be considered as
complete or as permanently effective until the Zoning Officer has noted
on the permit that the work has been inspected and approved as being
in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and any other
applicable Township ordinance.
B. All applications for zoning permits, use and occupancy permits and any
other permits required by this chapter shall be made in writing by the
owner or the tenants or authorized agent and shall be filed with the
Zoning Officer on forms as required by the Zoning Officer.
§ 205-136 TOWING § 205-137.1
186:865
§ 205-137.1. Conditional use procedures. [Amended 1-3-2011 by
Ord. No. 533]
Whenever a conditional use is authorized pursuant to the terms of this
chapter, as amended, the procedures for application and review of
requested conditional uses shall be as follows:
A. Written request. The landowner shall make a written request to the
Board of Supervisors that it hold a hearing on his or her application.
The request shall contain a statement reasonably informing the Board
of Supervisors of the matters that are in issue.
B. Plans and accompanying documents. The application shall be
accompanied by plans and other materials in accordance with Article
XXII. If the application shall involve a subdivision or land development,
then plans prepared in accordance with the requirements of Chapter
175, Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code of the Township of
East Norriton shall be filed for review as well.
C. Hearing on conditional use request. The Board of Supervisors shall hold
a hearing upon the request, commencing not later than 60 days after
the request is filed, or as may be required by the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, unless the applicant
requests or consents, in writing, to an extension of time.
D. Decision on conditional use request. In allowing a conditional use, the
Board of Supervisors may attach reasonable conditions and safeguards
as may be deemed necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter
and to ensure the protection of adjacent uses from adverse impacts that
may be determined by a fair preponderance of credible evidence.
E. Criteria and standards.
(1) The applicant shall establish, by a fair preponderance of credible
evidence, that the conditional use complies with the intent of this
chapter and the uses permitted by conditional use.
(2) The applicant shall establish, by a fair preponderance of credible
evidence, compliance with all conditions of the conditional use
enumerated in that section which gives the applicant the right to
seek a conditional use.
(3) The applicant shall establish, by a fair preponderance of credible
evidence, that adequate screening is provided between the lands
subject to the conditional use application and surrounding
residential uses and residentially zoned districts to screen the
facility from view, preclude any glare from lighting or noise above
the allowable decibel level in the ordinance from being ascertained
beyond the boundaries of the property.
(4) The applicant shall establish, by a fair preponderance of credible
evidence, that the proposed conditional use will be properly
§ 205-137.1 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-137.1
186:866
§ 205-137.2. Applications to Zoning Hearing Board. [Added
1-3-2011 by Ord. No. 533]
An appeal or an application for a special exception or variance from the
terms of this chapter may be filed with the Secretary to the Zoning Hearing
Board and shall set forth the following facts:
serviced by all existing public service systems. The peak traffic
generated by the conditional use must be accommodated for in a
safe and efficient manner, or improvement must be made in order
to effect the same. Similar responsibility must be assumed with
respect to other public service systems, including, but not limited
to, police protection, fire protection, utilities, parks and recreation.
(5) The applicant shall establish, by a fair preponderance of credible
evidence, that the proposed conditional use shall be in accord with
the comprehensive plan and any of its implementing or supporting
plans or policies.
(6) The applicant shall establish, by a fair preponderance of credible
evidence, that the proposed conditional use shall comply or shall be
subject to waiver therefrom under all other applicable criteria and
standards of East Norriton Township ordinances and any other
applicable state or federal laws or regulations.
(7) The applicant shall establish, by a fair preponderance of credible
evidence, that the plan for development for said conditional use
shall be properly designed with regard to internal circulation,
parking, building relationships, landscaping, ingress and egress,
screening, stormwater management and buffering.
(8) The applicant shall establish, by a fair preponderance of credible
evidence, that the use intended at the location intended shall not be
contrary or adverse to the public health, public safety, or public
welfare.
A. Name and address of the applicant.
B. Name and address of the owner of the real estate to be affected by the
proposed exception or variance.
C. A brief description and location of the real estate to be affected by such
proposed change.
D. Present zoning classification of the real estate in question, the
improvements thereon and its present use.
E. Section of this chapter under which the variance or exception
requested may be allowed and reasons for which it should be granted.
F. A fee as established by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 205-137.1 TOWING § 205-137.2
186:867
G. A plot plan, drawn to scale of not less than one inch equals 20 feet,
showing, at a minimum, the following features:
(1) The name(s) of the property owner(s).
(2) The address of the property.
(3) A north arrow.
(4) The entire property, including property lines and distances.
(5) Existing and proposed structures, including dimensions of all sides.
(6) Distances of existing and proposed structures from property lines.
(7) Existing and proposed roads, driveways and parking areas.
(8) The areas (in square feet) of existing and proposed structures.
(9) Existing and proposed impervious and building coverage
percentages for the property.
(10) Floodplain conservation district boundary lines.
§ 205-137.2 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-137.2
186:868
ARTICLE XXII
Zoning Hearing Board
§ 205-138. Appointment.
The Board of Supervisors shall appoint a Zoning Hearing Board consisting
of three members. The word "Board," when used in this article, shall mean
the Zoning Hearing Board.
§ 205-139. Membership.
The membership of the Board shall consist of three residents of the
Township appointed by the Board of Supervisors. Their terms of office shall
be three years and shall be so fixed that the term of office of one member
shall expire each year. The Board shall promptly notify the governing body
of any vacancies which occur. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only
for the unexpired portion of the term. Members of the Board shall hold no
other office in the municipality.
§ 205-140. Organization.
The Board shall elect from its own membership its officers, who shall
serve annual terms as such and may succeed themselves. For the conduct
of any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum shall be not less
than a majority of all the members of the Board, but where two members
are disqualified to act in a particular matter the remaining member may
act for the Board. The Board may appoint a hearing officer from its own
membership to conduct any hearing on its behalf, and the parties may
waive further action by the Board as provided in § 205-141. The Board
may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its procedure, consistent
with ordinances of the Township and laws of the commonwealth. The Board
shall keep full public records of its business and shall submit a report of
its activities to the Board of Supervisors once every three months so as to
coincide with the calendar-year quarters.
§ 205-141. Hearings. [Amended 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 512]
The Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in accordance with
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.232
§ 205-141.1. Mediation.
A. Parties to proceedings authorized in this article may utilize mediation
as an aid in completing such proceedings. In proceedings before the
Zoning Hearing Board, in no case shall the Zoning Hearing Board
initiate mediation or participate as a mediating party. Mediation shall
supplement, not replace, those procedures in this article once they have
been formally initiated. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as
232. Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 205-138 TOWING § 205-141.1
186:869
§ 205-142. Powers and duties.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and
render final adjudications in the following matters:
expanding or limiting municipal police powers or as modifying any
principals of substantive law.
B. Participation in mediation shall be wholly voluntary. The
appropriateness of mediation shall be determined by the particulars of
each case and the willingness of the parties to negotiate. The Township
shall encourage and assure that in each case, the mediating parties,
assisted by the mediator as appropriate, shall develop terms and
conditions:
(1) For funding mediation.
(2) For selecting a mediator who, at a minimum, shall have a working
knowledge of municipal zoning and subdivision procedures and
demonstrated skills in mediation.
(3) For completing mediation, including time limits for such
completion.
(4) For suspending time limits otherwise authorized in this article and
other applicable law, provided that there is written consent by the
mediating parties, and by an applicant or the Township
decisionmaking body if either is not a party to the mediation.
(5) For identifying all parties and affording them the opportunity to
participate.
(6) Subject to legal restraints, for determining whether some or all of
the mediation sessions shall be open or closed to the public.
(7) For assuring that mediated solutions are in writing and signed by
the parties, and become subject to review and approval by the
appropriate decisionmaking body pursuant to the authorized
procedure set forth in this article and other applicable law.
C. No offers or statements made in the mediation sessions, excluding the
final written mediated agreement, shall be admissible as evidence in
any subsequent judicial or administrative proceedings.
A. Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance, except
curative amendments brought before the governing body.
B. Challenges to the validity of a land use ordinance raising procedural
questions or alleged defects in the process of enactment or adoption
which challenges shall be raised by an appeal taken within 30 days after
the effective date of said ordinance.
§ 205-141.1 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-142
186:870
C. Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer, including but not
limited to the granting or denial of any permit, or failure to act on the
application therefor, the issuance of any cease and desist order or the
registration or refusal to register any nonconforming use, structure or
lot.
D. Appeals from a determination by a municipal engineer or the Zoning
Officer with reference to the administration of any floodplain or flood
hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use ordinance.
E. Applications for variance from the terms of the Zoning Ordinance and
Flood Hazard Ordinance or such provisions within a land use
ordinance.
(1) The Board shall hear requests for variances where it is alleged that
the provisions of the zoning ordinances inflict unnecessary
hardship upon the applicant. The Board may, by rule, prescribe the
form of application and may require preliminary application to the
Zoning Officer. The Board may grant a variance, provided that all of
the following findings are made where relevant in a given case:
(a) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or
shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical
conditions peculiar to the particular property and that the
unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions and not the
circumstances or conditions generally created by the
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance in the neighborhood or
district in which the property is located.
(b) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions,
there is no possibility that the property can be developed in
strict conformity with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance
and that the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary
to enable the reasonable use of the property.
(c) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
appellant.
(d) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property
is located, nor substantially or permanently impair the
appropriate use or development of adjacent property, nor be
detrimental to the public welfare.
(e) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue.
(2) In granting any variance the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement
§ 205-142 TOWING § 205-142
186:871
the purposes of the Municipalities Planning Code233 and the Zoning
Ordinance.
F. Applications for special exceptions under the Zoning Ordinance or
Floodplain or Flood Hazard Ordinance or such provisions within a land
use ordinance.
(1) The Board shall hear and decide requests for special exceptions, in
accordance with the following standards and criteria:
(a) The suitability for the property for the use desired.
(b) The effect of the proposed use upon the safety and health of the
immediate neighborhood and the general public therein.
(c) The effect of the proposed use upon the character of the
immediate neighborhood so as to conserve the value of existing
buildings and encourage the most appropriate use of the land.
(2) In granting a special exception, the Board may attach such
reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those
expressed in this chapter, as it may deem necessary to implement
the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance. The Board is charged with
using its most sound discretion in considering special exceptions in
that the uses subject to the special exceptions have not been
permitted in a given district but rather must be considered on a
case-by-case basis. The burden of proof in any application for a
special exception shall be on the applicant to prove that the use is
one which is permitted by special exception and that the proposed
use will not adversely affect the general public.234
G. Appeals from the determination of any officer or agency charged with
the administration of any transfers of development rights or
performance density provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.
H. Appeals from the Zoning Officer's determination pursuant to a request
for a preliminary opinion.
I. Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or municipal
engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance or provisions
thereof with reference to sedimentation and erosion control and
stormwater management insofar as the same do not relate to
application for subdivision or land development under the Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance or the Planned Residential
Development Ordinance, if any.
J. A variance or special exception shall lapse one year after the date of its
grant unless a building permit has been obtained to affect such
233. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
234. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F(3), pertaining to duration of variance or special
exception, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 4-28-2009 by Ord.
No. 515.
§ 205-142 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-142
186:872
variance or special exception. When the property is the subject of a
subdivision or land development application, any variance or special
exception shall lapse one year after the date on which the subdivision or
land development application has been waived or receives preliminary
and/or final approval from the East Norriton Township Board of
Supervisors unless a building permit has been obtained to affect such
variance or special exception. [Added 4-28-2009 by Ord. No. 515]
§ 205-142 TOWING § 205-142
186:873

ARTICLE XXIII
Heliports
§ 205-143. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSONAL USE HELIPORT — A helicopter landing area licensed by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation for the purpose of picking up
or discharging passengers or cargo. No fueling, helicopter repair or storage
areas are permitted in conjunction with the operation of a personal use
heliport.
§ 205-144. General provisions.
A personal use heliport shall be permitted as a special exception in the
Business and Professional, Commercial, Industrial and Institutional Zoning
Districts only when licensed by the Bureau of Aviation of the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation and shall be subject to the standards of the
district in which it is located as well as the following conditions:
A. Fencing which does not interfere with the landing of the helicopters
shall be required by the Zoning Hearing Board whenever necessary to
restrict pedestrian access to the landing area.
B. No personal use heliport shall be located closer than 100 feet to the
property line of the parcel on which it is located or 500 feet to a
residential district.
§ 205-143 TOWING § 205-144
186:875

ARTICLE XXIV
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 205-145. Investigation of violations; notice.
§ 205-146. Violations and penalties.
A. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to take cognizance of violations
of this chapter. He shall investigate each violation which comes to his
attention, whether by observation or communication. If it appears to
the Zoning Officer or the Township that a violation of any zoning
ordinance has occurred, the Township shall initiate enforcement
proceedings by sending an enforcement notice as provided in this
section.
(1) The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the
parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has
filed a written request to receive enforcement notices regarding
that parcel, and to any other person requested in writing by the
owner of record.
(2) An enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
(a) The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the Township intends to take action.
(b) The location of the property in violation.
(c) The specific violation with a description of the requirements
which have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable
provisions of this chapter.
(d) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
(e) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board within 30 days of receipt of said notice
of violation.
(f) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board,
constitutes a violation, with the possible sanctions clearly
described.
B. Failure to secure a zoning permit or Zoning Hearing Board certificate,
when required, previous to the erection, construction, extension or
addition of a building, shall also be a violation of this chapter. Failure to
secure any permit required by this chapter shall also be a violation of
this chapter. Failure to comply with any order or decision of the Zoning
Hearing Board shall also be a violation of this chapter.
§ 205-145 TOWING § 205-146
186:877
§ 205-147. Remedies.
In case any building, structure, landscaping or land is or is proposed to be
erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained or used
in violation of any ordinance or other statute, the Board of Supervisors or,
with the approval of the Board of Supervisors, an officer of the Township
or any aggrieved owner or tenant of real property who shows that his
property or person shall be substantially affected by the alleged violation,
in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or
proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such building, structure,
landscaping or land, or to prevent, in or about such premises, any act,
conduct, business or use constituting a violation. When any such action is
instituted by a landowner or tenant, notice of that action shall be served
upon the Township at least 30 days prior to the time the action is begun
by serving a copy of the complaint on the Board of Supervisors of the
Township. No such action may be maintained until such notice has been
given.
§ 205-147.1. Finances and expenditures.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of the provisions of any zoning ordinance or
other statute shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil
enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township, pay a judgment
of not more than $500 plus court costs, including reasonable attorneys'
fees incurred by the Township as a result thereof. No judgment shall
commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of the
determination of a violation by the District Justice. District Justices
shall have initial jurisdiction over proceedings brought under this
section. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable
rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation, unless the District Justice, determining
that there has been a violation, further determines that there was a
good faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating the
ordinance to have believed that there was no such violation, in which
event there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until
the fifth day following the date of the determination of a violation by the
District Justice and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation. All judgments, costs and reasonable
attorneys' fees collected for violation of the zoning ordinances shall be
paid over to the Township.
B. The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending final adjudication
of the violation and judgment.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the Township the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
§ 205-146 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-147.1
186:878
§ 205-148. Fee schedule established. [Amended 12-23-2008 by Ord.
No. 512]
The Board of Supervisors shall establish a fee schedule in which shall
be listed the various fees for applications, permits and hearings. Said fee
schedule shall be based, as nearly as possible, upon actual costs to the
Township for said applications, permits and hearings. The fee schedule may
be amended from time to time by resolution.235
§ 205-149. Amendments.
A. The Board of Supervisors may appropriate funds to finance the
preparation of zoning ordinances and shall appropriate funds for
administration, for enforcement and for actions to support or oppose,
upon appeal to the courts, decisions of the Zoning Hearing Board.
B. The Board of Supervisors shall make provision in the budget and
appropriate funds for the operation of the Zoning Hearing Board.
C. The Zoning Hearing Board may employ or contract for and fix the
compensation of legal counsel, as the need arises. The legal counsel
shall be an attorney other than the Township Solicitor. The Board may
also employ or contract for and fix the compensation of experts and
other staff and may contract for services as it shall deem necessary. The
compensation of legal counsel, experts and staff and the sums expended
for services shall not exceed the amount appropriated by the Board of
Supervisors for this use.
D. For the same purposes, the Board of Supervisors may accept gifts and
grants of money and services from private sources and from the county,
state and federal governments.
E. The Board of Supervisors may prescribe reasonable fees with respect to
the administration of the Zoning Ordinance and with respect to
hearings before the Zoning Hearing Board. Fees for these hearings may
include compensation for the Secretary and members of the Zoning
Hearing Board, notice and advertising costs and necessary
administrative overhead connected with the hearing. The cost,
however, shall not include legal expenses of the Zoning Hearing Board,
expenses for engineering, architectural or other technical consultants
or expert witness costs.
A. The Board of Supervisors, from time to time, may amend, supplement,
change, modify or repeal this chapter, including the Zoning Map, by
proceeding in the following manner, and as otherwise required by law.
B. Amendment procedures.
(1) Before voting on the enactment of an amendment, the Board of
Supervisors shall hold a public hearing thereon, pursuant to public
235. Editor’s Note: The fee schedule is on file in the Township offices.
§ 205-147.1 TOWING § 205-149
186:879
notice. In addition, if the proposed amendment involves a Zoning
Map change, notice of said public hearing shall be conspicuously
posted by the Township at points deemed sufficient by the
Township along the perimeter of the tract to notify potentially
interested citizens. The affected tract or area shall be posted at
least one week prior to the date of the hearing.
(2) In the case of an amendment, other than that prepared by the
Planning Commission, the Board of Supervisors shall submit each
such amendment to the Planning Commission at least 30 days prior
to the hearing on such proposed amendment to provide the
Planning Commission an opportunity to submit recommendations.
(3) If, after any public hearing held upon an amendment, the proposed
amendment is changed substantially or is revised to include land
previously not affected by it, the Board of Supervisors shall hold
another public hearing, pursuant to public notice, before
proceeding to vote on the amendment.
(4) At least 30 days prior to the public hearing on the amendment by
the Board of Supervisors, the Township shall submit the proposed
amendment to the County Planning Commission for
recommendations.
(5) Within 30 days after enactment, a copy of the amendment to the
Zoning Ordinance shall be forwarded to the County Planning
Commission.
C. Publication, advertisement and availability of ordinances.
(1) Proposed zoning ordinances and amendments shall not be enacted
unless notice of proposed enactment is given in the manner set
forth in this section, and shall include the time and place of the
meeting at which passage will be considered, a reference to the
place within the Township where copies of the proposed ordinance
or amendments may be examined without charge or obtained for a
charge not greater than the cost thereof. The Board of Supervisors
shall publish the proposed ordinance or amendment once in one
newspaper of general circulation in the Township not more than 60
days nor less than seven days prior to passage. Publication of the
proposed ordinance or amendment shall include either the full text
thereof or the title and a brief summary prepared by the Township
Solicitor and setting forth all of the provisions in reasonable detail.
If the full text is not included:
(a) A copy thereof shall be supplied to a newspaper of general
circulation in the Township at the time the public notice is
published.
(b) An attested copy of the proposed ordinance shall be filed in the
Montgomery County Law Library.
§ 205-149 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-149
186:880
§ 205-150. Planning Commission.
The Board of Supervisors shall submit each such amendment to the County
Planning Commission and the Township Planning Commission at least 30
days prior to the hearing on such proposed amendment to provide the
Township Planning Commission an opportunity to submit recommendations.
(2) In the event that substantial amendments are made in the proposed
ordinance or amendment, before voting upon enactment, the Board
of Supervisors shall, at least 10 days prior to enactment,
readvertise in one newspaper of general circulation in the
Township a brief summary setting forth all the provisions in
reasonable detail, together with a summary of the amendments.
(3) Zoning ordinances and amendments may be incorporated into the
official ordinance books by reference with the same force and effect
as if duly recorded therein.
§ 205-149 TOWING § 205-150
186:881

ARTICLE XXV
R-R Retirement Residential District
§ 205-150.1. Creation; title.
A new district shall be created which will be entitled "R-R Retirement
Residential District."
§ 205-151. Declaration of intent.
The Retirement Residential District is intended to address the housing
needs of older persons who do not require the intensive needs of a nursing
home but desire the security, safety and special design of a residential
environment which can provide protective care and independent living.
§ 205-152. Permitted uses.
The following uses shall be permitted, and a building may be erected,
altered or used, and a lot or premises may be used for any of the following
purposes:
A. A retirement residential community consisting of one or a group of
retirement residential structures which shall contain independent
residential retirement units for older persons.
B. Accessory uses to retirement residential communities and personal
care homes will be specifically restricted to serve only residents of the
retirement residential community or personal care home, as applicable,
and their invited guest and shall be limited to the following:
(1) Auditoriums, activity rooms, craft rooms, library, lounges and
similar facilities for members of the retirement residential
community or personal care home, as applicable, and invited
guests.
(2) Office and retail facilities designed to serve only the members of
the retirement residential community or personal care home, as
applicable, such as, but not limited to, a doctor's office, pharmacy,
fitness center, gift shop, coffee shop, post office, bank, travel agent,
beauty shop and barbershop.
(3) Guard station and/or mechanical entrance gate.
(4) Off-street automobile parking or parking garage and off-street
delivery and loading facilities as may be required for the use of
occupants, staff and visitors to the facility.
§ 205-150.1 TOWING § 205-152
186:883
B1. Personal care homes, as the sole use of a property or in
conjunction with other permitted or special exception uses,
subject to the standards in this subsection. Wherever there
is a conflict between the standards herein and the general
requirements of the R-R District, the standards herein shall
apply.
(1) The minimum lot area devoted to this use shall be three
acres.
(2) The maximum height of a personal care building shall
be 35 feet.
(3) The minimum setback from an abutting street ultimate
right-of-way shall be 50 feet. A low-intensity buffer shall
be installed in this area in accordance with the
requirements of § 175-22.1, Subsection C(4) of Chapter
175, Subdivision and Land Development.
(4) Property line buffers shall be provided in accordance
with the requirements of § 175-22.1, Subsection C, of
Chapter 175, Subdivision and Land Development.
(5) Personal care homes shall be served by public water
and sewer.
(6) Parking shall be provided in accordance with Article
XVIII, § 205-102, Subsection B(2)(p) of this chapter.
(7) The maximum number of beds/residents in a personal
care home shall be based upon applicable regulations
of the appropriate regulation agencies of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as well as the
maximum building area, impervious surface ration and
height permitted in this district.
(8) The maximum number of residents in a single room/
unit in a personal care home shall be based upon the
maximum number of beds in the room/unit and any
applicable regulations of the appropriate regulatory
agencies of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. In no
case shall the number of residents in a single room/unit
exceed the number of permanent beds in that room/
unit.
(9) The maximum horizontal dimension of a building used
as a personal care home shall be 300 feet.
(10) The provisions of § 205-156, Subsection F, herein shall
apply with the understanding that the term "owner of
an individual dwelling unit" as used in said section shall
be construed to also mean "resident of a personal care
home."
(11) No-impact home-based business as defined in Article II
herein.
§ 205-152 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-152
186:884
§ 205-153. Development requirements.
§ 205-154. Area and bulk requirements.
C. Uses permitted by special exception.
(1) Adult day care is permitted by special exception.
(2) Any uses permitted by right or by conditional use in the RPResidential
and Professional Zoning District are permitted when
authorized by special exception, subject to the provisions in the
Zoning Code applicable to the RP Zoning District, except that
group day-care home(s) and day-care center(s) are prohibited.
(3) Special exception uses shall be subject to the applicable parking
requirements contained in Article XVIII of this chapter.
(4) Buffering along an abutting street shall be provided in accordance
with the low-intensity buffer provisions of § 175-22.1, Subsection
C(4), of Chapter 175, Subdivision and Land Development.
A. A Master Plan shall be required for the entire tract and shall include a
unified architectural theme.
B. Phasing. If constructed in phases, each phase shall be planned so that
the regulations shall be fully complied with at the completion of any
stage.
C. Minimum district size equals seven acres.
D. Whenever there is a combination of uses by right and special exception
uses on a development tract in this district, the minimum area devoted
to permitted uses shall be three acres.
A. The maximum number of dwelling units shall be 10 dwelling units per
gross acre of lot area. Lot area devoted to uses permitted in § 205-152C
above shall not be utilized in the calculation of number of dwelling
units.
B. Building area shall not exceed 35% of the lot area.
C. Impervious surface ratio, including building area, will not exceed 68%
of the lot area.
D. Minimum building setbacks from streets and property lines shall be as
follows:
(1) When adjacent to a residential district:
(a) In the case of buildings less than two stories, a setback equal to
the building height but in no event less than 25 feet.
(b) In the case of two or two-and-one-half-story buildings, a
setback of not less than 50 feet.
§ 205-152 TOWING § 205-154
186:885
§ 205-155. Off-street parking requirements.
(2) When adjacent to a zoning district other than residential, all
buildings shall be set back a distance equal to the height of the
building but not less than 25 feet.
(3) When adjacent to an improved public street, all buildings shall be
set back a distance not less than 50 feet from the ultimate right-ofway
line, 25 feet of which must be a buffer area.
E. Minimum space between buildings shall be 25 feet.
F. Unit occupancy.
(1) For retirement residential dwellings, no more than three persons
shall occupy a dwelling and at least one of whom shall be 55 years
of age or older.
(2) For all dwellings, principal occupants, if unrelated by blood or
marriage, shall be 55 years of age or older.
G. Height of building. No building shall exceed a height of 35 feet nor shall
it be more than 2 1/2 stories.
H. The footprint of a building shall not be longer than six units nor wider
than two units.
A. There shall be a minimum of two parking spaces for each independent
retirement residential dwelling unit.
B. Attached garages and driveways may be used in the calculations for offstreet
parking spaces.
C. When submitting a land development plan, the applicant shall provide
for the maximum parking that may be expected for the retirement
residential community. This shall include the sum of applicable parking
requirements outlined in this section.
D. Overflow parking shall be provided at the rate of one space for every
two units and shall be provided in approved areas accessible by all
residents and visitors. One-half of the required overflow parking may be
held in reserve and not constructed unless required by the operator of
the facility or directed by the Township.
E. No parking or loading shall be permitted closer than 25 feet from any RR
District boundary line adjacent to a residential district, 25 feet from
the ultimate right-of-way line of an existing street, and 10 feet from any
R-R District boundary line adjacent to a zoning district other than
residential.
F. It shall be illegal to park any commercial vehicles with a manufacturer's
specified payload of 2,000 pounds or greater.
§ 205-154 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-156
186:886
§ 205-156. General regulations.
A. Utilities. All buildings and units within the retirement residential
community shall be served by both public water and public sanitary
sewer. All utility lines such as electric, telephone and cable shall be
installed underground.
B. Signs. Identification signs and directional signs shall be permitted
pursuant to § 205-110D or E, as may be applicable, of this chapter.
Traffic directional signs and signs indicating direction to delivery and
loading areas are permitted and shall not exceed four square feet each.
C. Lighting fixtures. External illumination of any retirement residential
community as well as the parking lots, driveways, walkways and
entrances thereto shall be arranged so as to protect the adjacent
highways and neighboring properties, whether or not contiguous
thereto, from unreasonable direct glare or hazardous visual
interference. No freestanding light fixture shall exceed a height of 16
feet.
D. Landscape plan. The developer of a retirement residential community
shall provide a separate landscape plan for the perimeters of the tract,
as well as any green or open space portions of the tract.
E. Buffer area. A permanent landscape buffer of no less than 25 feet in
width when adjacent to an existing street right-of-way line or a
residential zoning district shall be provided along the perimeter
boundaries of a retirement residential community, excluding access
points only in accordance with the Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.236
F. Declaration of age restriction. At the time of subdivision and land
development, as a prerequisite to any final plan approved, the
developer shall record a declaration against the entire tract, in a form
acceptable to the Township Solicitor, binding all properties and owners
to the restriction which shall require that the owner of an individual
dwelling unit within the Retirement Residential District shall be age 55
or older.
G. In the R-R Zoning District, a one and one-half-story building is defined
as a building with two floors of living space above ground and a height
less than 25 feet. A two-and-one-half-story building shall have three
floors of living space above ground with a height less than 35 feet. The
top floor of a one-and-one-half- or two-and-one-half-story building shall
have substantially less living space than the floor located immediately
beneath the top floor.
236. Editor's Note: See Ch. 175, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 205-156 TOWING § 205-156
186:887

ARTICLE XXVI
HI Heavy Industrial District
§ 205-157. Applicability of regulations.
In an HI Heavy Industrial District, the following regulations shall apply.
§ 205-158. Permitted uses.
A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot or premises may be
used for any of the following purposes and no other:
§ 205-159. General regulations.
A. Any use permitted in the I Industrial Zoning District which shall be
subject to the same regulations and restrictions contained therein.
B. Mining and mineral extraction.
C. Any uses of the same general character as any of the above permitted
uses when authorized as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing
Board, provided that such use shall not create any danger to health or
safety in the surrounding area or any amount of offensive noise,
vibration, smoke, dust, odor, heat, lumination or other objectionable
influences.
A. Lot area. The lot area shall be a minimum of 80,000 square feet, and a
lot width of not less than 200 feet at the building line shall be provided
for every building or other structure erected or used for any use
permitted in this district.
B. Building area. No more than 40% of the lot area shall be occupied by
buildings.
C. Setbacks. Buildings, including accessory structures and the outward
edge, which is part of any mining or mineral extraction operation within
the Township, shall be set back from the property lines and road
frontages as follows:
(1) Front yard setback: 100 feet;
(2) Side yard setback: 100 feet;
(3) Rear yard setback: 100 feet;
(4) Setback from any residential building: 250 feet; and
(5) Setback from road frontages: 100 feet.
D. Height regulation. The maximum height of any building or structure
shall be 35 feet.
E. Parking. All off-street parking and loading areas shall be provided for in
accordance with Article XVIII of this chapter.
§ 205-157 TOWING § 205-159
186:889
§ 205-160. Smoke control.
§ 205-161. Emission control.
F. Landscaping. Including conservation of existing trees and woodlands,
street trees, stormwater basin landscaping and site element screens
shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 175,
Subdivision and Land Development.
G. Hours of operation. No mining or mineral extraction operations
conducted in the Township shall commence operations of any
machinery utilized in said business, including motorized vehicles
engaged in the business, until 7:00 a.m. and all such operations shall
cease by 5:00 p.m., prevailing time, Monday through Friday only.
H. Exterior storage. Any exterior storage of mining or mineral extraction
products or by-products shall comply with all recognized fire standards
and safety standards and shall be screened from view from adjoining
properties with the planting of an appropriate evergreen screen.
I. Deliveries or transport to and from the site. No deliveries to the location
or transportation of product or by-product of the mining or mineral
extraction operations shall be conducted except between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday though Friday only.
J. External illumination. Any external illumination to be placed on the site
as part of or to assist in the mining or mineral extraction operation shall
be shielded from direct visual observation on any adjoining property or
along any adjacent roadway.
K. Signage and retail operations. No sale of any of the mine or extracted
materials or any other product or by-product of the mining or mineral
extraction operation may be sold on the premises where the mining
and/or mineral operation is conducted.
A. No smoke shall be emitted from any chimney or other source which has
a visible gray opacity greater than No. 1 on the Ringelmann Chart as
published by the United States Bureau of Mines.
B. Smoke of a shade not darker than No. 2 on the Ringelmann Smoke
Chart may be emitted for not more than four minutes in any 30 minutes.
C. These provisions, applicable to visible gray smoke, shall also apply to
visible smoke of a different color but with an equivalent apparent
opacity.
A. No emission shall be made which can cause any damage to health,
animals or vegetation or other form of property or which can cause any
excessive soiling at any point.
B. No emission of liquid or solid particles from any chimney or otherwise
shall exceed 0.3 grain per cubic foot of the covering gas at any point.
§ 205-159 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-161
186:890
§ 205-162. Noise control.
At no point on the boundary of a residential or commercial district shall
the sound-pressure level of any operation exceed the described levels in the
designated octave bands shown below for the district indicated.
Sound Levels
Octave Band
(cycles per second)
Along Residential
District Boundaries
Maximum Permitted
Sound Level
(decibels)
At Any Other Point
on the Lot Boundary
Maximum Permitted
Sound Level
(decibels)
0 to 75 72 79
75 to 150 67 74
150 to 300 59 66
300 to 600 52 59
600 to 1,200 46 53
1,200 to 2,400 40 47
2,400 to 4,800 34 41
Above 4,800 32 39
§ 205-163. Control of odors.
There shall be no emission of odorous matter in such quantities as to
be offensive along a lot boundary line. Any process which may involve
the creation or emission of any odors shall be provided with a secondary
safeguard system so that control will be maintained if the primary
safeguard system should fail. There is hereby established as a guide in
determining such quantities of offensive odors, Table III (Odor Thresholds)
in Chapter 5 of the Air Pollution Abatement Manual, copyright 1951, by the
Manufacturing Chemists Association, Inc., Washington D.C., or the latest
revised edition thereof.
§ 205-164. Control of glare and heat.
Any operation producing intense glare or heat shall be performed within
an enclosed building or behind a solid fence in such manner as to be
completely imperceptible from any point along the lot lines.
C. For measurement of the amount of particles in gases resulting from
combustion, standard correction shall be applied to a stack
temperature of 500° F. and 50% excess air.
§ 205-161 TOWING § 205-165
186:891
§ 205-165. Control of vibration.
No vibration which is discernible to the human sense of feeling shall be
perceptible without instruments at any point on the lot line.
§ 205-166. Radioactivity or electrical disturbances.
There shall be no activities which emit dangerous radioactivity at any point.
There shall be no electrical disturbance (except from domestic household
appliances) adversely affecting the operation at any point or any equipment
other than that of the creator of such disturbance.
§ 205-167. Outdoor storage of materials; disposal.
§ 205-168. Power service lines.
Every use requiring power shall be so operated that the service lines,
substation and appurtenances shall conform to the highest safety
requirements known, shall be so constructed and installed to be an integral
part of the architectural features of the plant and, if visible from abutting
residential properties, shall be concealed by coniferous planting.
§ 205-169. Waste disposal.
No use shall be conducted in such a way as to discharge any treated
or untreated sewage or industrial waste into any stream. All methods of
sewage and industrial waste treatment and disposal shall be approved by
the Board of Supervisors.
§ 205-170. Water requirements.
All water requirements shall be stated in the application. Water shall be
supplied by water distributing companies operating and supervised as
municipal or public utilities by virtue of the laws of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania and the ordinances of this Township. No permit for
construction, building or use shall be issued by the Zoning Officer until
satisfactory proof of the availability and supply of water is furnished.
A. No flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be stored in
bulk above the ground; provided, however, that tanks or drums of fuel
are excluded from this provision.
B. All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, raw materials and products stored
outdoors shall be concealed from any adjacent properties.
C. No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or
manner that may be transferred off the lot by natural causes or forces.
D. All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust which
constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible or otherwise be
attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors in closed
containers.
§ 205-165 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-170
186:892
ARTICLE XXVII
ATR Age-Targeted Residential District
[Added 5-26-2009 by Ord. No. 517]
§ 205-170.1. Creation; title.
A new district shall be created which will be entitled "ATR Age-Targeted
Residential District."
§ 205-171. Permitted uses.
The following uses shall be permitted, and a building may be erected,
altered or used, and a lot or premises may be used, for any of the following
purposes:
§ 205-172. Development requirements.
§ 205-173. Area and bulk requirements.
A. Age-targeted housing, as the sole use of a property, subject to the
standards in this article.
B. As an accessory use, a no-impact home-based business, as defined in
Article II herein.
A. A Master Plan shall be required for the entire tract and shall include a
unified architectural theme.
B. Phasing. If constructed in phases, each phase shall be planned so that
the regulations shall be fully complied with at the time of completion of
any stages.
C. The minimum lot area devoted to this use shall be five acres and the
maximum lot area devoted to this use shall be 10 acres.
A. The maximum number of dwelling units shall be 10 dwelling units per
gross acre of lot area.
B. Building area shall not exceed 35% of the lot area.
C. Impervious surface ratio, including building area, shall not exceed 68%.
D. Minimum building setbacks from streets and property lines shall be as
follows:
(1) When adjacent to a residential district:
(a) In the case of buildings less than two stories, a setback equal to
the building height but in no event less than 25 feet.
(b) In the case of two- or two-and-one-half-story buildings, a
setback of not less than 50 feet.
§ 205-170.1 TOWING § 205-173
186:893
§ 205-174. Off-street parking requirements.
§ 205-175. General provisions.
(2) When adjacent to a zoning district other than residential, all
buildings shall be set back a distance equal to the height of the
building but not less than 25 feet.
(3) When adjacent to an improved public street, all buildings shall be
set back a distance not less than 50 feet from the ultimate right-ofway
line, 25 feet of which must be a buffer area.
E. Minimum space between buildings shall be 25 feet.
F. Height of building. No building shall exceed a height of 35 feet nor shall
it be more than 2 1/2 stories.
G. The footprint of a building shall not be longer than six units nor wider
than two units.
A. There shall be a minimum of two parking spaces for each age-targeted
housing residential dwelling unit. Driveways may be used in the
calculation of off-street parking spaces, but one garage parking space
for each unit may not be used to address the parking requirements of
this section. Overflow parking shall be provided at the rate of 0.2 space
for every unit and shall be provided in approved areas accessible by all
residents and visitors.
B. When submitting a land development plan, the applicant shall design
for the maximum parking that may be expected for the age-targeted
housing development. This shall include the sum of applicable parking
requirements outlined in this section. A specified number of the
overflow parking spaces may be held in reserve with the permission of
the Board of Supervisors.
C. No parking or loading shall be permitted closer than 25 feet from any
ATR Age-Targeted Residential District boundary line adjacent to a
residential district, 25 feet from the ultimate right-of-way line of an
existing street, and 10 feet from any ATR Age-Targeted Residential
District boundary line adjacent to a zoning district other than
residential.
D. It shall be illegal to park any commercial vehicles with a manufacturer's
specified payload of 2,000 pounds or greater in an ATR age-targeted
residential development.
A. Utilities. All buildings and units within the age-targeted housing
development shall be served by both public water and public sanitary
sewer. All utility lines such as electric, telephone and cable shall be
installed underground.
§ 205-173 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-175
186:894
B. Signs. Identification signs and directional signs shall be permitted
pursuant to § 205-110D or E, as may be applicable, of this chapter.
Traffic directional signs and signs indicating direction to delivery and
loading areas are permitted and shall not exceed four square feet each.
C. Lighting fixtures. External illumination of any age-targeted housing
development as well as the parking lots, driveways, walkways and
entrances thereto shall be arranged so as to protect the adjacent
highways and neighboring properties, whether or not contiguous
thereto, from unreasonable direct glare or hazardous visual
interference. No freestanding light fixture shall exceed a height of 16
feet.
D. Landscape plan. The developer of an age-targeted housing development
shall provide a separate landscape plan for the perimeters of the tract,
as well as any green or open space portions of the tract.
E. Buffer area. A permanent landscape buffer of no less than 25 feet in
width when adjacent to an existing street right-of-way line or a
residential zoning district shall be provided along the perimeter
boundaries of an age-targeted housing development, excluding access
points only in accordance with the Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.237
F. Declaration of age restriction. In an age-targeted housing development,
the age restriction and recording of a declaration of age restriction, as
set forth in § 205-156F, shall be permitted, but shall not be required.
G. In the ATR Age-Targeted Residential District, a one-and-one-half-story
building is defined as a building with two floors of living space above
ground and a height less than 25 feet. A two-and-one-half-story building
shall have three floors of living space above ground with a height less
than 35 feet. The top floor of a one-and-one-half- or two-and-one-halfstory
building shall have substantially less living space than the floor
located immediately beneath the top floor.
237. Editor's Note: See Ch. 175, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 205-175 TOWING § 205-175
186:895

ARTICLE XXVIII
Airport Overlay Zoning District
[Added 1-3-2011 by Ord. No. 533]
§ 205-176. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to create an airport district overlay that
considers safety issues around the airport, regulates and restricts the
heights of constructed structures and objects of natural growth, creates
appropriate zones, establishing the boundaries thereof and providing for
changes in the restrictions and boundaries of such zones, creates the
permitting process for use within said zones and provides for enforcement,
assessment of violation penalties, an appeals process, and judicial review.
§ 205-177. Relation to other zone districts.
The Airport District Overlay shall not modify the boundaries of any
underlying zoning district. Where identified, the Airport District Overlay
shall impose certain requirements on land use and construction in addition
to those contained in the underlying zoning district.
§ 205-178. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this article shall have the
meaning given to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
AIRPORT ELEVATION — The highest point of an airport's usable landing
area measured in feet above sea level. The airport elevation of the airport is
302 feet above sea level.
AIRPORT HAZARD — Any structure or object, natural or man-made, or use
of land which obstructs the airspace required for flight or aircraft in landing
or taking off at an airport or is otherwise hazardous as defined in 14 CFR
Part 77 and 74 Pa.C.S.A. § 5102.
AIRPORT HAZARD AREA — Any area of land or water upon which an airport
hazard might be established if not prevented as provided for in this article
and the Act 164 of 1984 (Pennsylvania laws relating to aviation).238
APPROACH SURFACE (ZONE) — An imaginary surface longitudinally
centered on the extended runway center line and extending outward and
upward from each end of the primary surface. An approach surface is
applied to each end of the runway based on the planned approach. The
inner edge of the approach surface is the same width as the primary surface
and expands uniformly depending on the planned approach. The approach
surface zone, as shown on Figure 205-179.1 (titled "Wings Field Airport
Surface Areas"),239 is derived from the approach surface.
238. Editor's Note: See 74 Pa.C.S.A. § 5101 et seq.
239. Editor's Note: Figure 205-179.1 is located at the end of this chapter
§ 205-176 TOWING § 205-178
186:897
CONICAL SURFACE (ZONE) — An imaginary surface extending outward
and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20
feet horizontally to one foot vertically for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.
The conical surface zone, as shown on Figure 205-179.1 (titled "Wings Field
Airport Surface Areas"),240 is based on the conical surface.
DEPARTMENT — Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
FAA — Federal Aviation Administration of the United States Department of
Transportation.
HEIGHT — For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set
forth in this article and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean
sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
HORIZONTAL SURFACE (ZONE) — An imaginary plane 150 feet above
the established airport elevation that is constructed by swinging arcs of
various radii from the center of the end of the primary surface and then
connecting the adjacent arc by tangent lines. The radius of each arc is based
on the planned approach. The horizontal surface zone, as shown on Figure
205-179.1 (titled "Wings Field Airport Surface Areas"),241 is derived from
the horizontal surface.
LARGER THAN UTILITY RUNWAY — A runway that is constructed for and
intended to be used by propeller-driven aircraft of greater than 12,500
pounds maximum gross weight and jet-powered aircraft.
NONCONFORMING USE — Any preexisting structure, object of natural
growth, or use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this
article or an amendment thereto.
NON-PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY — A runway having an existing
instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only
horizontal guidance, or area-type navigation equipment, for which a
straight-in non-precision instrument approach procedure has been
approved or planned.
OBSTRUCTION — Any structure, growth, or other object, including a
mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth by this article.
PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY — A runway having an existing
instrument approach procedure utilizing an Instrument Landing System
(ILS) or a Precisions Approach Radar (PAR). It also means a runway for
which a precision approach system is planned and is so indicated on an
approved airport layout plan or any other planning document.
PRIMARY SURFACE (ZONE) — An imaginary surface longitudinally
centered on the runway, extending 200 feet beyond the end of paved
runways or ending at each end of turf runways. The elevation of any point
on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point
on the runway center line. The primary surface zone, as shown on Figure
240. Editor's Note: Figure 205-179.1 is located at the end of this chapter
241. Editor's Note: Figure 205-179.1 is located at the end of this chapter
§ 205-178 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-178
186:898
205-179.1 (titled "Wings Field Airport Surface Areas"),242 is derived from
the primary surface.
RUNWAY — A defined area of an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of
aircraft along its length.
STRUCTURE — An object, including a mobile object, constructed or
installed by man, including but without limitation, buildings, towers, cranes,
smokestacks, earth formation and overhead transmission lines.
TRANSITIONAL SURFACE (ZONE) — An imaginary surface that extends
outward and upward from the edge of the primary surface to the horizontal
surface at a slope of seven feet horizontally to one foot vertically 7:1. The
transitional surface zone, as shown on Figure 205-179.1 (titled "Wings Field
Airport Surface Areas"),243 is derived from the transitional surface.
TREE — Any object of natural growth.
UTILITY RUNWAY — A runway that is constructed for and intended to be
used by propeller-driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight
or less.
VISUAL RUNWAY — A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft
using visual approach procedures.
§ 205-179. Establishment of airport zones.
There are hereby created and established certain zones within the Airport
District Overlay article, defined in § 205-178 and depicted on Figure
205-179.1 (titled Wings Field Airport Surface Areas"),244 hereby adopted as
part of this article, which include:
§ 205-180. Permit applications.
A. Approach Surface Zone.
B. Conical Surface Zone.
C. Horizontal Surface Zone.
D. Primary Surface Zone.
E. Transitional Surface Zone.
A. As regulated by Act 164 and defined by 14 CFR 77.13(a) (as amended or
replaced), any person who plans to erect a new structure, to add to an
existing structure, or to erect and maintain any object (natural or manmade),
in the vicinity of the airport, shall first notify the Department's
Bureau of Aviation (BOA) by submitting Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation Form AV-57 to obtain an obstruction review of the
proposal at least 30 days prior to commencement thereof. The
242. Editor's Note: Figure 205-179.1 is located at the end of this chapter
243. Editor's Note: Figure 205-179.1 is located at the end of this chapter
244. Editor's Note: Figure 205-179.1 is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 205-178 TOWING § 205-180
186:899
§ 205-181. Variance.
Any request for a variance shall include documentation in compliance with
14 CFR Part 77 Subpart B (FAA Form 7460-1 as amended or replaced).
Determinations of whether to grant a variance will depend on the
determinations made by the FAA and the Department's BOA as to the effect
of the proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe,
efficient use of navigable air space. In particular, the request for a variance
shall consider which of the following categories the FAA has placed the
proposed construction in:
§ 205-182. Use restrictions.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, no use shall be made
of land or water within the Airport District Overlay in such a manner
as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio
communications between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots
to distinguish between airport lights and others, impair visibility in the
Department's BOA response must be included with this permit
application for it to be considered complete. If the Department's BOA
returns a determination of no penetration of airspace, the permit
request should be considered in compliance with the intent of this
overlay article. If the Department's BOA returns a determination of a
penetration of airspace, the permit shall be denied, and the project
sponsor may seek a variance from such regulations as outlined in
§ 205-181.
B. No permit is required to make maintenance repairs to or to replace
parts of existing structures which do not enlarge or increase the height
of an existing structure.
A. No objection. The subject construction is determined not to exceed
obstruction standards, and marking/lighting is not required to mitigate
potential hazard. Under this determination a variance shall be granted.
B. Conditional determination. The proposed construction/alteration is
determined to create some level of encroachment into an airport hazard
area which can be effectively mitigated. Under this determination, a
variance shall be granted contingent upon implementation of mitigating
measures as described in § 205-184, Obstruction marking and lighting.
C. Objectionable. The proposed construction/alteration is determined to
be a hazard and is thus objectionable. A variance shall be denied and
the reasons for this determination shall be outlined to the applicant.
Such requests for variances shall be granted where it is duly found that
a literal application or enforcement of the regulations will result in
unnecessary hardship and that relief granted will not be contrary to the
public interest, will not create a hazard to air navigation, will do
substantial justice, and will be in accordance with the intent of this
article.
§ 205-180 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-182
186:900
vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards or otherwise endanger or
interfere with the landing, takeoff or maneuvering of aircraft utilizing the
airport.
§ 205-183. Preexisting nonconforming uses.
The regulations prescribed by this article shall not be construed to require
the removal, lowering, or other change or alteration of any structure or
tree not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of this
article, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of a nonconforming use.
No nonconforming use shall be structurally altered or permitted to grow
higher, so as to increase the nonconformity, and a nonconforming use, once
substantially abated (subject to the underlying zoning ordinance,) may only
be reestablished consistent with the provisions herein.
§ 205-184. Obstruction marking and lighting.
Any permit or variance granted pursuant to the provisions of this article
may be conditioned according to the process described in § 205-181 to
require the owner of the structure or object of natural growth in question
to permit the municipality, at its own expense, or require the person
requesting the permit or variance, to install, operate, and maintain such
marking or lighting as deemed necessary to assure both ground and air
safety.
§ 205-185. Violations and penalties.
Violations of this article shall be subject to that in the underlying Zoning
Ordinance.
§ 205-186. Appeals.
Appeals shall be subject to the process in the underlying Zoning Ordinance.
§ 205-182 TOWING § 205-186
186:901

ARTICLE XXIX
Wireless Communications Facilities
[Added 2-25-2014 by Ord. No. 550]
§ 205-187. Purposes and findings of fact.
A. The purpose of this article is to establish uniform standards for the
siting, design, permitting, maintenance, and use of wireless
communications facilities in East Norriton Township. While the
Township recognizes the importance of wireless communications
facilities in providing high-quality communications service to its
residents and businesses, the Township also recognizes that it has an
obligation to protect public safety and to minimize the adverse visual
effects of such facilities through the standards set forth in the following
provisions.
B. By enacting this article, the Township intends to:
(1) Promote the health, safety and welfare of Township residents and
businesses with respect to wireless communications facilities;
(2) Provide for the managed development of wireless communications
facilities in a manner that enhances the benefits of wireless
communication and accommodates the needs of both Township
residents and wireless carriers in accordance with federal and
state laws and regulations;
(3) Establish procedures for the design, siting, construction,
installation, maintenance and removal of both tower-based and
non-tower-based wireless communications facilities in the
Township, including facilities both inside and outside the public
rights-of-way;
(4) Address new wireless technologies, including, but not limited to,
distributed antenna systems, data collection units, cable wi-fi and
other wireless communications facilities.
(5) Encourage the co-location of wireless communications facilities on
existing structures rather than the construction of new towerbased
structures;
(6) Protect Township residents from potential adverse impacts of
wireless communications facilities and preserve, to the extent
permitted under law, the visual character of established
communities and the natural beauty of the landscape; and
(7) Update the Township's wireless facilities regulations to incorporate
changes in federal and state laws and regulations.
§ 205-187 TOWING § 205-188
186:903
§ 205-188. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ANTENNA — Any system of wires, rods, discs, panels, flat panels, dishes,
whips, or other similar devices used for the transmission or reception
of wireless signals. An antenna may include an omnidirectional antenna
(rod), directional antenna (panel), parabolic antenna (disc) or any other
wireless antenna. An antenna shall not include tower-based wireless
communications facilities defined below.
CO-LOCATION — The mounting of one or more WCFs, including antennas,
on an existing tower-based WCF or utility pole or light pole.
COMMONWEALTH — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
COUNTY — The County of Montgomery, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEMS (DAS) — A network of spatially
separated antenna sites connected to a common source that provides
wireless service within a geographic area or structure.
EMERGENCY — A condition that:
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
MONOPOLE — A WCF or site which consists of a single pole structure,
designed and erected on the ground or on top of a structure, to support
communications antennas and connecting appurtenances.
NON-TOWER WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (NON-TOWER
WCF) — All non-tower wireless communications facilities, including, but
not limited to, antennas and related equipment. Non-tower WCFs shall not
include support structures for antennas and related equipment.
PERSONS — Individuals, corporations, companies, associations, joint-stock
companies, firms, partnerships, limited liability companies, corporations
and other entities established pursuant to statutes of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, provided that "person" does not include or apply to the
Township or to any department or agency of the Township.
RIGHT-OF-WAY or ROW — The surface of and space above and below
any real property in the Township in which the Township, county or
commonwealth has a regulatory interest, or interest as a trustee for the
public, as such interests now or hereafter exist, including, but not limited to,
all streets, highways, avenues, roads, alleys, sidewalks, tunnels, viaducts,
bridges, skyways, or any other public place, area or property under the
control of the Township, county or commonwealth, and any unrestricted
public or utility easements established, dedicated, platted, improved or
Constitutes a clear and immediate danger to the health, welfare, or
safety of the public; or
A.
Has caused or is likely to cause facilities in the rights-of-way to be
unusable and result in loss of the services provided.
B.
§ 205-188 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-188
186:904
devoted for utility purposes, but excluding lands other than streets that
are owned by the Township, county or commonwealth. The phrase "in the
right(s)-of-way" means in, on, over, along, above and/or under the right(s)-
of-way.
STEALTH TECHNOLOGY — Camouflaging methods applied to wireless
communications towers, antennas and other facilities which render them
more visually appealing or blend the proposed facility into the existing
structure or visual backdrop in such a manner as to render it minimally
visible to the casual observer. Such methods include, but are not limited
to, architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, building-mounted
antennas painted to match the existing structure, and facilities constructed
to resemble trees, shrubs, flagpoles and light poles.
SUBSTANTIALLY CHANGE —
TOWER-BASED WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (TOWERBASED
WCF) — Any structure that is used for the purpose of supporting
one or more antennas, including, but not limited to, self-supporting lattice
towers, guy towers and monopoles, utility poles and light poles. DAS hub
facilities are considered to be tower-based WCFs.
TOWNSHIP — East Norriton Township, Montgomery, County, Pennsylvania.
WIRELESS — Transmissions through the airwaves, including, but not
limited to, infrared line-of-sight, cellular, PCS, microwave, satellite, or radio
signals.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (WCF) — The antennas, nodes,
control boxes, towers, poles, conduits, ducts, pedestals, electronics and
other equipment used for the purpose of transmitting, receiving,
distributing, providing, or accommodating wireless communications
services.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY APPLICANT (WCF APPLICANT)
— Any person that applies for a wireless communications facility building
permit, zoning approval and/or permission to use the public ROW or other
Township-owned land or property.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A freestanding structure, such as
a tower-based wireless communications facility, or any other support
structure that could support the placement or installation of a wireless
communications facility if approved by the Township.
Any increase in the height of a wireless support structure by more than
10%, or by the height of one additional antenna array with separation
from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed 20 feet, whichever
is greater, except that the mounting of the proposed wireless
communications facility may exceed the size limits set forth herein if
necessary to avoid interference with existing antennas; or
A.
Any further increase in the height of a wireless support structure which
has already been extended by more than 10% of its originally approved
height or by the height of one additional antenna array.
B.
§ 205-188 TOWING § 205-189
186:905
§ 205-189. General requirements for all tower-based wireless
communications facilities.
A. The following regulations shall apply to all tower-based wireless
communications facilities:
(1) Standard of care. Any tower-based WCF shall be designed,
constructed, operated, maintained, repaired, modified and
removed in strict compliance with all current, applicable technical,
safety and safety-related codes, including, but not limited to, the
most-recent editions of the American National Standards Institute
(ANSI) Code, National Electrical Safety Code, National Electrical
Code, as well as the accepted and responsible workmanlike
industry practices of the National Association of Tower Erectors.
Any tower-based WCF shall at all times be kept and maintained in
good condition, order and repair by qualified maintenance and
construction personnel, so that the same shall not endanger the life
of any person or any property in the Township.
(2) Wind. Any tower-based WCF structures shall be designed to
withstand the effects of wind according to the standard designed by
the American National Standards Institute as prepared by the
engineering departments of the Electronics Industry Association
and Telecommunications Industry Association (ANSI EIA/
TIA-222-G, as amended).
(3) Height. Any tower-based WCF shall be designed at the minimum
functional height and shall not exceed a maximum total height of
150 feet, which height shall include all subsequent additions or
alterations. All tower-based WCF applicants must submit
documentation to the Township justifying the total height of the
structure.
(4) Public safety communications. No tower-based WCF shall interfere
with public safety communications or the reception of broadband,
television, radio or other communication services enjoyed by
occupants of nearby properties.
(5) Maintenance. The following maintenance requirements shall apply:
(a) Any tower-based WCF shall be fully automated and unattended
on a daily basis and shall be visited only for maintenance or
emergency repair.
(b) Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure the upkeep of
the facility in order to promote the safety and security of the
Township's residents.
(c) All maintenance activities shall utilize nothing less than the
best available technology for preventing failures and
accidents.
§ 205-189 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-189
186:906
(6) Radio frequency emissions. No tower-based WCF may, by itself or
in conjunction with other WCFs, generate radio frequency
emissions in excess of the standards and regulations of the FCC,
including, but not limited to, the FCC Office of Engineering
Technology Bulletin 65, entitled "Evaluating Compliance with FCC
Guidelines for Human Exposure to Radio Frequency
Electromagnetic Field," as amended.
(7) Historic buildings or districts. No tower-based WCF may be located
on a building or structure that is listed on either the National or
Pennsylvania Register of Historic Places or the official historic
structures and/or historic districts list maintained by the Township,
or that has been designated by the Township as being of historic
significance.
(8) Identification. All tower-based WCFs shall post a notice in a readily
visible location identifying the name and phone number of a party
to contact in the event of an emergency, subject to approval by the
Township.
(9) Lighting. Tower-based WCFs shall not be artificially lighted, except
as required by law and as may be approved by the Township. If
lighting is required, the applicant shall provide a detailed plan for
sufficient lighting, demonstrating as unobtrusive and inoffensive an
effect as is permissible under state and federal regulations.
(10) Appearance. Towers shall be galvanized and/or painted with a rustpreventive
paint of an appropriate color to harmonize with the
surroundings.
(11) Noise. Tower-based WCFs shall be operated and maintained so as
not to produce noise in excess of applicable noise standards under
state law and the Township Code, except in emergency situations
requiring the use of a backup generator, where such noise
standards may be exceeded on a temporary basis only.
(12) Aviation safety. Tower-based WCFs shall comply with all federal
and state laws and regulations concerning aviation safety.
(13) Retention of experts. The Township may hire any consultant(s) and/
or expert(s) necessary to assist the Township in reviewing and
evaluating the application for approval of the tower-based WCF
and, once approved, in reviewing and evaluating any potential
violations of the terms and conditions of this article. The applicant
and/or owner of the WCF shall reimburse the Township for all costs
of the Township's consultant(s) in providing expert evaluation and
consultation in connection with these activities.
(14) Timing of approval. Within 30 calendar days of the date that an
application for a tower-based WCF is filed with the Township, the
Township shall notify the applicant, in writing, of any information
that may be required to complete such application. All applications
§ 205-189 TOWING § 205-189
186:907
§ 205-190. Tower-based facilities outside the rights-of-way.
for tower-based WCFs shall be acted upon within 150 days of the
receipt of a fully completed application for the approval of such
tower-based WCF, and the Township shall advise the applicant, in
writing, of its decision. If additional information was requested by
the Township to complete an application, the time required by the
applicant to provide the information shall not be counted toward
the one-hundred-fifty-day review period.
(15) Nonconforming uses. Nonconforming tower-based WCFs which are
hereafter damaged or destroyed due to any reason or cause may be
repaired and restored at their former location but must otherwise
comply with the terms and conditions of this article.
(16) Removal. In the event that use of a tower-based WCF is planned to
be discontinued, the owner shall provide written notice to the
Township of its intent to discontinue use and the date when the use
shall be discontinued. Unused or abandoned WCFs or portions of
WCFs shall be removed as follows:
(a) All unused or abandoned tower-based WCFs and accessory
facilities shall be removed within six months of the cessation of
operations at the site, unless a time extension is approved by
the Township.
(b) If the WCF and/or accessory facility is not removed within six
months of the cessation of operations at a site, or within any
longer period approved by the Township, the WCF and
accessory facilities and equipment may be removed by the
Township and the cost of removal assessed against the owner
of the WCF.
(c) Any unused portions of tower-based WCFs, including antennas,
shall be removed within six months of the time of cessation of
operations. The Township must approve all replacements of
portions of a tower-based WCF previously removed.
(17) Permit fees. The Township may assess appropriate and reasonable
permit fees directly related to the Township's actual costs in
reviewing and processing the application for approval of a towerbased
WCF, as well as related inspection, monitoring and related
costs.
A. The following regulations shall apply to tower-based wireless
communications facilities located outside the rights-of-way:
(1) Development regulations:
(a) Prohibited in residential zones. No tower-based WCF shall be
located in a district zoned residential or within 500 feet of a lot
in residential use or a residential district boundary. Tower-
§ 205-189 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-190
186:908
based WCFs are permitted only in such districts as specified in
Articles XI, XV, XVI, and XXVI of this chapter.
(b) Gap in coverage. An applicant for a tower-based WCF must
demonstrate that a significant gap in wireless coverage exists
with respect to all wireless operators in the applicable area
and that the type of WCF being proposed is the least-intrusive
means by which to fill that gap in wireless coverage. The
existence or nonexistence of a gap in wireless coverage shall
be a factor in the Township's decision on an application for
approval of tower-based WCFs.
(c) Sole use on a lot. A tower-based WCF is permitted as a sole use
on a lot, subject to the minimum lot area and yards complying
with the requirements for the applicable zoning district.
(d) Combined with another use. A tower-based WCF may be
permitted on a property with an existing use or on a vacant
parcel in combination with another industrial, commercial,
institutional or municipal use, subject to the following
conditions:
[1] The existing use on the property may be any permitted use
in the applicable district and need not be affiliated with the
communications facility.
[2] Minimum lot area. The minimum lot shall comply with the
requirements for the applicable district and shall be the
area needed to accommodate the tower-based WCF and
guy wires, the equipment building, security fence, and
buffer planting.
[3] Minimum setbacks. The tower-based WCF and
accompanying equipment building shall comply with the
requirements for the applicable zoning district, provided
that no tower-based WCF shall be located within 500 feet
of a lot in residential use or a residential district boundary.
(e) Notice. Upon receipt of an application for a tower-based WCF,
the Township shall mail notice thereof to the owner or owners
of every property zoned residential on the same street within
50 linear feet of the parcel or property of the proposed facility
and of every property zoned residential not on the same street
within 500 feet of the parcel or property of the proposed
facility.
(f) Co-location. An application for a new tower-based WCF shall
not be approved unless the Township finds that the wireless
communications equipment planned for the proposed towerbased
WCF cannot be accommodated on an existing or
approved structure or building. Any application for approval of
a tower-based WCF shall include a comprehensive inventory of
§ 205-190 TOWING § 205-190
186:909
all existing towers and other suitable structures within a twomile
radius from the point of the proposed tower, unless the
applicant can show to the satisfaction of the Township that a
different distance is more reasonable, and shall demonstrate
conclusively why an existing tower or other suitable structure
cannot be utilized.
(2) Design regulations:
(a) The WCF shall employ the most-current stealth technology
available in an effort to appropriately blend into the
surrounding environment and minimize aesthetic impact. The
application of the stealth technology chosen by the WCF
applicant shall be subject to the approval of the Township.
(b) Any height extensions to an existing tower-based WCF shall
require prior approval of the Township. The Township reserves
the right to deny such requests based upon aesthetic and land
use impact, or any other lawful considerations related to the
character of the Township.
(c) Any proposed tower-based WCF shall be designed structurally,
electrically, and in all respects to accommodate both the WCF
applicant's antennas and comparable antennas for future
users.
(3) Surrounding environs:
(a) The WCF applicant shall ensure that the existing vegetation,
trees and shrubs located within proximity to the WCF structure
shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible.
(b) The WCF applicant shall submit a soil report to the Township
complying with the standards of Appendix G: Geotechnical
Investigations, ANSI EIA/TIA 222, as amended, to document
and verify the design specifications of the foundation of the
tower-based WCF, and anchors for guy wires, if used.
(4) Fence/screen:
(a) A security fence having a maximum height of six feet shall
completely surround any tower-based WCF, guy wires, or any
building housing WCF equipment.
(b) An evergreen screen that consists of a hedge or a row of
evergreen trees shall be located along the perimeter of the
security fence.
(c) The WCF applicant shall submit a landscape plan for review
and approval by the Township planning consultant for all
proposed screening.
(5) Accessory equipment:
§ 205-190 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-190
186:910
(a) Ground-mounted equipment associated to, or connected with,
a tower-based WCF shall be underground. In the event that an
applicant can demonstrate that the equipment cannot be
located underground to the satisfaction of the Township
Engineer, then the ground-mounted equipment shall be
screened from public view using stealth technologies, as
described above.
(b) All utility buildings and accessory structures shall be
architecturally designed to blend into the environment in
which they are situated and shall meet the minimum setback
requirements of the underlying zoning district.
(6) Additional antennas. As a condition of approval for all tower-based
WCFs, the WCF applicant shall provide the Township with a written
commitment that it will allow other service providers to co-locate
antennas on tower-based WCFs where technically and
economically feasible. The owner of a tower-based WCF shall not
install any additional antennas without obtaining the prior written
approval of the Township.
(7) Access road. An access road, turnaround space and parking shall
be provided to ensure adequate emergency and service access to a
tower-based WCF. Maximum use of existing roads, whether public
or private, shall be made to the extent practicable. Road
construction shall at all times minimize ground disturbance and the
cutting of vegetation. Road grades shall closely follow natural
contours to assure minimal visual disturbance and minimize soil
erosion. Where applicable, the WCF owner shall present
documentation to the Township that the property owner has
granted an easement for the proposed facility.
(8) Financial security. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the owner of a
tower-based WCF outside the ROW shall, at its own cost and
expense, obtain from a surety licensed to do business in
Pennsylvania and maintain a financial security acceptable to the
Township Solicitor, in an amount of $100,000, to assure the faithful
performance of the terms and conditions of this article. The
financial security shall provide that the Township may recover from
the principal and surety any and all compensatory damages
incurred by the Township for violations of this article, after
reasonable notice and opportunity to cure. The owner shall file the
financial security with the Township. [Amended 10-27-2015 by
Ord. No. 566]
(9) Visual or land use impact. The Township reserves the right to deny
an application for the construction or placement of any towerbased
WCF based upon visual and/or land use impact.
(10) Inspection. The Township reserves the right to inspect any towerbased
WCF to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article
§ 205-190 TOWING § 205-190
186:911
§ 205-191. Tower-based facilities in the rights-of-way.
and any other provisions found within the Township Code or state
or federal law. The Township and/or its agents shall have the
authority to enter the property upon which a WCF is located at
any time, upon reasonable notice to the operator, to ensure such
compliance.
A. The following regulations shall apply to tower-based wireless
communications facilities located in the rights-of-way:
(1) Prohibited in residential zones. No tower-based WCF shall be
located within a residential zone or within 500 feet of a lot in
residential use or a residential district boundary. Tower-based
WCFs are only permitted in such districts as specified in Articles
XI, XV, XVI and XXVI of this chapter.
(2) Gap in coverage. An applicant for a tower-based WCF must
demonstrate that a significant gap in wireless coverage exists with
respect to all wireless operators in the applicable area and that the
type of WCF being proposed is the least-intrusive means by which
to fill that gap in wireless coverage. The existence or nonexistence
of a gap in wireless coverage shall be a factor in the Township's
decision on an application for approval of tower-based WCFs in the
ROW.
(3) Notice. Upon receipt of an application for a tower-based WCF, the
Township shall mail notice thereof to the owner or owners of every
property zoned residential on the same street within 500 linear feet
of the property or parcel of the proposed facility and of every
property zoned residential not on the same street within 500 feet of
the parcel or property of the proposed facility.
(4) Co-location. An application for a new tower-based WCF in the ROW
shall not be approved unless the Township finds that the proposed
wireless communications equipment cannot be accommodated on
an existing structure, such as a utility pole or traffic light pole. Any
application for approval of a tower-based WCF shall include a
comprehensive inventory of all existing towers and other suitable
structures within a one-mile radius from the point of the proposed
tower, unless the applicant can show to the satisfaction of the
Township that a different distance is more reasonable, and shall
demonstrate conclusively why an existing tower or other suitable
structure cannot be utilized.
(5) Time, place and manner. The Township shall determine the time,
place and manner of construction, maintenance, repair and/or
removal of all tower-based WCFs in the ROW based on public
safety, traffic management, physical burden on the ROW, and
related considerations. For public utilities, the time, place and
§ 205-190 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-191
186:912
manner requirements shall be consistent with the police powers of
the Township and the requirements of the Public Utility Code.
(6) Equipment location. Tower-based WCFs and accessory equipment
shall be located so as not to cause any physical or visual
obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to otherwise
create safety hazards to pedestrians and/or motorists, or to
otherwise inconvenience public use of the ROW, as determined by
the Township. In addition:
(a) In no case shall ground-mounted equipment, walls, or
landscaping be located within 18 inches of the face of the curb.
(b) Ground-mounted equipment that cannot be undergrounded
shall be screened, to the fullest extent possible, through the
use of landscaping or other decorative features to the
satisfaction of the Township.
(c) Required electrical meter cabinets shall the screened to blend
in with the surrounding area to the satisfaction of the
Township.
(d) Any graffiti on the tower or on any accessory equipment shall
be removed at the sole expense of the owner within 10
business days of notice of the existence of the graffiti.
(e) Any underground vaults related to tower-based WCFs shall be
reviewed and approved by the Township.
(7) Design regulations.
(a) The WCF shall employ the most-current stealth technology
available in an effort to appropriately blend into the
surrounding environment and minimize aesthetic impact. The
application of the stealth technology chosen by the WCF
applicant shall be subject to the approval of the Township.
(b) Any height extensions to an existing tower-based WCF shall
require prior approval of the Township and shall not increase
the overall height of the tower-based WCF to more than 150
feet. The Township reserves the right to deny such requests
based upon aesthetic and land use impact, or any other lawful
considerations related to the character of the Township.
(c) Any proposed tower-based WCF shall be designed structurally,
electrically, and in all respects to accommodate both the WCF
applicant's antennas and comparable antennas for future
users.
(8) Visual or land use impact. The Township reserves the right to deny
the construction or placement of any tower-based WCF in the ROW
based upon visual and/or land use impact.
§ 205-191 TOWING § 205-191
186:913
(9) Additional antennas. As a condition of approval for all tower-based
WCFs in the ROW, the WCF applicant shall provide the Township
with a written commitment that it will allow other service providers
to co-locate antennas on tower-based WCFs where technically and
economically feasible. The owner of a tower-based WCF shall not
install any additional antennas without obtaining the prior written
approval of the Township.
(10) Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days following written
notice from the Township, or such longer period as the Township
determines is reasonably necessary or such shorter period in the
case of an emergency, an owner of tower-based WCF in the ROW
shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove,
relocate, change or alter the position of any WCF when the
Township, consistent with its police powers and applicable Public
Utility Commission regulations, shall determine that such removal,
relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary under the
following circumstances:
(a) The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any
Township or other public improvement in the right-of-way;
(b) The operations of the Township or other governmental entity in
the right-of-way;
(c) Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility easement;
or
(d) An emergency as determined by the Township.
(11) Compensation for ROW use. In addition to permit fees as described
in § 205-192 of this article, every tower-based WCF in the ROW is
subject to the Township's right to fix annually a fair and reasonable
compensation to be paid for use and occupancy of the ROW. Such
compensation for ROW use shall be directly related to the
Township's actual ROW management costs, including, but not
limited to, the costs of the administration and performance of all
reviewing, inspecting, permitting, supervising and other ROW
management activities by the Township. The owner of each towerbased
WCF shall pay an annual fee to the Township to compensate
the Township for the Township's costs incurred in connection with
the activities described above. The annual ROW management fee
for tower-based WCFs shall be determined by the Township and
authorized by resolution of the Township Board of Supervisors and
shall be based on the Township's actual ROW management costs as
applied to such tower-based WCF.
(12) Financial security. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the owner of a
tower-based WCF in the ROW shall, at its own cost and expense,
obtain from a surety licensed to do business in Pennsylvania and
maintain financial security acceptable to the Township Solicitor, in
an amount of $100,000, to assure the faithful performance of the
§ 205-191 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-191
186:914
§ 205-192. General requirements for all non-tower wireless
communications facilities.
terms and conditions of this article. The financial security shall
provide that the Township may recover from the principal and
surety any and all compensatory damages incurred by the
Township for violations of this article, after reasonable notice and
opportunity to cure. The owner shall file a copy of the financial
security with the Township. [Amended 10-27-2015 by Ord. No.
566]
A. The following regulations shall apply to all non-tower wireless
communications facilities that do not substantially change the physical
dimensions of the wireless support structure to which they are
attached:
(1) Permitted in all zones subject to regulations. Non-tower WCFs are
permitted in all zones subject to the restrictions and conditions
prescribed below and subject to the prior written approval of the
Township.
(2) Notice. Upon receipt of an application for any non-tower-based
WCF, the Township shall mail notice thereof to the owner or owners
of every property zoned residential on the same street within 500
linear feet of the parcel or property of the proposed facility and of
every property zoned residential not on the same street within 500
feet of the parcel or property of the proposed facility.
(3) Standard of care. Any non-tower WCF shall be designed,
constructed, operated, maintained, repaired, modified and
removed in strict compliance with all current, applicable technical,
safety and safety-related codes, including, but not limited to, the
most-recent editions of the American National Standards Institute
(ANSI) Code, National Electrical Safety Code, and National
Electrical Code. Any WCF shall at all times be kept and maintained
in good condition, order and repair by qualified maintenance and
construction personnel, so that the same shall not endanger the life
of any person or any property in the Township.
(4) Wind. Any non-tower WCF structures shall be designed to
withstand the effects of wind according to the standard designed by
the American National Standards Institute as prepared by the
engineering departments of the Electronics Industry Association
and Telecommunications Industry Association. (ANSI EIN/
TIA-222-G, as amended).
(5) Public safety communications. No non-tower WCF shall interfere
with public safety communications or the reception of broadband,
television, radio or other communication services enjoyed by
occupants of nearby properties.
§ 205-191 TOWING § 205-192
186:915
(6) Aviation safety. Non-tower WCFs shall comply with all federal and
state laws and regulations concerning aviation safety.
(7) Radio frequency emissions. No non-tower WCF may, by itself or in
conjunction with other WCFs, generate radio frequency emissions
in excess of the standards and regulations of the FCC, including,
but not limited to, the FCC Office of Engineering Technology
Bulletin 65, entitled "Evaluating Compliance with FCC Guidelines
for Human Exposure to Radio Frequency Electromagnetic Fields,"
as amended.
(8) Removal. In the event that use of a non-tower WCF is discontinued,
the owner shall provide written notice to the Township of its intent
to discontinue use and the data when the use shall be discontinued.
Unused or abandoned WCFs or portions of WCFs shall be removed
as follows:
(a) All abandoned or unused WCFs and accessory facilities shall be
removed within three months of the cessation of operations at
the site, unless a time extension is approved by the Township.
(b) If the WCF or accessory facility is not removed within three
months of the cessation of operations at a site, or within any
longer period approved by the Township, the WCF and/or
associated facilities and equipment may be removed by the
Township and the cost of removal assessed against the owner
of the WCF.
(9) Timing of approval. Within 30 calendar days of the date that an
application for a non-tower WCF is filed with the Township, the
Township shall notify the applicant, in writing, of any information
that may be required to complete such application. Within 90
calendar days of receipt of a complete application, the Township
shall make its final decision on whether to approve the application
and shall advise the applicant, in writing, of such decision. If
additional information was requested by the Township to complete
an application, the time required by the applicant to provide the
information shall not be counted toward the Township's ninety-day
review period.
(10) Permit fees. The Township may assess appropriate and reasonable
permit fees directly related to the Township's actual costs in
reviewing and processing the application for approval of a nontower
WCF or $1,000, whichever is less.
B. The following regulations shall apply to all non-tower wireless
communications facilities that substantially change the wireless
support structure to which they are attached:
(1) Permitted in all zones subject to regulations. Non-tower WCFs are
permitted in all zones subject to the restrictions and conditions
§ 205-192 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-192
186:916
prescribed below and subject to the prior written approval of the
Township.
(2) Notice. Upon receipt of an application for any non-tower-based
WCF, the Township shall mail notice thereof to the owner or owners
of every property zoned residential on the same street within 500
linear feet of the parcel or property of the proposed facility and of
every property zoned residential not on the same street within 500
feet of the parcel or property of the proposed facility.
(3) Standard of care. Any non-tower WCF shall be designed,
constructed, operated, maintained, repaired, modified and
removed in strict compliance with all current, applicable technical,
safety and safety-related codes, including, but not limited to, the
most-recent editions of the American National Standards Institute
(ANSI) Code, National Electrical Safety Code, and National
Electrical Code. Any WCF shall at all times be kept and maintained
in good condition, order and repair by qualified maintenance and
construction personnel, so that the same shall not endanger the life
of any person or any property in the Township.
(4) Wind. Any non-tower WCF structures shall be designed to
withstand the effects of wind according to the standard designed by
the American National Standards Institute as prepared by the
engineering departments of the Electronics Industry Association
and Telecommunications Industry Association (ANSFEINTIA-222-E
Code, as amended).
(5) Public safety communications. No non-tower WCF shall interfere
with public safety communications or the reception of broadband,
television, radio or other communication services enjoyed by
occupants of nearby properties.
(6) Historic buildings. Non-tower WCFs may not be located on a
building or structure that is listed on either the National or
Pennsylvania Register of Historic Places or the official historic
structures and/or historic districts lists maintained by the Township
or has been designated by the Township as being of historic
significance.
(7) Aviation safety. Non-tower WCFs shall comply with all federal and
state laws and regulations concerning aviation safety.
(8) Maintenance. The following maintenance requirements shall apply:
(a) The non-tower WCF shall be fully automated and unattended
on a daily basis and shall be visited only for maintenance or
emergency repair.
(b) Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure the upkeep of
the facility in order to promote the safety and security of the
Township's residents.
§ 205-192 TOWING § 205-192
186:917
(c) All maintenance activities shall utilize nothing less than the
best available technology for preventing failures and
accidents.
(9) Radio frequency emissions. No non-tower WCF may, by itself or in
conjunction with other WCFs, generate radio frequency emissions
in excess of the standards and regulations of the FCC, including,
but not limited to, the FCC Office of Engineering Technology
Bulletin 65, entitled "Evaluating Compliance with FCC Guidelines
for Human Exposure to Radio Frequency Electromagnetic Fields,"
as amended.
(10) Removal. In the event that use of a non-tower WCF is discontinued,
the owner shall provide written notice to the Township of its intent
to discontinue use and the date when the use shall be discontinued.
Unused or abandoned WCFs or portions of WCFs shall be removed
as follows:
(a) All abandoned or unused WCFs and accessory facilities shall be
removed within three months of the cessation of operations at
the site, unless a time extension is approved by the Township.
(b) If the WCF or accessory facility is not removed within three
months of the cessation of operations at a site, or within any
longer period approved by the Township, the WCF and/or
associated facilities and equipment may be removed by the
Township and the cost of removal assessed against the owner
of the WCF.
(11) Timing of approval. Within 30 calendar days of the date that an
application for a non-tower WCF is filed with the Township, the
Township shall notify the applicant, in writing, of any information
that may be required to complete such application. Within 90
calendar days of receipt of a complete application, the Township
shall make its final decision on whether to approve the application
and shall advise the applicant, in writing, of such decision. If
additional information was requested by the Township to complete
an application, the time required by the applicant to provide the
information shall not be counted toward the Township's ninety-day
review period.
(12) Retention of experts. The Township may hire any consultant(s) and/
or expert(s) necessary to assist the Township in reviewing and
evaluating the application for approval of the WCF and, once
approved, in reviewing and evaluating any potential violations of
the terms and conditions of this article. The applicant and/or owner
of the WCF shall reimburse the Township for all costs of the
Township's consultant(s) in providing expert evaluation and
consultation in connection with these activities.
(13) Financial security. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the owner of
each individual non-tower WCF shall, at its own cost and expense,
§ 205-192 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-192
186:918
§ 205-193. Non-tower wireless communications facilities outside
the rights-of-way.
obtain from a surety licensed to do business in Pennsylvania and
maintain financial security acceptable to the Township Solicitor,
in all amount of $25,000, for each individual non-tower WCF, to
assure the faithful performance of the terms and conditions of this
article. The financial security shall provide that the Township may
recover from the principal and surety any and all compensatory
damages incurred by the Township for violations of this article,
after reasonable notice and opportunity to cure. The owner shall
file a copy of the financial security with the Township. [Amended
10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 566]
(14) Permit fees. The Township may assess appropriate and reasonable
permit fees directly related to the Township's actual costs in
reviewing and processing the application for approval of a nontower
WCF, as well as related inspection, monitoring and related
costs.
A. The following additional regulations shall apply to non-tower wireless
communications facilities located outside the rights-of-way that
substantially change the wireless support structure to which they are
attached:
(1) Development regulations. Non-tower WCFs shall be co-located on
existing structures such as existing buildings or tower-based
WCFs, subject to the following conditions:
(a) Such WCF does not exceed a maximum height of 150 feet.
(b) If the WCF applicant proposes to locate the communications
equipment in a separate building, the building shall comply
with the minimum requirements for the applicable zoning
district.
(c) A six-foot-high security fence shall surround any separate
communications equipment building. Vehicular access to the
communications equipment building shall not interfere with
the parking or vehicular circulations on the site for the
principal use.
(2) Design regulations.
(a) Non-tower WCFs shall employ stealth technology and be
treated to match the supporting structure in order to minimize
aesthetic impact. The application of the stealth technology
chosen by the WCF applicant shall be subject to the approval of
the Township.
(b) Non-tower WCFs, which are mounted to a building or similar
structure, may not exceed a height of 15 feet above the roof or
§ 205-192 TOWING § 205-193
186:919
§ 205-194. Non-tower wireless communications facilities in the
rights-of-way.
parapet, whichever is higher, unless the WCF applicant obtains
a conditional use permit.
(c) All non-tower WCF applicants must submit documentation to
the Township justifying the total height of the non-tower
structure. Such documentation shall be analyzed in the context
of such justification on an individual basis.
(d) Antennas, and their respective accompanying support
structures, shall be no greater in diameter than any crosssectional
dimension that is reasonably necessary for their
proper functioning.
(e) Noncommercial usage exemption. The design regulations
enumerated in this § 205-193A(2) shall not apply to directbroadcast
satellite dishes installed for the purpose of receiving
video and related communications services at residential
dwellings.
(3) Removal, replacement, modification.
(a) The removal and replacement of non-tower WCFs and/or
accessory equipment for the purpose of upgrading or repairing
the WCF is permitted, so long as such repair or upgrade does
not increase the overall size of the WCF or the number of
antennas.
(b) Any material modification to a wireless telecommunication
facility shall require a prior amendment to the original permit
or authorization.
(4) Visual or land use impact. The Township reserves the right to deny
an application for the construction or placement of any non-tower
WCF based upon visual and/or land use impact.
(5) Inspection. The Township reserves the right to inspect any WCF to
ensure compliance with the provisions of this article and any other
provisions found within the Township Code or state or federal law.
The Township and/or its agents shall have the authority to enter the
property upon which a WCF is located at any time, upon reasonable
notice to the operator, to ensure such compliance.
A. The following additional regulations shall apply to all non-tower
wireless communications facilities located in the rights-of-way:
(1) Co-location. Non-tower WCFs in the ROW shall be co-located on
existing poles, such as existing utility poles or light poles.
(2) Design requirements:
§ 205-193 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-194
186:920
(a) WCF installations located above the surface grade in the public
ROW, including, but not limited to, those on streetlights and
joint utility poles, shall consist of equipment components that
are no more than six feet in height and that are compatible in
scale and proportion to the structures upon which they are
mounted. All equipment shall be the smallest and least visibly
intrusive equipment feasible.
(b) Antennas and all support equipment shall be treated to match
the supporting structure. WCFs and accompanying equipment
shall be painted, or otherwise coated, to be visually compatible
with the support structure upon which they are mounted.
(3) Compensation for ROW use. In addition to permit fees as described
above, every non-tower WCF in the ROW is subject to the
Township's right to fix annually a fair and reasonable compensation
to be paid for use and occupancy of the ROW. Such compensation
for ROW use shall be directly related to the Township's actual ROW
management costs, including, but not limited to, the costs of the
administration and performance of all reviewing, inspecting,
permitting, supervising and other ROW management activities by
the Township. The owner of each non-tower WCF shall pay an
annual fee to the Township to compensate the Township for its
costs incurred in connection with the activities described above.
The annual ROW management fee for non-tower WCFs shall be
determined by the Township and authorized by resolution of
Township Board and shall be based on the Township's actual ROW
management costs as applied to such non-tower WCF.
(4) Time, place and manner. The Township shall determine the time,
place and manner of construction, maintenance, repair and/or
removal of all non-tower WCFs in the ROW based on public safety,
traffic management, physical burden on the ROW, and related
considerations. For public utilities, the time, place and manner
requirements shall be consistent with the police powers of the
Township and the requirements of the Public Utility Code.
(5) Equipment location. Non-tower WCFs and accessory equipment
shall be located so as not to cause any physical or visual
obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to otherwise
create safety hazards to pedestrians and/or motorists, or to
otherwise inconvenience public use of the ROW, as determined by
the Township. In addition:
(a) In no case shall ground-mounted equipment, walls, or
landscaping be located within 18 inches of the face of the curb.
(b) Ground-mounted equipment shall be located underground. In
the event an applicant can demonstrate, to the satisfaction of
the Township Engineer, that ground-mounted equipment
cannot be undergrounded, then all such equipment shall be
§ 205-194 TOWING § 205-194
186:921
§ 205-195. Violations applicable to all wireless facilities.
screened, to the fullest extent possible, through the use of
landscaping or other decorative features to the satisfaction of
the Township.
(c) Required electrical meter cabinets shall be screened to blend
in with the surrounding area to the satisfaction of the
Township.
(d) Any graffiti on the tower or on any accessory equipment shall
be removed at the sole expense of the owner within 10
business days of notice of the existence of the graffiti.
(e) Any underground vaults related to non-tower WCFs shall be
reviewed and approved by the Township.
(6) Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days following written
notice from the Township, or such longer period as the Township
determines is reasonably necessary, or such shorter period in the
case of an emergency, an owner of a WCF in the ROW shall, at its
own expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change
or alter the position of any WCF when the Township, consistent
with its police powers and applicable Public Utility Commission
regulations, shall have determined that such removal, relocation,
change or alteration is reasonably necessary under the following
circumstances:
(a) The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any
Township or other public improvement in the right-of-way;
(b) The operations of the Township or other governmental entity in
the right-of-way;
(c) Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility easement;
or
(d) An emergency as determined by the Township.
(7) Visual or land use impact. The Township retains the right to deny
an application for the construction or placement of a non-tower
WCF based upon visual and/or land use impact.
A. Penalties. Any person violating any provision of this article shall be
subject, upon finding by a Magisterial District Judge, to a penalty not
exceeding $500, for each and every offense, together with attorneys'
fees and costs. A separate and distinct violation shall be deemed to be
committed each day on which a violation occurs or continues to occur.
In addition to an action to enforce any penalty imposed by this article
and any other remedy at law or in equity, the Township may apply to a
federal district court for an injunction or other appropriate relief at law
§ 205-194 EAST NORRITON CODE § 205-195
186:922
or in equity to enforce compliance with or restrain violation of any
provision of this article.
B. Determination of violation. In the event a determination is made that a
person has violated any provision of this article, such person shall be
provided written notice of the determination and the reasons therefor.
Except in the case of an emergency, the person shall have 30 days to
cure the violation. If the nature of the violation is such that it cannot be
fully cured within such time period, the Township may, in its reasonable
judgment, extend the time period to cure, provided the person has
commenced to cure and is diligently pursuing its efforts to cure. If the
violation has not been cured within the time allowed, the Township may
take any and all actions authorized by this article and/or federal and/or
Pennsylvania law and regulations.
§ 205-195 TOWING § 205-195
186:923
Appendix
Chapter A211
PENSION ADVISORY BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pension plans — See Ch. 26.
§ A211-1. Membership; term.
§ A211-2. Purpose; functions of Board.
The Pension Advisory Board is hereby charged with the responsibility of
overseeing the administration of pension funds for the Nonuniformed
Employees Pension Plan and the Uniformed Employees Pension Plan. To
carry out its administrative responsibilities, the functions of the Pension
Advisory Board shall include but not be limited to:
A. The Pension Advisory Board shall consist of five members as follows:
(1) One nonuniformed East Norriton Township employee.
(2) One member of the East Norriton Township police force.
(3) One member of the East Norriton Township Board of Supervisors.
(4) The East Norriton Township Manager.
(5) The East Norriton Township Solicitor.
B. Members shall be appointed annually and shall serve until a
replacement member is appointed by the Board of Supervisors.
A. Review of pension applications.
B. Investment recommendations.
C. Hiring of investment managers.
D. Recommendations of any changes in the benefit structure.
E. Exchange of information regarding new legislation applicable to
pension plans.
F. Review of eligibility status of Township's uniformed and nonuniformed
employees.
G. Recommendations regarding policies and procedures relating to any
conflict of interest in a third-party transaction.
§ 205-195 EAST NORRITON CODE § A211-3
A211:924
§ A211-3. Meetings.
The Pension Advisory Board shall meet at such times as may be necessary
to perform its functions as stated above, at the discretion of the majority of
the members of the Pension Advisory Board, but, in any event, the Pension
Advisory Board shall meet at least annually.
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
458 11-25-2003 Police Pension Plan
amendment
NCM
459 11-25-2003 Employee Pension Plan
amendment
NCM
460 2-24-2004 Bond NCM
461 3-16-2004 Alcoholic beverages:
intermunicipal liquor
license transfers
amendment
Ch. 59, Art. II
(footnote only)
462 3-16-2004 Industrial Development
Authority amendment
Ch. 18, Art. III
(footnote only)
463 3-16-2004 Sewers: wastewater
collection system
Superseded by Ord.
No. 508
464 5-25-2004 Uniform Construction Code Ch. 74
465 5-25-2004 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 152
466 5-25-2004 Subdivision and land
development amendment;
zoning amendment
Ch. 175; Ch. 205
467 5-25-2004 Zoning Map amendment NCM
468 12-21-2004 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 175
469 11-23-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 196
470 1-25-2005 Sewer connection charges
amendment
Ch. 162, Art. II
471 12-21-2004 Zoning Map amendment NCM
§ A211-3 PENSION ADVISORY BOARD § DL-1
A211:925
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
472 1-25-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
473 1-25-2005 Zoning Map amendment NCM
474 1-25-2005 Emergency municipal
services tax amendment
Ch. 182, Art. III
475 2-22-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 196
476 2-22-2005 Nuisances amendment Ch. 129
477 4-21-2005 Connection to water
distribution system and
capping of wells (Rahway
Avenue area)
NCM
478 7-26-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
479 7-26-2005 Police Pension Plan
amendment
NCM
480 8-23-2005 Zoning Map amendment NCM
481 10-25-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
482 10-25-2005 East Norriton - Plymouth
Joint Sewer Authority
amendment
Ch. 18, Art. II
483 12-20-2005 Subdivision and land
development (readoption)
Ch. 175 (history
only)
484 12-20-2005 Zoning (readoption) Ch. 205 (history
only)
485 1-24-2006 Planning Commission
amendment
Ch. 30
486 7-25-2006 Building renumbering
(Johnson Highway)
NCM
487 9-26-2006 Shopping carts amendment Ch. 163
488 8-22-2006 Use and occupancy permits:
general provisions
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 577
489 10-24-2006 Cable television franchise NCM
490 2-20-2007 Sewer connection
regulations amendment
Ch. 162, Art. III
491 12-19-2006 Realty transfer tax
amendment
Ch. 182, Art. V
492 12-19-2006 Employee Pension Plan
amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 EAST NORRITON CODE § DL-1
A211:926
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
493 12-19-2006 Police Pension Plan
amendment
NCM
494 12-19-2006 Use and occupancy permits:
transfer of ownership
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 577
495 4-17-2007 Sewer rents amendment Ch. 162, Art. II
496 4-17-2007 Historic preservation
amendment
Ch. 11
497 8-28-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
498 8-28-2007 Zoning Map amendment NCM
499 10-23-2007 Local services tax
amendment
Ch. 182, Art. III
500 8-28-2007 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 175
501 10-23-2007 Historic preservation
amendment
Ch. 11
502 12-18-2007 Waste collectors and
recyclables amendment
Ch. 165, Art. II
503 1-7-2008 Subdivision and land
development (readoption)
Ch. 175 (history
only)
504 1-7-2008 Zoning (readoption) Ch. 205 (history
only)
505 3-10-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
506 3-10-2008 Zoning Map amendment NCM
507 7-22-2008 East Norriton - Plymouth
Joint Sewer Authority
amendment
Ch. 18, Art. II
508 7-22-2008 Sewers: wastewater
collection system
Superseded by Ord.
No. 530
509 10-28-2008 Sewer connection
regulations amendment
(Exhibit A)
See Ch. 162, Art. III
510 10-28-2008 Solid waste management Ch. 165, Art. I
511 12-23-2008 Records: inspection and
reproduction
Ch. 35, Art. I
512 12-23-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
513 2-17-2009 Police pension plan See Ch. 26, Art. II
514 2-17-2009 Employee pension plan See Ch. 26, Art. I
§ DL-1 PENSION ADVISORY BOARD § DL-1
A211:927
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
515 4-28-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
516 4-28-2009 Real estate registry
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 558
517 5-26-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
518 5-26-2009 Zoning Map amendment NCM
519 6-23-2009 Police pension plan
amendment
See Ch. 26, Art. II
520 8-25-2009 Contractor registration Ch. 73
521 10-27-2009 General obligation note NCM
522 12-15-2009 Shade Tree Commission
repealer
Ch. 39, reference
only
523 12-15-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
524 5-25-2010 General obligation note
sinking fund
NCM
525 4-27-2010 Bond NCM
526 5-25-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
527 6-22-2010 Fire insurance Ch. 120, Art. I
528 8-24-2010 Fire prevention Ch. 95
529 8-24-2010 Property maintenance Ch. 152
530 10-26-2010 Sewers: wastewater
collection system
Ch. 162, Art. V
531 11-16-2010 Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 10
532 11-16-2010 Streets and sidewalks:
removal of snow and ice
amendment
Ch. 168, Art. II
533 1-3-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
534 1-3-2011 Police pension plan
amendment
NCM
535 3-22-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 196
536 5-24-2011 Address changes on
Barbara Drive
NCM
537 6-28-2011 Municipal authorities: East
Norriton - Plymouth Joint
Sewer Authority
amendment
Ch. 18, Art. II
538 7-26-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
§ DL-1 EAST NORRITON CODE § DL-1
A211:928
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
539 7-26-2011 Municipal claims and tax
liens
Ch. 19
540 11-15-2011 Police pension plan
amendment
NCM
541 11-15-2011 Employee pension plan
amendment
NCM
542 7-24-2012 Human Relations
Commission
Ch. 11A
543 9-18-2012 Stormwater Maintenance
Fund
Ch. 43
544 9-18-2012 Sewage grinder pumps Ch. 162, Art. VII
545 12-11-2012 Collection of delinquent real
estate taxes
Ch. 182, Art. VI
546 1-7-2013 Noise: engine brake
retarders
Ch. 127, Art. II
547 7-23-2013 Local Taxpayers Bill of
Rights
Ch. 182, Art. VII
548 7-23-2013 Responsible contractor
requirements
Ch. 160
549 10-22-2013 Alarm devices amendment Ch. 54
550 2-25-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
551 3-25-2014 Stormwater management Ch. 166
552 4-22-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 196
553 5-27-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
554 7-22-2014 Cable television franchise NCM
555 7-22-2014 Employee Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 26, Art. I
556 8-26-2014 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 175
557 8-26-2014 Intergovernmental
reimbursement agreement
NCM
§ DL-1 PENSION ADVISORY BOARD § DL-1
A211:929
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
558 11-18-2014 Code corrections and
amendments
Ch. 72 (reference
only); Ch. 87, Art.
III; Ch. 114; Ch.
125 (reference
only); Ch. 127, Art.
I; Ch. 139, Art. I;
Ch. 148; Ch. 150
(reference only);
Ch. 152; Ch. 156
(reference only; Ch.
160; Ch. 162, Arts. I
through IV; Ch. 165,
Art. II; Ch. 168, Art.
IV; Ch. 178
(reference only)
559 12-9-2014 Employees Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 26, Art. I
560 12-9-2014 Police Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 26, Art. II
561 1-5-2015 Unemployment
Compensation Group Trust
Ch. 46A
562 2-24-2015 Firearms and hunting
repealer; parks and
recreation: rules and
regulations amendment
Ch. 97 (reference
only); Ch. 139, Art.
I
563 4-28-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
564 7-28-2015 Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 10
565 10-27-2015 Streets and sidewalks:
removal of snow and ice
amendment; vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 168, Art. II; Ch.
196
566 10-27-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
567 10-27-2015 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 175
568 11-17-2015 Promissory note NCM
569 2-23-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
570 12-13-2016 Garage sales; zoning
amendment
Ch. 110; Ch. 205
§ DL-1 EAST NORRITON CODE § DL-1
A211:930
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
571 2-28-2017 Subdivision and land
development amendment;
zoning amendment
Ch. 175; Ch. 205
572 3-28-2017 Police Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 26, Art. II
573 3-28-2017 Employee Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 26, Art. I
574 12-12-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 205
575 12-12-2017 Subdivision and Land
Development Amendment
Ch. 175
576 2-27-2018 Planning Commission
Amendment
Ch. 30
577 3-27-2018 Use and Occupancy and
Temporary Access
Certificates
Ch. 190
578 3-27-2018 Residential Rental Property
Licensing and Registration
Ch. 159
579 3-27-2018 Property Maintenance
Amendment
Ch. 152
580 3-27-2018 Conveyance of Property NCM
581 9-25-2018 Sewer System Bid Proposal NCM
582 3-26-2019 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
583 3-26-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 205
§ DL-1 PENSION ADVISORY BOARD § DL-1
A211:931